HOUSTON | Tue Jun 29 , 2010 7:45 pm EDT HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Bad weather halted some clean-up efforts from the Gulf of Mexico oil spill on Tuesday as high winds and waves from a strengthening storm threatened to hamper plans to capture more of the crude gushing from the largest spill in U.S. history . 
The National Hurricane Center said tropical storm Alex would build into the first hurricane of the Atlantic season as it moved over southern Gulf waters . 
Ripple effects from Alex produced six-foot -LRB- 1.8-meter -RRB- waves and wind gusts of up to 20 miles per hour and were expected to last a couple of days , said Phil Grigsby of the National Weather Service in New Orleans . 
Offshore oil clean-up activity off the Louisiana coast was halted because of severe weather , the U.S. Coast Guard said . 
Controlled burns of oil on the ocean , flights spraying dispersant chemicals and booming operations were all stopped , said Coast Guard Petty Officer Kelly Parker . 
However , BP Plc 's oil-capture and relief well drilling continued at the site of the leak . 
Grigsby said the weather would also affect clean-up operations on beaches and marshes . 
Alex , forecast to strengthen into a hurricane later on Tuesday , was churning northwest across the southwestern Gulf and expected to come ashore near the Texas-Mexico border late Wednesday or early Thursday . 
BP spokesman Robert Wine said BP 's oil-capture and relief well drilling operations were continuing . 
`` That 's all big equipment , and it is n't as affected by the sea state , '' he said of three rigs and a drillship a mile above the leak . 
BP officials have said waves as high as 12 feet -LRB- 4 metros -RRB- would delay plans to hook up a third system to capture much more oil and officials in Florida said high surf would probably hamper clean-up efforts . 
BP 's market capitalization has shrunk by $ 100 billion since its Deepwater Horizon drilling rig sank in 5,000 feet -LRB- 1,525 metros -RRB- of water on April 22 , two days after an explosion and fire killed 11 workers . 
But U.S.-listed shares of BP closed 2.29 percent higher at $ 27.67 on Tuesday on bargain-hunting . 
The shares have lost more than half their value since the spill began . 
`` It 's tough to say if the stock has bottomed because the political situation remains so fluid , but on a basis the stock is attractive , '' said John Brady , senior vice president at MF Global in Chicago . 
The stock 's weakness since the disaster has also sparked talk of a possible takeover bid . 
`` The spill is bad , but you need to remember that BP is a global company with a global business , and there 's strength elsewhere , '' Brady said . 
The oil spill crisis is in its 71st day with no firm end in sight . 
The economic and ecological costs to tourism , wildlife , fishing and other industries , already massive , continue to mount for four states along the U.S. Gulf coast . 
The lucrative tourism industry in the Gulf could be hard hit for years by a false perception the spill has ruined all the beaches , tourism officials said . 
U.S. government officials estimate 35,000 to 60,000 barrels are gushing from the blown-out well each day . 
BP 's containment system can handle up to 28,000 barrels daily . 
The planned addition would have raised that to 53,000 bpd . 
Senior U.S. officials were beating a path to the Gulf region , responding to criticism that President Barack Obama and his administration responded too slowly to the crisis . 
Tuesday 's visitors included Vice President Joe Biden . 
A U.S. appeals court set July 8 for oral arguments on the Obama administration 's request to stay a ruling that lifted its six-month moratorium on deepwater oil drilling . 
A federal judge blocked it at the request of drilling companies , saying the suspension was too broad and arbitrary . 
Polls have given Obama low marks for his handling of the disaster , although not as low as those given to BP . 
`` BP 's handling of the spill from a crisis management perspective will go down in history as one of the great examples of how to make a situation worse by bad communications , '' said Michael Gordon , of New York-based crisis PR firm Group Gordon Strategic Communications . 
Mistakes include downplaying the environmental damage , initially blaming others for the disaster and underestimating the amount of oil leaking , analysts say . 
As crude oil and dispersants float on the surface of the Gulf , crews are battling to keep it off beaches and away from wildlife breeding grounds . 
On Louisiana 's Bay Baptiste , winds whipped waves up about a foot high and white caps were visible in the distance as the outer bands of Alex began to move into the region . 
Several marshes were only partially boom-protected , with oil coating the bottom part of reeds as crabs covered in crude scurried on nearby marsh islands . 
The Atlantic hurricane season runs from June 1 to November 30 and meteorologists predict this year will be very active , suggesting more problems for the oil spill clean-up effort . 
In Biloxi , Mississippi , BP spokesman Richard Judy acknowledged problems with clean-up operations after the state 's mainland was hit by oil . 
`` What 's keeping us busy in this area is maintaining boom , in some cases putting out new boom , doing pick-up of oiled material on the beaches when it gets there and also going out and working on the coastal islands , '' Judy said . 
`` Weather has been a problem . 
We have to be careful not to keep our crews on beaches if there 's lightning nearby . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Containment and closure would have been better but then the loss of profits by the top 2 % would have been unbearable . 
So , in keeping with the agenda of having the general population eat the garbage left by those who are presumed better human beings , we 'll just say `` how unfortunate that the hurrican season has n't been postponed . '' 
This is yellow journalism at its best . 
If there was n't an oil spill in the Gulf , nobody north of Brownsville would take a second look at Alex or any overzealous newscaster 's warning of `` coastal flooding '' on the north side or water churning in the Gulf . 
As a native southeast Texan , I 've been through my share of hurricanes and tropical storms , and I can safely say that I am not the least bit worried about Alex , `` coastal flooding '' north of South Padre Island or any effect that it `` might '' have on the BP oil spill . 
You just focus on getting that relief well drilled , BP , and those claims dispersed to the people who need them . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
