A sea turtle covered in oil from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill swims off Grand Terre Island , Louisiana in this June 8 , 2010 file photo . 
LONDON | Tue Jun 29 , 2010 10:21 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A week after one of his wells in the Gulf of Mexico began spewing crude into the sea , BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward visited the Reuters office in London . 
Initially anxious , the CEO relaxed and grew in confidence as he outlined his plans to halt the leak , peppering his conversation with industry slang like `` mods , '' short for `` modifications . '' 
His message over the lunch with senior journalists was clear : BP had one of the biggest engineering , logistical and financial problems the oil industry had ever faced , but the company was up to the challenge . 
What the CEO failed to mention was that BP also faced a massive political problem , perhaps the biggest such crisis for an oil company operating in the United States since Teddy Roosevelt broke up John D. Rockefeller 's Standard Oil . 
It was a telling omission . 
BP 's failure to grasp the fact that its biggest challenge was in Washington , not the Gulf , has led to a series of gaffes and strategic communications errors that have inflamed public opinion , fanned the political firestorm and dragged the company 's share price ever lower . 
Most analysts expect the spill cleanup to cost under $ 30 billion , but BP 's market capitalization is down $ 100 billion , on expectations it will face fines of up to $ 30 billion as well as curbs on its business in the United States , its most important market . 
It did n't have to be this way . 
`` BP 's handling of the spill from a crisis management perspective will go down in history as one of the great examples of how to make a situation worse by bad communications , '' said Michael Gordon , of New York-based crisis PR firm Group Gordon Strategic Communications . 
`` It was a combination of a lack of transparency , a lack of straight talking and a lack of sensitivity to the victims . 
When you 're managing an environmental disaster of this magnitude you not only have to manage the problem but also manage all the stakeholders . '' 
From the start , BP adopted positions that fueled suspicion . 
Hayward repeatedly told reporters in the first days after the rig drilling the doomed well exploded that `` it was n't our accident . '' 
Instead , the CEO blamed Transocean , the company that operated the drilling rig . 
`` In such an awful and public situation , to immediately blame someone else , even if you 're right , is bad from a public relations standpoint , '' said Henry Sneath , First Vice-President with DRI , an association of U.S. corporate defense lawyers . 
`` You immediately blacken your reputation and poison potential jurors that might ultimately rule on your faith . '' 
The company also failed to tackle its image as a serial safety and environmental offender . 
That was especially true in the United States where regulators had blamed both a 2005 refinery blast that killed 15 workers and pipeline leaks in Alaska in 2006 on cost-cutting . 
When a Congressional Committee in mid-May highlighted this record , BP insisted it had changed . 
But it could n't say how . 
`` BP 's inability to precisely describe the improvements it has made in its safety and operational culture took us by surprise , '' UBS said in a research note after the hearing . 
BP further weakened its credibility by underestimating the amount of oil leaking from its well . 
Even when scientists challenged the Coast Guard 's 5,000 barrel-per-day estimate of the flow rate , BP defended it robustly . 
On May 14 , Bob Dudley , BP 's director for the Americas , told MSNBC the 5,000 bpd figure was `` a good estimate '' and that calculations of up to 70,000 bpd were `` scaremongering . '' 
On June 15 , a government panel said the flow rate was actually up to 60,000 bpd and internal BP documents released by a U.S. Congressman last week showed BP had itself calculated the well could flow at up to 100,000 bpd . 
`` Once you 've lost trust and credibility , your ability to get your message across is critically hampered , '' said Jonathan Hemus , director of Insignia Communications . 
Then there were Hayward 's mistakes . 
Telling interviewers the spill was `` relatively tiny '' and that the environmental impact was likely to be `` very , very modest '' was interpreted as a crude attempt to downplay the spill 's impact . 
Even worse was Hayward 's comment on TV that he wanted his life back . 
Predictably , wives of some of the 11 men who died in the rig blast responded that they 'd like their husbands back . 
On June 25 , Hayward 's boss , the BP Chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg said Hayward was returning to the UK , admitting the CEO 's remarks had `` upset people . '' 
A day later , Hayward showed he could upset the U.S. public just as capably from the other of the Atlantic , when he was photographed aboard his yacht off the Isle of Wight as the oil spill confined fishermen in Louisiana to port . 
`` I think we can all conclude that Tony Hayward is not going to have a second career in PR consulting , '' White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel told ABC news after the yachting incident . 
What makes the mistakes even worse , is that BP should have been well placed to mount a world-class crisis PR effort . 
The firm had almost unlimited resources . 
Its chairman was a media-savvy former telecoms CEO . 
And its head of public relations , Andrew Gowers , was a former editor of the Financial Times , and one-time Reuters reporter , with recent experience of crisis management : Gowers headed Lehman Brothers PR team during its collapse , although the rapidity and breadth of the banking meltdown was such that no amount of PR could have saved the bank . 
Yet the oil giant had a key shortcoming . 
BP 's British CEO had never held a position in the United States , its Swedish chairman had limited U.S. experience , and Gowers ' only stint working in the United States was his few months with Lehman . 
Hayward exacerbated his lack of U.S. savvy by choosing another Briton , Alan Parker , head of the UK 's largest financial PR agency , Brunswick , as his external PR adviser . 
It was n't until late May before the company appointed a heavy-hitting U.S. PR representative -- Dick Cheney 's former spokeswoman , Anne Kolton . 
The lack of local knowledge hurt BP in those first few weeks . 
U.S. executives say that it is difficult for European executives , especially those who have n't spent a long time working in the United States , to understand the combatative political landscape there . 
`` In Europe , the attitude would be much more , ` the company is the only one who can solve the problem , so what do we need to do to help the company to get it sorted ? ' '' 
said Patrick Dunleavy , a professor of political science at the London School of Economics . 
`` The company did n't adequately gauge how much backlash there would be and how quickly it would be ... that was a really bad piece of risk management , '' he added . 
BP has also been caught out by a more hostile media than it is used to . 
For long the UK 's largest and most international business , BP 's success is a source of pride for a former imperial power which agonizes over its position in the world . 
To many in Britain , the CEO of BP is the patron saint of British business -- someone whose pronouncements on matters even outside the energy space can make the front pages . 
Even now , BP enjoys a reasonably positive press in Britain . 
But the role of U.S. television in reporting the disaster in has been a challenge for a media team more geared toward dealing with financial reporters whose professional readers care less about snappy sound-bites . 
BP would have faced public anger and political pressure no matter how slick its PR , of course . 
The question is : could it have handled the situation better ? 
`` PR is not the antidote to what 's happening here . 
Whenever something like this happens it is a 100 percent certainty that the public relations will be deemed to be botched , '' said Eric Dezenhall , a crisis PR specialist for almost 30 years , Washington-based Dezenhall said BP 's communications efforts must be judged over the longer term . 
`` All of these PR chestnuts that sound wonderful in a college class , about apologizing and contrition , there is very , very weak data to show these cliches bear out in reality . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Simon Robinson and Sitaraman Shankar -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Regardless which companies are culpable , the federal government is guilty of refusing help that would have mitigated the damage . 
Worse yet , our President and his administration interfered with the judicial process by condemning BP 1 -RRB- before all facts were known , 2 -RRB- prior to a completed investigations , and 3 -RRB- without a fair , impartial trial in a Court of Law . 
It will be interesting to see whether all of the ultimate judicial proceedings will take place in the United States , or if the United States government will be brought before The International Court of Justice at the Hague . 
And what department of the legal Division of BP do you work in ? 
The only court that needs to be convened has already done so and it is the Court of Public Opinion -- BP GUILTY ON ALL COUNTS ! 
BP will begin 's pinning off ' U.S. divisions and getting ` out of Dodge ' as soon as they can . 
The U.S. will pursue BP like a dog -LRB- which is what they are , a mean , rabid dog , sacrificing safety , lives and an entire eco system in the pursuit of profits -RRB- . 
This article was about how they so mismanaged their PUBLIC RELATIONS there is no saving their face ... . 
and you want to talk about the U.S. government jumping the legal gun ? 
At the speed that the legal systems -LRB- world wide -RRB- move , the entire bayou would be a wasteland ! 
Hell , the Hague could n't even bring the butcher of Yugoslavia to justice before he died of old age ! 
You 're not from another planet , you are another -LRB- poorly disguised , I add -RRB- plant of the BP manipulators . 
Hint : When you start taking PR advice from lawyers -- and British trained ones at that -- you have already lost your case . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
