In this May 26 , 2010 photo , officials effort to plug the gushing oil well using a maneuver known as a `` top kill '' that has never before been tried 5,000 feet underwater . 
AP BP has launched a two-pronged attempt to plug the blown-out oil well in the Gulf of Mexico using heavy mud and dense rubber balls , but the company 's CEO said it wo n't be clear for 48 hours whether the efforts will stop the massive oil spill . 
CEO Tony Hayward said in an interview Friday morning that the `` junk shot '' method -- which pumps rubber and other man-made material into the gushing well -- has been added to the `` top kill , '' which has been slowing the flow of oil by pumping mud into the source since Thursday . 
Speaking on the same program , U.S. incident commander Thad Allen said the flow of oil and gas from the broken well has been stopped , but that the real test will be whether the stoppage can be sustained . 
`` The real challenge is to put enough mud into the well to keep the pressure where they can put a cement plug over the top , '' he said on ABC 's Good Morning America . 
The next 12 to 18 hours will be `` very critical '' in the attempt to protect the fragile ecosystem in the Gulf , which is being overwhelmed by the largest oil spill in U.S. history . 
Hayward said BP 's efforts have been going `` pretty well according to plan , '' and that the company planned to begin pumping more mud into the well again later today . 
President Obama arrived Friday in the Gulf , where he planned to tour a beach with Allen and visit with local officials . 
A day earlier , he acknowledged that his administration could have done a better job dealing with the spill and that it misjudged the industry 's ability to handle a worst-case scenario . 
`` I take responsibility . 
It is my job to make sure that everything is done to shut this down , '' he said . 
Friday 's trip was the president 's second to the coast since the BP-leased oil rig Deepwater Horizon exploded April 20 , killing 11 workers and triggering the spill . 
He will be briefed in Grand Isle , La. , where the public beach has been closed since globs of oil started washing up a week ago . 
Buggie Vegas , who owns Bridge Side Cabins and Marina there , said Obama needs to see the disaster for himself . 
`` I think he 's going to get the message when he comes down and sees how bad it is , '' Vegas said . 
The top kill is oil and gas giant BP PLC 's latest untested bid to end a spill that has , by the most conservative estimate , surpassed the Exxon Valdez disaster by gushing more than 18 million gallons into the Gulf . 
It has worked on land but never been tried 5,000 feet underwater , and Hayward gave it a 60 to 70 percent chance of success . 
He said Friday morning the top kill was progressing as planned and BP engineers had completed a second phase by pumping what he called `` loss prevention material '' into a crippled piece of equipment known as a blowout preventer to form a bridge against which crews could pump more heavyweight mud . 
`` Clearly I 'm as anxious as everyone in America is to get this thing done , '' Hayward said . 
If the top kill fails , BP 's next best hope for controlling even part of the leak is a tinier version of something that has already been tried : a steel containment box to cap the well . 
A 100-ton box lies junked on the ocean floor , abandoned by BP after ice-like crystals clogged it . 
While BP officials say the smaller box should n't have that problem , it 's clearly not their preferred method . 
It has been sitting in reserve on the seabed for more than a week while engineers first tried to siphon off oil through a mile-long tube . 
That succeeded in collecting 924,000 gallons before crews took it out to allow room for the top kill attempt . 
If the small box does n't work , BP officials say they will go back to the tube , crossing their fingers that a relief well still weeks away from being drilled far enough to affect the leak will help stop the bleeding . 
And even that 's not a sure bet . 
Obama said Thursday that authorities insisted BP drill a second relief well as a backup since such wells often miss their mark . 
BP said in a regulatory filing Friday that it has spent $ 930 million so far responding to the ruptured well , including costs for cleanup and prevention work , drilling relief wells , and paying grants to Gulf states , damage claims and federal costs . 
BP says it 's too early to quantify other potential costs and liabilities associated . 
Two teams of scientists calculated the well has been spewing between 504,000 and more than a million gallons a day , which in the worst-case scenario means about 39 million gallons could have leaked . 
The larger figure would be nearly four times the size of the Exxon Valdez disaster , in which a tanker ran aground in Alaska in 1989 , spilling nearly 11 million gallons . 
The new Gulf spill estimates released Thursday were far higher than the 210,000 gallons that BP and the Coast Guard had guessed was pouring from the well . 
But even the highest estimate would not make the spill the biggest ever in the Gulf . 
In 1979 , a drilling rig in Mexican waters -- the Ixtoc I -- blew up , releasing 140 million gallons of oil . 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
