A statue dedicated to oil workers is seen in Cabimas in Venezuela 's western state of Zulia , near Lake Maracaibo March 1 , 2008 . 
NEW YORK | Fri Apr 8 , 2011 6:25 pm BST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Brent crude jumped to a 32-month high above $ 125 on Friday as commodities climbed in unison on a weaker dollar after attacks on Libyan oil fields made long-term supply cuts more likely . 
Brent was poised for a fourth consecutive weekly gain , and its 5 percent rise would be the largest percentage rise since the week to February 25 . 
In addition to the Libyan conflict , ongoing unrest in the Middle East and bomb attacks intended to postpone Nigerian elections added to oil supply concerns . 
Brent crude for May rose $ 2.71 to $ 125.38 a barrel by 11:50 a.m. -LRB- 4:50 p.m. British time -RRB- , having hit $ 125.79 , the highest front-month price since August 2008 . 
U.S. crude rose $ 1.43 to $ 111.73 after earlier reaching $ 111.90 , the highest intraday price since September 2008 . 
U.S. crude trading volumes lagged Brent near midday Friday in New York . 
U.S. crude volumes the previous two weeks were the lowest weekly volumes for 2011 . 
`` Troubles in Libya mean Gaddafi has caused damage to the Sirte basin , which has about two-thirds of their oil . 
There 's dollar weakness and some very large fund action piling into the market in oil and base metals , '' said Rob Montefusco , an oil trader at Sucden Financial . 
Libya 's civil war has cut its normal output of 1.6 million barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- by 80 percent to between 250,000 and 300,000 bpd , according to a senior government official . 
NATO leaders have acknowledged the limits of their air power , with analysts predicting a drawn-out conflict . 
Libya 's fellow OPEC member Nigeria , which produces 1.9 million bpd , postponed parliamentary elections again in some areas , although polls will go ahead in most of the country on Saturday as planned . 
`` Upcoming elections in Nigeria have already seen an uptick in violence in the oil rich states of Akwa Ibom and Balyesa , with any loss in Nigerian crude -LRB- similar in quality to Libya -RRB- likely to put further pressure on light-heavy differentials , '' said Barclays Capital analyst Amrita Sen. Crude prices rallied in step with gains across the commodities markets , where gold hit a record high , driven by a weaker dollar and a positive global outlook despite Portugal 's request for a bailout earlier this week . 
A weaker dollar often lifts dollar-denominated commodities because they become attractive as a hard-asset inflation hedge and demand can be stoked by cheaper prices for consumers using other currencies . 
`` New investment flows at the start of the quarter are driving oil and gold this morning , with the strong rise over the past week attracting trend followers and more fund money , '' said Michael Guido , director of hedge fund energy sales at Macquarie Bank in New York . 
`` The uptrend is still very much intact , with key technical levels being taken out . '' 
The surge in oil prices is stoking inflationary concerns worldwide due to the potential adverse impact on economic growth and the risk of demand destruction . 
