Fuel storage tanks are seen at Mobil Oil 's oil refinery in Melbourne March 8 , 2011 . 
NEW YORK | Fri Apr 8 , 2011 6:26 pm EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Oil prices surged the most in three weeks on Friday , with Brent jumping $ 4 a barrel to a 32-month high as a sinking dollar triggered a fresh rush of fund buying across the commodities spectrum . 
U.S. crude topped $ 113 but trailed Brent , which closed out its best weekly gain since February . 
Deepening violence in Libya and concerns about unrest in Saudi Arabia and Nigeria lent new impetus to a rally that is threatening to crimp global growth and add to growing inflation concerns . 
Analysts said Friday 's sharp gains in oil , wheat , copper and gold -- while stocks slipped -- stemmed from a big wave of second-quarter investment . 
Oil drew extra support from fears that the war in Libya was starting to inflict lasting damage on the oil sector . 
`` Troubles in Libya mean Gaddafi has caused damage to the Sirte basin , which has about two-thirds of their oil . 
There 's dollar weakness and some very large fund action piling into the market in oil and base metals , '' said Rob Montefusco , an oil trader at Sucden Financial . 
ICE Brent crude for May rose $ 3.98 to settle at $ 126.65 a barrel , highest settlement since July 2008 . 
It reached $ 126.91 in post-settlement trading . 
U.S. crude rose $ 2.49 to settle at $ 112.79 . 
It reached $ 113.20 post-settlement , the highest intraday price since September 2008 . 
DXY measuring the greenback against a basket of currencies weakened as the euro jumped to a 15-month peak against the dollar following the European Central Bank 's interest rate hike . 
<USD/> A weaker dollar often lifts dollar-denominated commodities because they become attractive as a hard-asset inflation hedge and demand can be stoked by cheaper prices for consumers using other currencies . 
`` New investment flows at the start of the quarter are driving oil and gold this morning , with the strong rise over the past week attracting trend followers and more fund money , '' said Michael Guido , director of hedge fund energy sales at Macquarie Bank in New York . 
`` The uptrend is still very much intact , with key technical levels being taken out . '' 
Brent 's 14-day Relative Strength Index , a technicians ' measure to gauge whether a contract is overbought or oversold , approached 80 -- a level only hit three times before and never surpassed , according to Reuters data . 
U.S. crude trading volumes above 600,000 lots neared the 30-day average , rebounding from late March when activity hit the lowest this year . 
In addition to the Libyan conflict , investors eyed protests in top oil exporter Saudi Arabia and unrest in Syria , Yemen and attacks intended to interfere with elections in OPEC-member Nigeria , which produces 1.9 million barrels per day of oil . 
Libya 's civil war has cut the normal output of 1.6 million barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- by 80 percent to between 250,000 and 300,000 bpd , according to a senior government official . 
NATO leaders have acknowledged the limits of their air power , with analysts predicting a drawn-out conflict . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Higher oil prices which will raise the price of gas which will push more people into driving those cheap electric that you 'll never see him drive . 
I guess he was n't kiding when he said he did n't mind $ 4.00 a gallon gas since the price of gas has doubled since he has been in office . 
If Libya produces something like 1.8 % of world supply , how is it that the price of oil is spiking by 50 % ? 
@ProudWesterner , you hit the nail on the head . 
Just look at the headline ; `` Oil hit a 32-month high above $ 124 Friday after attacks on Libyan oil fields raised the prospect of long-term supply cuts , with commodities in general rising on optimism global economic recovery will fuel demand . '' 
Two key words there being `` prospect '' and `` optimism '' . 
Nothing has actually happened yet but speculators are \* guessing \* something might so prices go up . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
