Mexico and China in swine flu row Mexico 's ambassador says he was denied access to citizens at a hotel A row is growing between Mexico and China over Beijing 's treatment of Mexicans traveling to China following the recent swine flu outbreak . 
Mexican officials said their citizens were being unfairly confined . 
The Mexican ambassador was denied access to a group being held at a Beijing hotel . 
China says the steps it has taken are lawful and justified . 
Some 400 people have been quarantined in China since the virus was confirmed in a man who arrived from Mexico . 
Most are in the Metropark hotel in Hong Kong , where the infected man checked in , but the number also includes his fellow passengers . 
No-one else has displayed any symptoms . 
Mexico has now confirmed 19 fatalities from the virus , but officials said it appeared that the outbreak could be levelling off . 
Mexicans are being held in hotels and other sites across China , including in Shanghai and Hong Kong . 
There are reports of international flyers being tested for the virus Ambassador Jorge Guajardo said many of them had no connection with the Shanghai-Hong Kong flight which carried the infected Mexican man . 
`` We are objecting to the fact that they are holding Mexicans in isolation for fear that they might have the flu virus , even though they have no signs of having the flu virus , '' he said . 
Mr Guajardo tried to visit 10 Mexicans quarantined in Beijing 's Guo Men hotel but was denied access by Chinese officials . 
On Saturday Foreign Minister Patricia Espinosa criticised China , along with Peru , Argentina , Cuba and Ecuador , for cutting flights to Mexico . 
She also urged Mexicans to avoid travel to China , accusing its government of discrimination for the quarantine measures . 
Chinese Ministry of Health spokesman Mao Qunan said extra protection was needed after the virus reached Hong Kong . 
`` The confirmation of this case clearly raised the risks of A-H1N1 flu entering our country , '' he said , quoted by state media . 
He said the ministry had ordered for all those in `` close contact '' with the virus to be put under `` protective control '' . 
