Toyota Motor , the once-mighty money machine that grabbed the crown of world s biggest automaker from General Motors last year , gave a shocking loss forecast today for a staggering $ 8.6 billion for this year . 
Culprits are aplenty , but one of them is the company 's mammoth size . 
Until the economic crisis slammed the brakes on car sales last year , Toyota couldn t build them fast enough . 
To catch up with demand , Toyota put up more factories , from China to the Czech Republic . 
Reaching annual sales of 10 million vehicles a feat never achieved by any automaker to date -- looked imminent for the 70-year-old carmaker . 
Now that rapid expansion has come back to haunt it . 
With consumers holding back on car purchases the world over , Toyota s sprawling manufacturing facilities are a liability . 
Tumbling sales are forcing dozens of its factories to work half-days , costing the company billions . 
This year , it expects to build 6.3 million vehicles -- 800,000 fewer than it did in the year that ended on March 31 . 
Size is a tricky business . 
Economics says that scale breeds savings , but at the same time , it makes carmakers less nimble . 
Striking a balance can be tough even for a company like Toyota , which has grown organically as an independent carmaker . 
Rivals such as General Motors and Volkswagen , meanwhile , have become bigger partly by scooping up brands , often outside their home markets , so achieving synergies is even more difficult . 
In the late 1990s , former Daimler-Benz Chairman Juergen Schrempp had a vision of creating an auto empire and took over Chrysler to form DaimlerChrysler , which went on to buy stakes in Japan s Mitsubishi Motors and South Korea s Hyundai Motor . 
Now , all of those ties have effectively been severed . 
The moral of Schrempp s failure was : Size isn t the formula for success . 
It s puzzling , then , that Sergio Marchionne , the dynamic chief executive of Italy s Fiat , is treading a similar path . 
The Italian-Canadian CEO is looking to super-size Fiat by combining with the newly bankrupt Chrysler and GM s German arm , Opel , in the belief that the Italian carmaker needs the resulting industrial efficiency to survive . 
Toyota s announcement today should be a wake-up call for Mr Marchionne . 
PHOTO CREDITS : Issei Kato\/Reuters ; Alessandro Garofalo\/Reuters Toyota is one of the best run automakers in the world , much of their production is in low wage countries and production has been robotized to the max . 
If they ca n't make a profit then nobody can . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
