\* Sees 2009 profits ` substantially less ' than previous view \* Says all other businesses performing in line \* Shares slump 30 percent -LRB- Recasts lead , adds share price , CEO , analyst comment -RRB- LONDON , May 8 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Emerging markets lender International Personal Finance -LRB- IPF . 
L -RRB- said soaring loan default rates in recession-hit Hungary would eat into its profits this year , knocking almost a third off the company 's share price . 
IPF , which offers small loans to consumers in central Europe , Romania and Mexico , risked breaching its debt covenants if loan impairment rates worsened further , an analyst said , but the firm 's CEO denied this would happen . 
`` It is likely , as a result of the underperformance in Hungary , that the -LRB- profit -RRB- outcome for 2009 will be substantially less than our expectations , '' the company said on Friday . 
Impairments in the country rose sharply in the first four months of the year , causing it to miss pretax profit targets by 8 million pounds . 
Hungary 's government expects the economy , which has been hit by falling exports and weakening domestic demand , to contract by up to 6 percent this year , while the forint currency has fallen sharply in the past six months , making it harder for local borrowers to repay loans taken out in hard currencies . 
Analyst Nitin Arora at Noble said his clients had `` lost faith '' in IPF 's management team , and he believed bad loans as a proportion of the firm 's loan portfolio had risen to 31 percent . 
`` We estimate that if that ratio goes to 34 percent , they will breach the interest covenants , '' he said . 
`` Given the deteriorating macro environment and the uncertainty in all the economies in which IPF operates , we would not be surprised to see the 34 percent being hit . '' 
IPF , which closed its Russian operations at the end of April , said it experienced a sharp downturn in loan collections in Poland , Czech Republic , Slovakia and Hungary , as the global recession hits consumers and unemployment rises . 
But Chief Executive John Harnett told Reuters he did not expect impairments to rise to 34 percent and the firm would continue to operate within its covenants . 
He said that , after a lull at the start of the year , collections in its largest markets of Poland and the Czech Republic improved in March and April , a trend that was set to continue for the rest of the year . 
Rates had stabilised in Hungary , albeit at a low level . 
`` We 've seen off the worst , '' he said . 
IPF , which split from UK parent Provident Financial -LRB- PFG . 
L -RRB- in July 2007 , said its operations in Mexico had not been affected by the outbreak of swine flu and it was still on track to break into profit there for the first time . 
Shares in IPF , which two months ago reported a 40 percent rise in full-year pretax profit , tumbled 31 percent to 98.5 pence at 1304 GMT , having hit a record low of 94 pence at the start of April . 
-LRB- ID : nL3885424 -RRB- . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
