POINTE-AUX-CHENES , LA. -- The best thing about this place -- where the dry land of south Louisiana gives up , and marshes and bayous stretch away to the Gulf -- used to be that white people had so much trouble finding it . 
Here , a French-speaking Indian tribe has lived for more than a century , isolated from a world that had proved itself unfriendly . 
But the oil found its refuge in a month and a day . 
Now , this tribe is feeling an especially sharp version of Louisiana 's despair . 
Its members worry that the oil will kill the marsh , and seethe at the idea that a bitter history now seems to be getting worse . 
`` They come in and take our land . 
Now , the oil 's taking over . 
It 's like it 's happening all over '' again , said Grace Welch , 26 , in a stilt-legged house across the street from the bayou . 
Across the plywood-floored living room , her father was fantasizing about killing Christopher Columbus . 
`` They shoulda hang him , '' said Sidney Verdin , 60 . 
He meant the native people who encountered Columbus , the first scout of the civilization that would eventually drill an oil well 5,000 feet under the ocean and then not know how to fix it when it broke . 
The Pointe-au-Chien tribe lives west of the Mississippi River mouth , more than 100 miles by water from the spot where the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig exploded and sank . 
Headed here from New Orleans , the road branches and narrows until it is two lanes hugging a cola-colored bayou where alligators hide . 
The tribe lives where the road ends . 
On Tuesday , in the shaded space under a house on stilts , chief Charles `` Chuckie '' Verdin -LRB- pronounced `` VUR-dan , '' a common name in the roughly 680-member tribe -RRB- , 53 , recounted watching the TV news when BP gave up its attempt to completely kill the leaking well . 
`` I just stayed there and looked at it , '' said the chief , a deeply tanned man wearing a camouflage T-shirt , as stray kittens played around his feet . 
`` Going through my head -LRB- was -RRB- , ` This is going to get a lot worse . ' '' 
The tribe is not recognized by the federal government , and its name is proof of its still-murky history : The tribe 's official name is French for `` Dog Point . '' 
But others nearby asserted that the right name was the more genteel Pointe-aux-Chenes , `` Point of Oaks , '' and that 's the name on the local school . 
In Cajun French , both names sound like `` Point ahw-shen . '' 
The tribe says it has lived in this region for more than a century , one of a group of tribes that escaped into the bayous as Manifest Destiny roared by . 
But , for a century now , the swamp has done a progressively worse job at keeping bad things away . 
In the early 1900s , Louisiana 's growing oil industry managed to gain control of tribal lands for drilling wells . 
And flood-control measures reduced the sediment deposits that kept the land above water : Homes and cemeteries were abandoned . 
