May 29 : This image made from video released by British Petroleum -LRB- BP PLC -RRB- shows the gushing oil well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP ROBERT , Louisiana -- BP admitted defeat Saturday in its attempt to plug the Gulf of Mexico oil leak by pumping mud into a busted well , but is readying yet another approach after repeated failures to stop the crude that 's fouling marshland and beaches . 
BP PLC Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said the company determined the `` top kill '' had failed after it spent three days pumping heavy drilling mud into the crippled well 5,000 feet underwater . 
More than 1.2 million gallons of mud was used , but most of it escaped out of the damaged riser . 
In the six weeks since the spill began , the company has failed in each attempt to stop the gusher , as estimates of how much oil is leaking grow more dire . 
The spill is the worst in U.S. history -- exceeding even the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster -- and dumping between 18 million and 40 million gallons into the Gulf , according to government estimates . 
`` This scares everybody , the fact that we ca n't make this well stop flowing , the fact that we have n't succeeded so far , '' Suttles said . 
`` Many of the things we 're trying have been done on the surface before , but have never been tried at 5,000 feet . '' 
The company failed in the days after the spill to use robot submarines to close valves on the massive blowout preventer atop the damaged well , then two weeks later ice-like crystals clogged a 100-ton box the company tried placing over the leak . 
Earlier this week , engineers removed a mile-long siphon tube after it sucked up a disappointing 900,000 gallons of oil from the gusher . 
Frustration has grown as drifting oil closes beaches and washes up in sensitive marshland . 
The damage is underscored by images of pelicans and their eggs coated in oil . 
Below the surface , oyster beds and shrimp nurseries face certain death . 
President Barack Obama visited the coast Friday to see the damage as he tried to emphasize that his administration was in control of the crisis . 
He told people in Grand Isle , where the beach has been closed by gobs of oil , that they would n't be abandoned . 
After BP announced the top kill failure , Obama said from Chicago that the continued flow of oil into the Gulf is `` as enraging as it is heartbreaking . '' 
Suttles said BP is already preparing for the next attempt to stop the leak that began after the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig exploded on April 20 , killing 11 people . 
The company plans to use robot submarines to cut off the damaged riser from which the oil is leaking , and then try to cap it with a containment valve . 
The effort is expected to take between four and seven days . 
`` We 're confident the job will work but obviously we ca n't guarantee success , '' Suttles said of the new plan , declining to handicap the likelihood it will work . 
He said that cutting off the damaged riser is n't expected to cause the flow rate of leaking oil to increase significantly . 
The permanent solution to the leak , a relief well currently being drilled , wo n't be ready until August , BP says . 
Experts have said that a bend in the damaged riser likely was restricting the flow of oil somewhat , so slicing it off and installing a new containment valve is risky . 
`` If they ca n't get that valve on , things will get much worse , '' said Philip W. Johnson , an engineering professor at the University of Alabama . 
Johnson said he thinks BP can succeed with the valve , but added : `` It 's a scary proposition . '' 
Word that the top-kill had failed hit hard in fishing communities along Louisiana 's coast . 
`` Everybody 's starting to realize this summer 's lost . 
And our whole lifestyle might be lost , '' said Michael Ballay , the 59-year-old manager of the Cypress Cove Marina in Venice , Louisiana , near where oil first made landfall in large quanities almost two weeks ago . 
Johnny Nunez , owner of Fishing Magician Charters in Shell Beach , Louisiana , said the spill is hurting his business during what 's normally the best time of year -- and there 's no end in sight . 
`` If fishing 's bad for five years , I 'll be 60 years old . 
I 'll be done for , '' he said after watching BP 's televised announcement . 
