The US ambassador to Syria , Robert Ford , was withdrawn over fears for his safety in October Syria has declared as unwelcome the ambassadors of several Western states , a week after governments around the world expelled its top diplomats . 
The US , UK , French and Turkish envoys were among those designated `` personae non gratae '' . 
Many have already left . 
President Bashar al-Assad has blamed outside powers for Syria 's divisions . 
Meanwhile , the UN has said the Syrian government has agreed to allow aid agencies to enter the four provinces that have seen the most violence . 
`` This agreement was secured in Damascus with the government there , in writing , '' John Ging , the director of operations for UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs -LRB- OCHA -RRB- told reporters in Geneva after a meeting of the Syrian Humanitarian Forum . 
`` Freedom of movement , unimpeded access for humanitarian action within Syria , is what it 's all about now . 
The good faith of the -LRB- Syrian -RRB- government will be tested on this issue today , tomorrow and every day , '' he added . 
Procedures would be streamlined for granting visas to staff from nine UN agencies and seven international NGOs , Mr Ging said . 
The UN will open field offices in the provinces of Deraa , Deir al-Zour , Homs and Idlib . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully The UN has been trying for months to get its aid workers into Syria , but with little success , reports the BBC 's Imogen Foulkes in Geneva . 
Visa applications have been delayed or denied , and supplies of aid blocked . 
The UN estimates that one million people are in need of assistance inside Syria , and that the number will likely increase after further assessments . 
In a separate development , Russian President Vladimir Putin and his Chinese counterpart , Hu Jintao , urged the international community to continue to support the peace plan negotiated by the UN and Arab League envoy to Syria , Kofi Annan , Chinese state TV said . 
But Saudi Arabia 's foreign minister said Gulf Arab states had `` begun to lose hope in the possibility of reaching a solution ... within this framework '' . 
Mr Annan is to address the UN Security Council in New York on Thursday . 
He is believed to want a `` serious review '' of efforts to implement his plan . 
Last week , at least 13 countries expelled top Syrian diplomats in protest at the massacre of more than 100 people , including 49 children , in the Houla area of Homs province . 
Turkey expelled all Syrian embassy staff . 
We hope the countries that initiated these steps will adopt those principles , which would allow relations to return to normal again '' End Quote Syrian foreign ministry In what it described as a reciprocal move on Tuesday , the Syrian government announced that 17 diplomats from the US , UK , Switzerland , France , Italy , Spain , Belgium , Bulgaria , Germany and Canada were now considered `` personae non gratae '' . 
All Turkish diplomatic staff were also declared unwelcome . 
`` The Syrian Arab Republic still believes in the importance of dialogue based on principles of equality and mutual respect , '' a foreign ministry statement said . 
`` We hope the countries that initiated these steps will adopt those principles , which would allow relations to return to normal again . '' 
The BBC 's Jim Muir in Beirut says it will be a long time before the Western states are prepared to re-establish diplomatic ties . 
US ambassador Robert Ford was called back to Washington in October over fears for his safety , while all British embassy staff were withdrawn in March on security grounds . 
France also closed its embassy that month in protest at the `` scandalous '' repression of dissent by the government . 
On Sunday , President Assad told parliament that Syria was facing not an internal crisis but an external war , waged against it because of its support for resistance to Israel . 
There have been fierce clashes between soldiers and armed rebels in Syria in recent days In his first public comment on the massacre at Houla , in which 108 people were killed on 25 May , Mr Assad said that even `` monsters '' would not have carried out such an act and it should prompt an end to bloodshed . 
Survivors and human rights groups blamed the army and shabiha militiamen allied to the government for the deaths . 
Tuesday 's diplomatic move by the government came as activists said at least 34 people had been killed in violence across the country . 
At least 15 soldiers were killed and dozens wounded , while four rebel fighters also died in fighting in several towns and villages in the Mediterranean province of Latakia , according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights . 
`` These are the heaviest clashes so far in the area since the beginning of the revolution , '' Rami Abdul Rahman , the head of the UK-based group , told the Reuters news agency . 
Several villages south-west of the central city of Homs earlier came under intense army artillery - and mortar-fire , leaving five people dead , according to the Local Co-ordination Committees , an activist network . 
Four civilians were also reportedly killed overnight in a `` huge military operation '' in Kafrouaid , a village in the northern province of Idlib . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
6th June 2012 - 19:49 Everybody will agree that it 's important to understand both sides of a conflict before demanding action that leads to further violence . 
If you 're prepared to watch\/listen to an alternative view from the BBC then please go here : '' -LRB- The rebels -RRB- believe in peaceful demonstration to bring about change . '' 
The same people who boast of killing 80 government soldiers at the weekend . 
`` The facts on the ground are indisputable . 
Assad is slaughtering and massacring his own people . 
Torture , rape and murder are matters of doctrine . '' 
Indisputable in the sense of \* fitting his worldview \* . 
6th June 2012 - 16:18 This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the house rules . 
John McCain US Senator who carried out 23 bombing missions in Vietnam is now calling for bombing over Syria . 
Take a few minutes to listen to the vitriolic rantings of this man . 
His accusations of rape & torture were not and probably never will be confirmed . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
