Syria ceasefire : UN plans to send observers ` in days ' Hillary Clinton : `` The regime 's troops and tanks have not pulled back from population centres '' A draft UN Security Council resolution has outlined plans to send monitors to Syria to oversee compliance with a UN and Arab League-backed peace plan . 
The draft , prepared by the US , is expected to be voted on at the Security Council on Friday , with a monitoring team arriving by early next week . 
A ceasefire at the core of the peace plan is largely holding . 
But at least three people were reportedly killed on Friday , as large protests were held in several places . 
One person was killed by security forces as anti-government demonstrators tried to reach the main square in the central city of Hama , activists said . 
Another was shot dead after Friday prayers in the town of Nawa , in the southern province of Deraa , while the third died in the town of Salqin , in the north-western province of Idlib , they added . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut For the first time in months , thousands of people crammed the central square to stage a night-time demonstration in Deir al-Zour , a troubled city near the Iraqi border in the east . 
It was part protest , but part celebration - people seemed to feel that things have changed . 
That and many other factors will be tested as people come out of mosques all over the country after Friday prayers . 
Opposition leaders are looking for a big turnout as a show of strength . 
But there are fears about how the security forces may react , especially if there are any acts of provocation . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees -LRB- LCC -RRB- , an activist network , said shots were fired by security forces at several locations on Friday in a bid to disperse protests . 
A number of civilians were killed on Thursday , after the ceasefire came into effect at 06:00 -LRB- 03:00 GMT -RRB- , activists said , while the government said a bomb attack had killed one soldier . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir in Beirut says it could be some time before a full picture emerges , but that the impression is the breaches of the ceasefire have not been as serious as some had feared . 
A spokesman for UN and Arab League envoy , Kofi Annan , who drew up the peace plan , said it had been `` relatively respected '' , but that the envoy was `` aware that we do n't have a perfect situation '' in Syria . 
`` There are detainees that need to be released , humanitarian corridors need to be opened , '' said Ahmed Fawzi , although he noted that Syria had granted entry visas to 74 media organizations . 
The draft UN Security Council resolution calls on the Syrian government and opposition groups to comply with all aspects of Mr Annan 's peace plan , including troop withdrawals and an end to `` all armed violence in all its forms '' . 
Activist Mousab Hamdee on monitoring mission : `` We do n't want people to come and watch us dying '' It threatens unspecified `` further measures '' if the Syrian government `` does not implement its commitments '' . 
The team of 10 to 12 observers would monitor the ceasefire and check the Syrian military was withdrawing from population centres in accordance with the peace plan . 
Mr Fawzi said they were `` standing by to board planes and get themselves on the ground as soon as possible '' and would be followed by a larger mission of some 250 observers . 
Security Council diplomats - including those of Russia and China , who have vetoed previous resolutions - have all backed the idea of observers . 
The ceasefire formally came into effect on Thursday - both sides vowed to observe it , but reserved the right to respond if attacked . 
Mr Annan said Syria had not fully complied with the deal as it had yet to withdraw troops and heavy weaponry from towns and cities . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said the ceasefire was important but was just a first step . 
Humanitarian groups must have full access , she said , and Syrian President Bashar al-Assad would `` have to go '' , a step which is not included in the peace plan . 
Mrs Clinton said the US supported the deployment of an advance team immediately . 
But she said the group , as well as any full monitoring mission would `` need complete freedom of movement , unimpeded communications , and access throughout the country and to all Syrians , as well as firm security guarantees from all parties . '' 
French President Nicolas Sarkozy said on Friday that he did not `` believe in Bashar al-Assad 's sincerity , nor unfortunately in the ceasefire '' , and said the international community should `` assume its responsibilities and create humanitarian corridors so those unfortunates who are being massacred by a dictator can escape '' . 
The UN estimates that about 9,000 people have died since anti-government protests began in March 2011 . 
In February , the Syrian government put the death toll at 3,838 - 2,493 civilians and 1,345 security forces personnel . 
Are you in Syria ? 
Do you have friends or family there ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below . 
At no time should you endanger yourself or others or take any unnecessary risks . 
Send your pictures and videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to 61124 -LRB- UK -RRB- or +447624800100 -LRB- International -RRB- . 
If you have a large file you can upload here . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
