BP oil spill : Deepwater , deep trouble The commission has found that ` most of the mistakes can be traced back to a failure of management ' The explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon rig last April killed 11 workers , and caused 4.9 m barrels of oil to be spewed into the Gulf of Mexico . 
It was one of the worst spills in history , combining natural destruction , economic damage and even diplomatic tension between London and Washington , as they rowed about BP 's punishment . 
And , according to the National Oil Spill Commission set up by Barack Obama , it was entirely `` avoidable '' . 
After reviewing thousands of pages of documents from government and industry -LRB- including company internal documents -RRB- , and interviewing hundreds of officials , oil-industry employees and other witnesses , the commission has found that `` most of the mistakes and oversights at Macondo -LRB- BP 's well -RRB- can be traced back to a single overarching failure a failure of management . 
Better management by BP , -LRB- and its key contractors -RRB- Halliburton and Transocean would almost certainly have prevented the blowout . '' 
There will be much argument in coming months and years over what that phrase means , and whether it is true . 
But the clearest implication is this : the lethal Deepwater blast need never have happened if only BP and its key contractors , three of the biggest and richest firms in the industry , had done their jobs better . 
That is from a chapter released this week ahead of the full report 's publication next Tuesday but on their own these 48 pages , which convey much technical analysis and argument in clear , cool prose , make for a devastating charge sheet . 
Seasoned BP-watchers mainly agreed yesterday that the extract was not as bad for the oil giant as it looked , largely because it spared then chief executive Tony Hayward and his staff from accusations of gross negligence . 
But that is to miss the point . 
The oil spill commission was never meant to argue any particular case , but to investigate the blowout , its causes and immediate aftermath : not the prosecution so much as the investigating detective . 
Yet if the rest of the report matches up to this chapter then it will be exhibit A for the US government in its civil lawsuit against BP . 
What the oil-spill commission makes clear is that drilling the Macondo well was a meticulously planned and well-designed operation which in execution was sometimes rushed to the point of thoughtlessness . 
Substandard equipment turned up and , rather than wait , the drillers pressed on , with a BP engineer talking about `` the risk\/reward equation '' and claiming that all would `` probably be fine '' . 
Behind this under-considered haste lay an overwhelming desire to cut costs . 
As the report remarks : `` Whether purposeful or not , many of the decisions that BP , Halliburton , and Transocean made that increased the risk of the Macondo blowout clearly saved those companies significant time -LRB- and money -RRB- '' . 
The commission lists nine key decisions that may have contributed to the disaster : seven of them saved the drillers time , and only two were not made by BP . 
There is nothing necessarily wrong with companies seeking to do business more efficiently ; but there is everything wrong in cutting corners when the risks are so huge and widespread . 
That must be unarguable after last April 's disaster . 
Two more sobering points to consider : first , the three companies named and shamed in the commission report are three of the biggest in the world , and they were operating off the US coastline . 
Imagine what smaller firms may be up to in less regulated territories . 
Second , American regulators clearly do not have enough oversight of deep-water drilling . 
Officials must be called in not just to judge plans for wells , but to closely supervise how those plans are implemented . 
Otherwise they are regulators of theory rather than practice . 
There is a lot more in the Deepwater Horizon saga still to run ; on the initial evidence , however , it is not just BP that needs to improve its act , but an entire industry and area of government . 
