Daniel P Carter hosts a Rock Show special with highlights from Download Daniel P Carter is joined by The Punk Show 's Mike Davies for a three-hour Rock Show special bringing together their interviews and music highlights from Download , one of the biggest events in the rock music calendar . 
Presenters\/Daniel P Carter and Mike Davies , Producer\/Charis Blyth for Somethin' Else Productions This morning , Ken Bruce is joined in the studio by Adam and Theo from British synth-pop outfit Hurts . 
This month has seen the release of their latest single and a remix of Lady Gaga 's Judas . 
Ahead of performing at Glastonbury , they come in to choose this week 's Tracks Of My Years , beginning with music from Elton John and Squeeze . 
There 's also another chance to play Popmaster and a brand new Record and Album Of The Week . 
Presenter\/Ken Bruce , Producer\/Gary Bones for the BBC Tonight , Paul Jones is joined by Woody Mann who comes in for a session and talks about his passion for acoustic blues and American roots music . 
In his youth , Woody spent time studying with legendary blues man the Reverend Gary Davis and he has since played with John Fahey , Bukka White and Son House . 
Devoting much of his time to research , he is constantly teaching and taking part in seminars . 
Tonight , he shares some of his vast knowledge of the blues . 
Presenter\/Paul Jones , Producer\/Paul Long for the BBC Clare Teal presents the second part of the BBC Big Band in concert with Grammy Award-winning singer Patti Austin . 
The goddaughter of Quincy Jones and Dinah Washington , one of Patti Austin 's first public appearances was at Harlem 's legendary Apollo Theatre when she was just four years old . 
Her career includes many successes in soul , R&B , funk , gospel and jazz . 
Her collaborations include recording with George Benson -LRB- Moody 's Mood For Love -RRB- , Michael Jackson -LRB- It 's The Falling In Love -RRB- , Luther Vandross -LRB- I 'm Gonna Miss You In The Morning -RRB- and many tracks on Quincy Jones 's 1981 album The Dude , including Razzamatazz and Turn On The Action . 
Together , Clare and Patti perform music from her inspired album of Gershwin tunes , Avant Gershwin , and perform spirited versions of classics such as Swanee , Funny Face and Lady Be Good . 
Presenter\/Clare Teal , Producer\/Bob McDowall for the BBC Johnnie Walker tells the story of the music used to score the seminal Sixties road movie Easy Rider . 
Such was the influence of the movie , it gave birth to the `` pop '' soundtrack and began a whole new way of looking at the music used in films and how this could be used to attract and manipulate audiences . 
It became a central concern for the major studios and many directors and producers looked to commission musicians and composers to specifically fashion their music around the current trends of the day . 
Johnnie talks to those who made it happen charting four decades of iconic movie soundtracks . 
Presenter\/Johnnie Walker , Producer\/Graeme Stewart for BBC Northern Ireland To tie in with this week 's concerts at London 's Barbican Centre , James Jolly delves into the discography of Bernard Haitink , one of the most celebrated conductors of our time . 
This week , Haitink 's recording highlights include Vaughan Williams 's Fifth Symphony with the London Philharmonic Orchestra , Ravel 's Bolero with the Boston Symphony Orchestra , the conclusion of Straus 's Der Rosenkavalier with the Royal Concertgebouw and Beethoven 's Fifth Piano Concerto -- Emperor , with the soloist Murray Perahia . 
A century after his death Johan Svendsen still finds himself in the shadow of his compatriot Edvard Grieg , yet in his native Norway he 's rightly regarded as of equal importance in rescuing the country 's musical tradition from near oblivion . 
Donald Macleod sets out to rescue Svendsen from obscurity and paints a portrait of a multi-talented individual . 
Svendsen excelled not only as composer but also as conductor ; in fact in the last 29 years of his life it was his podium activities that saw him lionised , first in Oslo , then in Copenhagen after one of the opera world 's most controversial transfer deals . 
The Rape Of Lucretia -- From The Aldeburgh Festival Angelika Kirschlager stars in The Rape Of Lucretia One of the highlights of this year 's Aldeburgh Festival is this concert performance of Britten 's opera The Rape Of Lucretia , with an exceptional line-up of soloists . 
Ronald Duncan 's libretto is based on the play Le Viol de Lucrce by Andr Obey , and Britten created the title role for Kathleen Ferrier , who gave the premire at Glyndebourne in July 1946 . 
Angelika Kirschlager -LRB- contralto -RRB- takes on the mantle in this performance , with Oliver Knussen conducting the Aldeburgh Festival Ensemble and a stellar cast including Ian Bostridge , Susan Gritton , Christopher Purves and Claire Booth . 
A classic spine-chilller by MR James , the father of the modern ghost story , set on the windswept Suffolk coast is this evening 's interval feature . 
In A Warning To The Curious , an amateur archaeologist from London arrives in the seaside town of Seaburgh to search for the legendary silver Crown of Anglia , which is believed to be hidden along the sandy shores of the North Sea . 
He uncovers the tale of the late William Ager , the guardian of the crown , which leads him to unearth the ancient relic on a remote beach . 
Having made his discovery , he becomes convinced he is being followed and , desperate to escape the ghostly presence , decides to return the crown to the desolate beach where it was unearthed -- with terrifying consequences . 
MR James spent much of his childhood on the East Anglian coast , and the fictional town of Seaburgh , in which this story is set , is based on Aldeburgh . 
What led to the demonisation of the working class ? 
Philip Dodd , in conversation with trade union lobbyist and parliamentary researcher Owen Jones , investigates how media and politicians depict the working class in tonight 's Night Waves . 
Plus there 's a new take on The Vorticists at Tate Modern in London . 
The Vorticist movement created a distinctive artistic style combining machine-age forms and energetic imagery , embracing modernity and blasting away the staid legacy of the Edwardian past . 
Works by Wyndham Lewis , Jacob Epstein and Henri Gaudier-Brzeska are part of a new interpretation of this pivotal movement that shone brightly but briefly just before and during the First World War . 
As part of BBC Radio 3 's Money Talks season , The Essay tells the story of the evolution of money -- from bartered cattle to flexible plastic . 
The history of money stretches back some 11,000 years . 
There have been certain key moments in its development and each essay tells the story and relates the resonance that these revolutionary blips have had ever since . 
The first of five essays on the earliest origins of money focuses on Cows and Shells . 
Monday 13 to Friday 17 June Gordon Bowker 's biography of the great Irish writer James Joyce and his years in exile is this week 's Book Of The Week . 
This five-part reading of the voluminous account looks at Joyce 's years spent in Europe , when he held down menial jobs , caroused a lot , experienced the ups and downs of married life , but still managed to produce works of literature that stand the test of time . 
Gordon Bowker 's study of the great writer , abridged for radio by Penny Leicester , begins with his early life in Dublin , which is full of japes with friends and exile . 
The narrator is Jim Norton and Andrew Scott is the voice of James Joyce . 
Reader\/Jim Norton , Producer\/Duncan Minshull for the BBC Monday 13 to Friday 17 June Beasts On The Lawn is a collection of Edwardian short stories by Saki -LRB- HH Munro -RRB- restaged in a modern-day gated community for those far too wealthy for their own good . 
The tales , adapted by Sean Grundy , are woven together by the character of Clovis , a security guard , recalling strange events . 
In Tobermory , a barrister couple seek help from Clovis when a demonstration goes horribly wrong . 
The fighting of a divorced couple and rival academics reaches new heights in The Interlopers . 
In the third story , 10-year-old Conrad is having an unhappy time , but he believes his pet ferret , Sredni Vashtar , will avenge his woes . 
In Gabriel Ernest , vile celebrity chef Van Cheele meets his match in the form of a filthy naked teenager sunbathing in his large garden . 
In the final instalment , Mrs Packletide 's Tiger , Mrs Packletide , ghastly wealthy inheritor of the Gippe perfume empire , needs to shoot a tiger . 
Producer\/Alison Crawford for the BBC Chloe has cerebral palsy and is certain she will lose her adored carer , Rose , when Rose falls for an apparently perfect man . 
Written by Sarah Daniels , But If You Try Sometimes stars Lesley Manville and also features Amy Golden , a young actor with cerebral palsy . 
Producer\/Sally Avens for the BBC In the first of this two-part series , Giles Fraser , the Canon Chancellor of St Paul 's Cathedral , explores church history to find out if money really is the root of all evil . 
Christianity began as a peasant religion deeply suspicious of money -- `` the root of all evil '' as it 's referred to in the Bible . 
Charging any interest on financial loans was deemed a sin . 
Yet today the Church is one of the largest owners of land and stocks and shares in the country , and many City institutions are run by Christians . 
In this first program , Giles investigates the teachings of Jesus and the early church . 
He talks to church historian Diarmaid MacCulloch and visits the Franciscan Hilfield Friary in Dorset where the monks have a real commitment to poverty . 
Giles , very sceptical himself , challenges Brother Sam , the head of the Franciscans , and asks : why should n't Christians make money ? 
Presenter\/Giles Fraser , Producer\/Jane Greenwood for Loftus Audio Monday 13 to Friday 17 June The latest in the detective series by the author of Gorky Park is set in Putin 's Moscow where three stations meet . 
Disillusioned with the workings of Moscow 's Prosecution Service , Arkady Renko is on the brink of resigning when he 's drawn into a strange new case . 
As a train pulls into Yaroslavl Station , a teenage girl wakes to find her baby has been taken . 
Meanwhile , Arkady 's vodka-loving friend , detective Victor Orlov , is called to a workers ' trailer where a prostitute has been found dead without a mark on her . 
With the local police keen to dismiss the death as an overdose , Renko 's curiosity is aroused . 
Three Stations is written by Martin Cruz Smith and read by Philip Jackson . 
Reader\/Philip Jackson , Producer\/Jane Marshall for Jane Marshall Productions 4.00-5 .00 pm BBC RADIO 4 EXTRA This week Mel Giedroyc hears about the work of rat-catchers ; takes a trip round a lighthouse ; finds out what happens in people 's bodies when they get angry ; discovers where Morse code came from ; and learns how to identify different kinds of ducks . 
Last week , there were five chilling chapters from Philip Pullman 's The Ruby In The Smoke . 
This week the story continues as listeners discover whether Sally is any closer to discovering the mystery behind her father 's disappearance . 
Fred MacAulay has a new round of the brainteaser quiz , Keep It In The Family ; Jasmine Guiness shares her Inheritance Tracks ; and listeners are asked to identify the celeb voice behind another Daily Dalek . 
Presenter\/Mel Giedroyc , Producer\/Rich Preston for the BBC 10.00-10 .30 am BBC RADIO 4 EXTRA This new series of Meet David Sedaris is a Comedy First premire -- where new comedy series are broadcast first on BBC Radio 4 Extra before transferring to BBC Radio 4 . 
The multi-award winning American writer David Sedaris brings his wit and charm in this second series first to Radio 4 Extra listeners . 
This week , David presents a memoir of one nefarious summer while studying at college in The Incomplete Quad and a modern take on the anthropomorphic fable in The Squirrel And The Chipmunk . 
Presenter\/David Sedaris , Producer\/Steve Doherty for Boomerang 7.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Chapman has the latest sports news and football debate including analysis of England 's Under-21 result against Spain , and a look ahead to Wednesday 's tie with Ukraine in The Monday Night Club . 
At 9pm Michael Vaughan and Phil Tufnell present the latest cricket news and interviews , including the latest from the county scene , and international news ahead of England 's third Test against Sri Lanka in The Monday Night Cricket Club . 
Presenters\/Mark Chapman , Michael Vaughan and Phil Tufnell , Producer\/Mike Carr BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 6.30-10 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra presents uninterrupted commentary on Surrey versus Essex in the Twenty20 competition . 
7.00-9 .00 pm BBC RADIO 6 MUSIC Metronomy are back in the Manchester studio for the first time in more than a year to play live for Marc Riley . 
The band are currently touring their critically acclaimed new album The English Riviera and getting ready to set the summer festivals alight . 
Some big warm pop hooks are on the way from Joe , Anna , Gbenga and Oscar ; hooks that will have listeners dreaming of long hazy summer days and nights . 
9.00pm-12 .00 midnight BBC RADIO 6 MUSIC Gideon Coe presents sessions from Jimmy Cliff , Flaming Lips , Shellac and The Cocteau Twins . 
Concert highlights are care of Richard Thompson and The Mission . 
Presenter\/Gideon Coe , Producer\/Henry Lopez Real BBC Radio 6 Music Publicity 
