For nearly three weeks , the world has been hearing about the leaking well on the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico . 
Now there 's video footage , and it 's not pretty , showing a turbulent plume of oil and gas billowing from the end of a 21-inch pipe that dropped to the mud floor of the gulf after the April 20 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig . 
But the new video clips do n't clarify one of the biggest unknowns : How much oil are we looking at ? 
The experts say emphatically that anyone who makes an estimate of the leak by looking at the video is simply arm-waving . 
There are too many variables . 
The stuff coming out of the pipe is n't just oil , for example , but a frothing cocktail of oil , gas , brine and sediment from miles below the sea bottom . 
BP , however , could try to measure the flow directly with off-the-shelf instruments routinely used in research on deep-sea hydrothermal vents and cold hydrocarbon seeps , according to scientists at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution . 
They said devices that can essentially take a sonogram of the plume could be strapped to one of the robotic submarines that BP has deployed around the damaged well . 
`` You can use this type of technique to determine the velocity of the particles , and if you know what the area is , it 's relatively straightforward mathematics to determine what the volume is , '' said Andy Bowen , director of the National Deep Submergence Facility at Woods Hole . 
BP representatives have spoken extensively with Woods Hole scientists about using scientific instruments to measure the flow . 
But a BP spokesman , David Nicholas , said the company has decided to focus on stopping the leak rather than measuring it . 
`` I do n't think an estimate of the flow rate would change either the direction or the scale of our response to it , '' Nicholas said . 
That response includes a new option that BP detailed Thursday . 
Engineers want to thread a second pipe into the end of the pipe that is spewing oil and gas , very much like inserting one drinking straw into the end of another . 
Ideally the `` riser insertion , '' as the option is called , would divert the oil to a barge on the surface rather than let it pollute the gulf . 
BP is also finishing the plumbing on a small dome , nicknamed the `` top hat , '' that could be lowered onto the leak to capture the oil and pipe it to the surface . 
Other options remain in the mix , none of which have ever been attempted before on a blown-out well in such deep water . 
`` None of these things are certain . 
They 're the next practical options that have come down our conveyor belt , '' Nicholas said . 
As the oil slick remains largely offshore , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is preparing to dredge the Mississippi River to gather sediment for creating an emergency archipelago of barrier islands . 
On Thursday evening , the Army Corps of Engineers closed a 24-hour comment period in which federal agencies could voice any objections to the massive barrier island restoration plan . 
The slick on the surface of the gulf is a moving target for scientists trying to estimate the rate of oil leaking nearly a mile below . 
It has changed sizes in heavy seas . 
The oil manifests itself in a variety of forms , which are documented in government reports as silver sheen , transparent sheen , brown oil , tarballs and `` orange pancakes or streamers . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
