BRUSSELS\/ATHENS | Fri Jul 22 , 2011 4:17 pm BST BRUSSELS\/ATHENS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A second international bailout is likely to stop a sharp rise of Greece 's public debt and prevent any disorderly default in the near term . 
But it may not be enough to avoid a painful debt restructuring sometime in coming years . 
Economists said the steps announced by euro zone leaders on Thursday , including cheaper bailout loans and a contribution by private investors , would prevent Greek debt from surging to 172 percent of gross domestic product next year as the International Monetary Fund forecast earlier this month . 
The debt is now at about 150 percent , having soared from 127 percent in 2009 to 143 percent last year . 
But the second bailout is not the game-changer that some European Union policymakers have claimed , and Greece will probably continue to struggle with high debt for many years . 
`` A full-scale default is avoided , for now . 
A full-scale default with a proper haircut -LRB- cut in the principal amount -RRB- is still , in our view , inevitable , '' UBS senior economist Paul Donovan said in a report . 
`` It may be next year , it may be the year after , but Greece will have to haircut its debt by around 50 percent at some point to have any hope of credibility . '' 
As part of the package , interest on European bailout loans to Greece will be cut to around 3.5 percent from roughly 4 percent now . 
Maturities on these loans will be doubled to a minimum of 15 years and extended to as much as 30 years , with a grace period of 10 years . 
In addition , private creditors will be offered a menu of options including bond swaps , a rollover into debt with maturities of up to 30 years , and a buyback of bonds , involving a loss of about 21 percent on the face value of the debt . 
The European Union estimated the private sector would contribute 50 billion euros on a net basis through mid-2014 , of which 37 billion euros -LRB- 32.6 billion pounds -RRB- would come from debt exchanges and 12.6 billion euros from the bond buyback . 
Together , the steps will cause a major reduction in financial pressure on Greece . 
Thanks to the first bailout of Athens , about 40 billion euros of its 340 billion euro debt is in the form of EU loans , and the proportion will rise ; the grace period means Athens will not have to be make payments on this part of the debt for 10 years . 
The IMF may offer similar relief on its loans , which are half the size of the EU 's . 
Also , the bond swaps and buyback will reduce the bond redemptions which Athens will have to meet between 2015 and 2020 . 
Combined with the primary budget surpluses which Greece is projected to start running next year , it may have minimal market funding needs for the rest of this decade . 
Prime Minister George Papandreou said on Thursday that the country 's funding needs would be covered up to 2020 . 
Reducing Greece 's funding needs is different from cutting its debt mountain to levels that the markets will consider safe and sustainable over the long term , however . 
Many private analysts think that at the very least , the debt\/GDP ratio needs to be cut below 100 percent , and some suggest 80 percent ; EU rules stipulate 60 percent . 
It is not clear whether the projected 50 billion euro contribution which the EU expects from the private sector refers entirely to reductions in Greece 's debt . 
Assuming it does , the debt ratio could fall to around 130 percent in 2014 . 
Assuming further that Greece can meet its ambitious target of raising a full 50 billion euros from privatisations by 2015 -- a risky assumption -- and then uses all the money to reduce debt , it would reach a ratio of 105-110 percent of GDP . 
`` It cuts a big chunk of debt . 
You can not say it brings sustainability . 
Greece is given the best possible environment to bring its house in order , but it needs to deliver on strong reforms and privatisation , '' said Marco Valli , chief euro zone economist at Unicredit . 
An important factor in the equation is economic growth , which both reduces the size of the debt in relation to the economy and improves Greece 's fiscal position by generating tax revenues . 
So far , the numbers have been negative ; Greece 's economy shrank 4.5 percent last year , worse than the 4.0 percent contraction assumed in the first bailout plan , and the IMF now expects it to shrink 3.9 percent this year , instead of the 3.0 percent decrease envisioned by the plan . 
The IMF now predicts meager growth of 0.6 percent for next year . 
Euro zone leaders are now focussing on this issue , pledging a `` Marshall Plan '' for Greece to stimulate its economy , but so far the effort seems mainly to comprise speeding up and making more efficient the use of development aid funds allocated by the EU . 
Analysts doubt this is by itself enough to support strong growth . 
Without a currency devaluation , denied to Greece by its membership of the euro zone , the country may take years to achieve the productivity gains required to improve its economic competitiveness . 
`` Necessary steps have been taken , but I 'm not sure that they are sufficient , '' said ING senior euro zone economist Martin van Vliet . 
He said another exercise to make private creditors write off Greek debt could not be ruled out down the road . 
The latest bailout plan seeks to prevent Greece 's problem from destabilising the rest of Europe , `` but it 's not guaranteed that this is the beginning of the end of the crisis . '' 
David Mackie , head of western European economic research at JP Morgan , said one 's view of Greece 's capacity to rein in its debt essentially depended on gut assumptions . 
`` The two critical issues are to what extent the funding will be met and how long a time horizon you are prepared to accept . 
If you give it 10 years then it does n't look so bad . 
If you think targets will be missed , which is not an unreasonable assumption , then it clearly looks worse . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
