Saturday 4 June 2005 10.32 BST Two Iraqi women walk through the old part of Basra , southern Iraq . 
Photograph : Samir Mizban\/AP It was once called the Venice of the East and with imagination you can still see why : boats skim across lagoons , golden domes glint in sunshine , coffee shops bustle in the old quarter . 
Stroll down the corniche at sunset and you can stop for kebab and ice cream , smoke a hubbly bubbly , play chess and listen to the water lapping below . 
And then , if you are a westerner , you can check you have not been followed , adjust your disguise , and signal to your bodyguard that you want to return to the hotel . 
Basra declared itself open to foreign visitors this week but instructed them to be vigilant , dress like locals and hire armed escorts . 
`` Then there is a 70 % to 80 % chance you will be OK , '' beamed Abdul Razuqi , the head of the tourism office in Iraq 's second city . 
Those odds are set to be tested if Iraqi Airways succeeds in running regular commercial flights between Basra and Heathrow , the first direct civilian air link between Iraq and the west . 
`` Flights to London should start soon . 
In the near future you will see many tourism initiatives here , '' Mohammad Musabah , the provincial governor , told the Guardian . 
Commercial flights between Basra and Baghdad resumed this week for the first time since the March 2003 invasion and there are plans to seek a slot at Heathrow within two months , according to Adel al-Helu , the head of the national airline 's Basra office . 
Repairs are due to start later this month on the gutted shell that was the Sheraton , the city 's only five-star hotel , and boatmen say they are ready to whisk paying clients around the Shatt al-Arab waterway . 
Its economy moribund , the city is desperate for investment and hopes to capitalize on its reputation as one of Iraq 's safer destinations . 
Adventure holidays are about adrenaline but the threat of kidnapping and assassination made Costa Basra more chilling than thrilling , said Don Lucey , whose Swindon-based firm , Bann Tours , aborted a trip to southern Iraq last July . 
`` It was too volatile so we stayed in Kuwait , '' he said . 
`` Anyone who goes alone into Iraq now is walking into a deathtrap . '' 
Mr Lucey hoped to lead another group into the country when security improved . 
Mr Razuqi , his office dark and hot in the wake of another power cut , suggested visitors could dye their hair and wear traditional robes to look more Iraqi . 
Helmets and body armor would give the game away . 
An attempt to write a brochure was abandoned because libraries with background material were burned and looted two years ago . 
`` But we can guide people ourselves , '' the tourism manager said . 
Those who can not wait for the Heathrow link can reach Iraq by flying from Istanbul to Irbil , in the relatively peaceful north , or fly from Syria or Jordan to Baghdad , or drive or sail from Kuwait or the United Arab Emirates to Basra . 
The city 's lagoons are striking from the air but corkscrew descents - a stomach-churning defense against missiles - can spoil the experience . 
Though the airport doubles as a British military base the terminal is often eerily deserted , with all but essential personnel and visitors banned . 
Soldiers in armored Land Rovers trundle from the main gate , a maze of blast walls and razor wire , but tourists would have to arrange their own rides into town , a former playground for the Gulf region degraded by two decades of war and neglect . 
The four-star Shatt al-Arab hotel is occupied by British troops but there are a dozen lesser hotels with spare rooms . 
The Mirbad , known to some guests as the Morbid , is popular for the visibility of guards with assault rifles . 
On Thursday a Shia cleric , Ali Abdul-Hussein , became the latest victim of sporadic assassinations which are blamed on rival militias and crooked police officers . 
But compared with Baghdad the port city is tranquil , with military patrols and bombs a rarity . 
`` Just 1 % of all incidents Iraq-wide happen here , '' said Stuart Innes , the British consul general . 
`` Property prices are up and we are nearing a tipping point for investment . 
Basra is blazing a trail . '' 
He displayed a 1970 photo of a white-jacketed waiter serving drinks at a corniche casino , swans and yachts gliding in the background . 
`` It used to be like Monte Carlo . '' 
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office advises against all but essential travel to Basra . 
Tourists who ignore that will find museums gutted , theaters shut , streets reeking with rubbish and sewage and waterways littered with capsized vessels , including Saddam Hussein 's yacht . 
The compensations are dazzling mosques , historic towns such as Qurna nearby , and marshes said to be the site of the Garden of Eden . 
When not disguised , westerners tend to be greeted warmly , if curiously . 
`` Problem in the head ? 
Why are you here ? '' 
one waiter asked the Guardian . 
One westerner said he acted deaf and dumb and even pretended to use sign language when out in public with his translator and guide . 
`` If they are ready to face the danger then they should come , though my advice is to wait for security to improve , '' said Khalaf al-Easa , the head of the city 's Iraqi Islamic party , an Arab Sunni group hostile to the occupation . 
Since the invasion religiously conservative Shias have turned what had been an open , liberal society into something closer to Iran , with alcohol banned and women strongly encouraged to wear the veil . 
Only men can sunbathe . 
Black market beer and whisky can be bought from back-alley traders in a slum nicknamed Chechnya for its banditry . 
But Mr Musabah , the governor , opened the door to an alcohol dispensation for tourists . 
`` In their hotels , maybe , '' he said . 
