Credit : Reuters\/Southern Mongolian Human Rights Information Center\/Handout HOHHOT , China | Mon May 30 , 2011 3:57 pm BST HOHHOT , China -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Police tightened security in the capital of China 's Inner Mongolia region on Monday after nearly a week of protests and authorities said they would improve mining safety rules following an accident which triggered the unrest . 
In a rare display of public anger , ethnic Mongolians took to the streets early last week in protest over the hit-and-run death of a herder , killed when struck by a coal truck in China 's biggest coal producing region . 
The government of the huge northern region , increasingly dominated by ethnic Han Chinese , told agencies to address safety and environmental concerns related to the mining industry , Xinhua news agency reported . 
`` All relevant departments , enterprises and local governments must promptly report and resolve injuries and accidents that occur in mining areas and transportation links , which have caused serious problems and reactions from the people , '' Xinhua said , citing a statement from Friday but without making a direct reference to the protests . 
The government announced earlier the arrest of two Han Chinese for homicide over the coal truck incident , but that failed to quell the anger . 
Inner Mongolia is China 's biggest coal producing region and the protests come as severe power shortages loom ahead of the summer peak energy season . 
But infrastructure is poor and the race by truck drivers , drawn by high margins , to transport coal to the country 's east has been accompanied by a spate of accidents . 
In an unusual sign of defiance , hundreds of ethnic Mongolians , who make up less than 20 percent of the roughly 24 million population of Inner Mongolia , have protested in other parts of the province in recent days . 
Authorities last week sealed off parts of the region and dispatched paramilitary police and others in riot gear to patrol Xinhua Square in the capital , Hohhot , after calls for protests spread online . 
On Monday , main gates at Inner Mongolia University in Hohhot were closed and small groups of paramilitary police carrying batons stood guard in the streets , though students entered through smaller side gates . 
`` The university is under lockdown today . 
It 's to prevent any disturbances , '' said one student . 
Xinhua Square remained cordoned off with paramilitary police posted every few metres and large groups of police in the square and surrounding streets . 
Residents in the city appeared to carry on as normal . 
Police pulled two Reuters reporters out of a car by the square and told them not to conduct interviews . 
`` Today there is a special situation , '' said one . 
`` You have to leave . '' 
The heavy security appeared to be effective . 
`` We have n't received any information about any protests there , '' said Enghebatu Togochog of the Southern Mongolian Human Rights Information Centre , though he added difficult communications made it hard to get up-to-date information . 
`` Security is exceptionally tight . 
The authorities appear to be sending text messages to people warning them not to leave their homes . '' 
Uprisings across the Arab world have made Chinese authorities jittery about any sign of instability . 
In a meeting on Monday that was chaired by Chinese President Hu Jintao , the Politburo , the nation 's top ruling body , said `` elements that can cause disharmony '' should be reduced by `` the largest degree . '' 
`` As the situation changes , our country 's concept of social management , institutional mechanisms , laws and policies ... are still unsuitable in many places , '' Xinhua reported the Politburo as saying . 
`` Resolving the problems in social management is urgent and requires long-term effort . '' 
Searches for the words `` Inner Mongolia '' on China 's most popular microblogging site , Weibo , appeared to have been blocked on Monday , returning the message : `` According to relevant laws , the search query can not be displayed . '' 
Resentment of ethnic majority Han Chinese by ethnic Mongolians goes back decades . 
Inner Mongolia was the first autonomous region set up by the Communist Party and was meant to serve as a model for Tibet and Xinjiang in offering a high degree of self-government . 
But a flood of migration by Han Chinese in the years following the 1949 revolution has rapidly diluted the Mongolian population . 
Ethnic Mongolian herders have complained that their traditional grazing lands have been ruined by mining and desertification , and that the government has tried to force them to settle in permanent houses . 
In Ulan Bator , capital of the independent country of Mongolia , about 50 protesters gathered in support of their ethnic cousins in China . 
Some held banners calling for an end to `` oppression '' and justice for the herder killed by the truck . 
Nicholas Bequelin of Human Rights Watch said from Hong Kong rising tension had the Party worried that instability could spread to other ethnic groups . 
`` The situation points to the wholesale failure of the Party 's policies towards ethnic minorities -- that they are alienating and disenfranchising each to the point that they are willing to protest even when they know the consequences can be severe , '' Bequelin said . 
