NEW YORK\/SAN FRANCISCO | Wed Jun 9 , 2010 7:24 pm EDT NEW YORK\/SAN FRANCISCO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
N -RRB- -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- shares tumbled nearly 16 percent on U.S. exchanges to a 14-year low on Wednesday on rising fears about how the wounded company will cope with the massive costs of the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster . 
The stock has now lost more than half its value since the April 20 explosion that sank a BP-contracted rig and led to the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
A steady flow of worsening news about the damage to the Gulf Coast environment and BP 's reputation , along with the potential liability and political fallout , has cast doubt on the British company 's ability to shoulder the burden . 
The dramatic sell-off on Wednesday added grist to the mill for corporate restructuring experts wondering about BP 's long-term viability , while other analysts pointed to an evaporation of investors ' patience . 
`` The confidence in BP being able to stop the oil leak and deal with the ecological aftermath has disappeared , '' said Joe Kinahan , chief derivatives strategist at TD Ameritrade . 
Concerns about BP having to halt its dividend contributed to the selling , and the U.S. Justice Department said late on Wednesday it was concerned about planned payouts from BP and Transocean Ltd RIGN . 
S , owner of the lost rig . 
In the past two days alone , seven analysts have cut their expectations on the likely payout from BP . 
BP believes it may be heading for a showdown with the U.S. government over ever-increasing demands to cover the costs of the spill , according to a company source . 
`` The United States ' government is very mad at BP , '' said Jon Burnham , head of Burnham Securities , who sold his BP shares on Monday . 
`` They are now in the position of appearing to buck the president , and I do n't think the market likes that much . '' 
BP 's New York-traded shares headed sharply lower at about 1:30 p.m. EDT -LRB- 1730 GMT -RRB- , after an article appeared on Fortune magazine 's website quoting high-profile oil analyst Matthew Simmons , who raised questions about the company 's liability for the oil spill and its ability to survive the crisis . 
BP 's depositary shares closed at $ 29.20 , down $ 5.46 on the New York Stock Exchange , the lowest closing level since August 14 , 1996 . 
Earlier , the company 's stock fell 4 percent in London trading . 
`` I still feel like they can , but there 's more doubt in my mind than there was a week ago , '' Weiss said . 
`` Momentum is a powerful thing . '' 
The company had said on a conference call with analysts on Friday that it has `` plenty '' of cash to deal with the problem , and the Obama administration has made similar comments as the company grapples with clean-up in the Gulf . 
A BP spokesman said `` nothing has changed '' since Friday . 
Restructuring experts agreed that by running the numbers alone , BP looked like it could handle the financial damage . 
Brad Sandler , a bankruptcy attorney with Pachulski Stang Ziehl & Jones in Wilmington , Delaware , said the likelihood of a BP bankruptcy was `` probably remote '' because of its access to credit , solid cash flow and a healthy balance sheet . 
BP reported about $ 27 billion of cash flow from operations in 2009 and total liabilities amounted to about 56 percent of total assets on its balance sheet of about $ 235 billion . 
Stephen Lubben , a law professor at Seton Hall University School of Law in Newark , New Jersey , added that the potentially massive liability bill was not large relative to BP 's size . 
`` You could add $ 50 billion of debt to their balance sheet and they would still be solvent , from an accounting perspective , '' he said . 
But Lubben noted that situation could change depending on whether creditors and banks get nervous and cut off BP 's access to funds , even if there was no sign of that now . 
Investors who bet on such events are already eyeing that possibility . 
BP Plc 's debt protection costs leaped 106 basis points on Wednesday to 368 basis points , or $ 368,000 per year to insure $ 10 million in debt for five years , according to Markit Intraday . 
Option-implied volatility for BP hit an all-time high , as traders brace for the likelihood for more downside in the stock price in the months to come , said Jon Najarian , a founder of Web information site optionMonster.com in Chicago . 
`` It is not just a rumor about the potential of a dividend cut in BP anymore , '' Najarian said . 
`` Now it 's about the survivability of the company . '' 
Other stocks associated with the Gulf spill were hit hard . 
N -RRB- fell 8.1 percent to $ 42.58 , having earlier traded at its lowest level in more than five years . 
Anadarko Petroleum Corp -LRB- APC . 
N -RRB- , part owner of the blown-out well , lost 18.6 percent to $ 34.83 a share . 
-LRB- Reporting by Doris Frankel in Chicago , Kristen Hays in Houston , Walden Siew , Ryan Vlastelica , Matt Daily and Michael Erman in New York and Tom Hals in Wilmington ; Writing by David Gaffen and Braden Reddall ; Editing by Steve Orlofsky -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Now they want people that own stock in BP to help pay for the accident by suspending -LRB- for who knows how long -RRB- their dividend . 
Maybe they should cut their pay once in awhile instead of giving themselves a raise and at the same time freezing social security cost of living increases to help pay for the accident . 
I think they forgot that BP and others involved carry insurance for such accidents and have enough cash flow to survive . 
You need to stay out of business and leave business to people that know business and not law . 
Where were these ` experts ' in corporate finance when the mortgage agencies were taking incalculable risks and saddling the citizenry with obligations for decades to come ? 
I guess we 're resigned to watching them constantly force the limelight away from their monumental failures of stewardship . 
I remember , Clinton told the banks to loan to anyone that got paid -LRB- $ 2,000.00 a month -RRB- a $ 2500.00 a month mortgage . 
And to do so the underwriters got paid off to do so . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
