PENSACOLA BEACH , Florida -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Gary Chernekoff does n't own a restaurant , is n't a charter boat captain and does n't work for a hotel or resort . 
A plumber by trade , the Pensacola , Florida resident expected to have a busy and profitable summer . 
He had three big jobs lined up -- vacation homes being built in this summer tourist haven on the coast of the Florida Panhandle . 
It was more than enough work for a one-man operation . 
But the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico that began in April is now depriving Chernekoff of his source of income . 
Unsure how deeply the spill would affect the market for $ 5,000-a-week time shares , investors stopped work on the projects . 
Chernekoff suddenly found himself without a job . 
`` I 'm telling you , that was a kick in the pants , '' said Chernekoff , who is trying to seek compensation from British energy giant BP Plc. . 
As state and BP officials respond to the biggest oil spill in U.S. history , Chernekoff 's predicament is echoed across Florida 's Gulf Coast . 
One economist calculated the state could lose up to 195,000 jobs and nearly $ 11 billion in economic activity from the prolonged impact of oil washing up on Florida shores . 
So far , only a few northwest Florida beaches have been littered with tar balls . 
The hotels remain relatively full along the Florida Panhandle , a summer tourist destination for many U.S. residents within driving distance from Georgia , Alabama , Tennessee , Arkansas and Louisiana . 
But economic development officials are eyeing the Gulf and bracing for higher concentrations of oil that would shut down their beaches and send travelers elsewhere . 
`` I talked to some hotel folks and it looks like they were packed over the weekend , '' said Buck Lee , director of the Santa Rosa Island Authority , as he toured Pensacola Beach this week . 
`` The question is : how long will it last ? '' 
Long before Walt Disney Co made its mark in Florida , tourists came to the `` Sunshine State '' for its beaches . 
The tourism industry pumps more than $ 60 billion a year into the state economy . 
Gulf Coast communities are even more dependent upon the seasonal industry , which in northern Florida peaks in the summer months . 
Economist Sean Snaith , who directs the Institute for Economic Competitiveness at the University of Central Florida in Orlando , said a conservative estimate has the state losing at least $ 2.2 billion in revenue and 39,000 jobs . 
That 's assuming a 10 percent decline in employment and output in tourism-related business in the 23 counties on the Florida Gulf Coast . 
If the impact becomes more severe or prolonged , dropping employment and output in half , Snaith said the state could lose nearly $ 11 billion in business activity and more than 195,00 jobs . 
That would be a body blow to a state just recovering from a housing market crash and suffering high unemployment . 
He acknowledges that exact numbers are difficult to nail down . 
`` A hurricane passes through and it 's a limited duration event . 
There 's damage and you can figure it out , '' Snaith said . 
`` Here , we do n't know when -LRB- the oil -RRB- is going to arrive or how long it 's going to stay . 
To use a hurricane analogy , we do n't know what category it 's going to be . '' 
His calculations did not take into account predictions that ocean currents could carry the oil around to Florida 's Atlantic Coast as well as the Gulf . 
State tourism officials have been trying to spread the word that most Florida beaches remain untainted by the spill . 
It 's a moving target . 
In Perdido Key , off Florida 's Panhandle , local health officials on Tuesday posted notices on the beaches telling visitors not to swim . 
It was the first such advisory posted for Florida beaches because of the oil spill . 
By Wednesday morning , however , tar balls were few and far between and no oil sheen was present . 
Florida marketing officials are tailoring their messages to would-be tourists and offering live beach updates on the state 's website , www.visitflorida.com . 
Local economic development officials are doing the same , but it 's hard to compete with around-the-clock media coverage of a story with global interest . 
`` There is a whole lot of anxiety and a lot of concern , '' said Chris Thompson , president and CEO of VisitFlorida , the state 's tourist marketing arm . 
`` Our battle is to separate the misperceptions from reality . '' 
Bill Stromquist , treasurer of the Perdido Key Area Chamber of Commerce in northwest Florida , said local booster efforts were being hurt by tourism officials in other states . 
During a recent road trip down the U.S. eastern seaboard , Stromquist said he stopped at state-run visitor information stations in each state along the way . 
In each place , he was told incorrectly that Florida beaches were closed . 
`` They 're killing us and I do n't know how to fix it , '' Stromquist told state tourism representatives on Wednesday . 
`` People are canceling before they get the information that the beaches are clean . '' 
A state-run advertising campaign paid for by $ 25 million in BP cash appears to be helping fill rooms in the Panhandle region . 
The BP-backed effort , which was criticized for taking too long to begin , follows advertisements paid for by the Florida Restaurant and Lodging Association . 
State officials have been trying to respond . 
On Monday , Florida Governor Charlie Crist launched a state-run program that will provide low-interest loans of up to $ 25,000 for businesses affected by the spill . 
BP so far has paid nearly $ 50 million in lost-income claims across Gulf states , including more than $ 6 million in Florida . 
Officials are also considering measures to provide property tax credits and to relax sales tax collection rules in an effort to help businesses address cash-flow problems brought on by the unexpected dip in revenue . 
`` This has caught a lot of businesses off guard , especially for May and June , '' said Lisa Echeverri , executive director of the Florida Department of Revenue . 
`` There are a number of things we can do to help businesses . '' 
Meanwhile , local officials must still contend with cost-conscious travelers trying to make the most out of their summer break . 
`` If I 'm spending $ 3,000 for a vacation , I 'm not going where there are any too many ` ifs , ' '' Stromquist said . 
-LRB- Editing by Jane Sutton and Will Dunham -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
