World leaders have vowed to help prevent future financial meltdowns by creating international accounting standards so all companies would play by the same rules , but the effort has instead been mired in loopholes and political pressures . 
In October , largely hidden from public view , the International Accounting Standards Board changed the rules so European banks could make their balance sheets look better . 
The action let the banks rewrite history , picking and choosing among their problem investments to essentially claim that some had been on a different set of books before the financial crisis started . 
The results were dramatic . 
Deutsche Bank shifted $ 32 billion of troubled assets , turning a $ 970 million quarterly pretax loss into $ 120 million profit . 
And the securities markets were fooled , bidding Deutsche Bank 's shares up nearly 19 percent on Oct. 30 , the day it made the startling announcement that it had turned an unexpected profit . 
The change has had dramatic consequences within the cloistered world of accounting , shattering the credibility of the IASB -- the very body whose rules have been adopted by 113 countries and is supposed to become the global standard-setter , including for the United States , within a few years . 
Sir David Tweedie , chairman of the IASB , acknowledged that the body needs more protection from political manipulation before it can claim that it has become the global gold standard . 
Tweedie said he nearly resigned over the rule change demanded by European politicians . 
`` I was so frustrated by the whole thing , '' he said . 
`` All the time when we are trying to build a global accounting system , and we are pretty close to it , and then suddenly out of left field this thing appears . 
It 's just absolutely exasperating . '' 
U.S. standards have been set by the Financial Accounting Standards Board since 1973 . 
`` Right now , there is no credibility , '' said Robert Denham , chairman of the Financial Accounting Foundation , which oversees the FASB . 
`` If we are going to have global accounting standards , my view is that is not going to work if the IASB is going to be jerked around by the European Commission . 
That is the very real risk that is posed by the EC coercion and the IASB 's response . '' 
The episode exposes how small , incremental changes in arcane accounting rules can affect billions of dollars in market value and corporate profitability . 
In turn , the money at risk raises the political stakes , as desperate companies begin to lobby political leaders to insist on changes that normally would come about only after a careful discussion and evaluation by experts . 
For years , there has been a disconnect between U.S. and international accounting rules . 
With the history of corporate litigation in the United States , U.S. standards tend to be exact and explicit , making it easier for companies to defend themselves in court . 
International rules rely on broad principles , giving companies greater leeway to make their own judgments . 
An extensive review of international accounting standards published last month by Moody 's Investors Service found significant differences between two French companies on one key issue -- even though they used the same accounting firm . 
Nevertheless , more than 110 countries have already adopted international rules since the IASB was established in 2001 , with Japan , South Korea , India and Canada soon to make the switch . 
Tweedie expects that 150 countries will have adopted IASB rules within the next three years . 
The Securities and Exchange Commission on Nov. 14 adopted a plan to have all U.S. companies prepare their statements using international standards for fiscal years ending after Dec. 15 , 2016 . 
More than 100 of the largest companies would be permitted to adopt the rules as soon as next year . 
But the financial crisis demonstrated how vulnerable the fledgling system is to political pressure . 
On Oct. 8 , the leaders of France , Germany , Italy , Britain and the European Commission met in Paris to discuss the worldwide economic crisis . 
They issued a statement saying they were working together `` within the European Union and with our international partners '' to ensure the safety and stability of the worldwide banking system . 
But buried within the statement was a sentence warning that European banks should not face a competitive disadvantage with U.S. banks `` in terms of accounting rules and their interpretation . '' 
The leaders added ominously : `` This issue must be resolved by the end of the month . '' 
At issue is an accounting standard known as fair value , or mark to market , in which companies disclose how much an asset could fetch on the open market . 
With the values of assets plummeting , banks were suddenly stuck with paper losses on assets they could no longer sell . 
With some critics saying the provision was forcing banks to take large write-downs , the SEC and FASB issued guidance in late September that companies could use their own internal models for assigning a value to assets -- in essence , a nod to the principles-based international rules . 
But European officials smelled a rat . 
Under rare circumstances , U.S. companies are permitted to reclassify assets they were actively seeking to trade into long-term `` loans , '' using an accounting rule that was considered weaker than the international equivalent . 
The international rules did not permit such transfers , and European officials feared that the new guidance was handing the Americans a competitive advantage . 
Shortly after the European leaders ' statement , Commissioner Charlie McCreevy of the European Commission , who was in charge of the European Union internal market , signaled he would introduce legal changes , overriding the international rules . 
McCreevy decided to exploit a loophole in the system -- that all accounting rules must be adopted as legislation by the E.U. . 
So McCreevy was going to force the changes on the IASB by threatening to remove -- or carve out -- the existing regulation , leaving nothing in its place . 
`` We made it clear what the IASB should accept , '' said Oliver Drewes , a spokesman for McCreevy . 
`` There is always the right , and threat and the pressure , that one could go for a carve-out for European companies . '' 
Tweedie said the rulemaking body had only four days to act before McCreevy pushed through a change in the law , even though accounting changes of this magnitude would normally take months to achieve . 
Unlike the U.S. board , the international board has no regulator like the SEC to help shield it from political pressure . 
So the IASB was at the mercy of the European Commission . 
`` There had been pressure on him , I suspect , from some of the European leaders , '' Tweedie said , referring to McCreevy . 
`` It was quite clear it was going to be pushed through and that would have been a disaster . 
We were faced with this hole being blown in the European accounting , and we just wanted to step in and control it . '' 
But the IASB bowed to demands to let the firms backdate the accounting shift to the beginning of July -- something not permitted under U.S. rules . 
In a recent report , Moody 's wrote that the backdating provision could distort a bank 's earnings and capital position , since `` it allows managements to ` cherry-pick ' selected assets '' and `` distort their economic reality , '' making it more -- not less -- difficult to compare global bank performance . 
`` The measure does not make much sense in the first place , '' said J.F. Tremblay , a Moody 's vice president . 
`` But the fact that a board can be influenced like that is not good news . '' 
