June 17 : BP CEO Tony Hayward testifies during a House Oversight and Investigations subcommittee hearing on the role of BP in the Deepwater Horizon Explosion and oil spill , on Capitol Hill in Washington . 
AP NEW ORLEANS -- BP 's chairman said Friday that CEO Tony Hayward is on his way out as the company 's point man on the Gulf oil spill crisis , a day after Hayward enraged members of Congress by offering few answers about how the environmental disaster happened . 
Other BP officials , however , said the switch had been previously announced and will not take place for some time . 
BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg told Britain 's Sky News television on Friday that Hayward `` is now handing over the operations , the daily operations to -LRB- BP Managing Director -RRB- Bob Dudley . '' 
BP had said this month that Dudley would take over the long-term response to the spill once the leak was stopped , but millions of gallons continue to spew and that milestone remains months away . 
Svanberg 's statement sowed confusion , with other BP officials saying Hayward remains in charge . 
`` Until the acute part of this crisis is over , until the leak is capped , Tony Hayward is still very much in charge in the response of this crisis , '' BP spokesman Robert Wine said . 
Wine said Hayward `` will at some point hand over the management of the aftermath , '' and that Dudley is putting together a team that will `` make sure that the long-term impacts are met with as well as the legal , political repercussions from this crisis . '' 
There is no date for the handover , Wine said , because `` clearly the well is still leaking . '' 
The chairman 's comments overshadowed some positive news in the cleanup effort . 
Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen announced earlier Friday that a newly expanded containment system is capturing or incinerating more than 1 million gallons of oil daily , the first time it has approached its peak capacity . 
And the system will soon grow . 
By late June , the oil giant hopes it can keep nearly 90 percent of the flow from hitting the ocean . 
But the massive leak , set off by an oil rig explosion that killed 11 workers nearly two months ago , will not be stopped completely until at least August . 
BP has been hammered for its response , in part because of comments by Hayward that Gulf Coast residents horrified by the spill consider insensitive . 
Hayward shocked residents in slick-hit Louisiana by saying , `` I would like my life back . '' 
The Briton was quoted by the Times of London suggesting that Americans were particularly likely to file bogus claims -- a statement that gained significance Friday when a House committee said BP has paid less than 12 percent of claims submitted . 
President Barack Obama has suggested he would fire Hayward if he could . 
On Thursday , Hayward told lawmakers on a U.S. House investigations panel that he was out of the loop on decisions surrounding the blown well . 
Both Democrats and Republicans were infuriated when he asserted , `` I 'm not stonewalling . '' 
`` It is clear that Tony has made remarks that have upset people , '' said Svanberg , who made a misstep of his own this week when he said BP cares `` about the small people . '' 
But he added that Hayward `` is also a man who has probably been on 100 hours of TV time and maybe 500 . '' 
Dudley , an American-born oil man with more than 30 years in the industry , has been BP 's managing director since 2009 . 
His responsibilities include broad oversight of the company 's activities in the Americas and Asia , and earlier this month he was named head of the company 's disaster management unit . 
The company said in a June 4 news release that Dudley would manage the long-term day-to-day operations of the oil spill response `` once the spill was over , '' and that he would report to Hayward . 
BP said then that the shift was being planned because it wants Hayward to focus on running the company and Dudley to focus on managing `` the reputational impact , the financial obligations and restore trust and confidence of BP in America . '' 
Svanberg told Sky News that no matter who is heading BP 's oil spill response , `` as long as we do n't close the well and take care of this , there will be criticisms about many things . '' 
Many Gulf Coast residents and business owners who have been economically devastated by the spill are still waiting for compensation from BP . 
The House Judiciary Committee said data it has collected shows that BP has paid $ 71 million out of an estimated $ 600 million in outstanding claims as of Tuesday . 
It based the figure on data it collected from BP 's daily reports to the Coast Guard on claims and on discussions with BP . 
The committee said not one of the 717 claims for bodily injury , or the 175 claims for diminished home property value , have been paid . 
`` I remain concerned that BP is stiffing too many victims and shortchanging others , '' said the committee 's chairman , Michigan Democrat John Conyers . 
BP spokesman Scott Dean said in an e-mail that the company had paid out $ 95 million as of Friday , and it had written about 30,000 checks to settle about half the 63,000 claims it has received . 
The chief of the Independent Claims Facility -- the newly created office charged with distributing $ 20 billion in compensation from BP -- said a plan to handle the remaining damage claims will be in place in 30 to 45 days . 
Kenneth Feinberg said he hopes to have a program going forward that would provide payment within 30 to 60 days of someone submitting a new claim . 
Those pledges do n't mean much to Jerry Forte , who filed a business claim with BP more than a month ago and has n't seen a dime . 
His seafood processing business on the docks in Pass Christian , Miss. , used to bring in more than $ 1 million a year but now is practically shuttered . 
`` I 'm 99 percent down . 
They took all the shrimp boats . 
I do n't have anybody shrimping , '' Forte said Friday . 
`` My bank accounts are all going down to nothing because we 're spending it all on bills , just waiting on BP . '' 
The slow claims process is just one of many criticisms lawmakers and the public have had with BP 's response to the spill -- and many of the toughest complaints have been directed at Hayward . 
Rep. Bart Stupak , D-Mich . 
, said the CEO 's `` evasive and obstructive '' responses during Thursday 's congressional testimony further damaged BP 's reputation . 
`` Whether this change in Gulf leadership for BP will be productive remains to be seen , '' Stupak said in a statement . 
`` I expect that Mr. Dudley will take a much more cooperative and open approach to answering our questions and responding to the needs of the Gulf region . 
If not , his tenure will likely be as short lived as Mr. Hayward 's . '' 
Also Friday , an oil company that owns a quarter of BP 's blown-out oil well , blasted BP for `` reckless decisions and actions '' that led to the well 's explosion . 
Chairman and CEO Jim Hackett 's statement came after some elected officials said Anadarko should help pay for the massive cleanup and spill-related claims . 
Company spokesman John Christiansen said the comments were in response to `` a week 's worth of testimony '' and other information and data compiled on the disaster . 
The recent oil containment efforts are a rare bit of good news for BP and suggest that its engineers are getting better at trapping oil after a two-month string of failures with equipment that clogged , proved ineffective or was simply abandoned . 
`` This is a significant improvement moving forward , '' said Adm. Allen , the top federal official in charge of the spill . 
But there 's still much that can go wrong , from strained hoses breaking to ships colliding in the crowded seas over the leak . 
A bolt of lightning hit a drill ship this week , starting a fire and halting oil collection for hours . 
Stopping the leak will require a pair of relief wells that are not expected to be ready until August , although drilling has gone faster than expected . 
`` Certainly stopping it is the first step and the important thing anyone can do , '' said Ed Overton , a professor of environmental studies at Louisiana State University . 
`` Mother Nature can handle a lot of insult . 
It 's just when you pile it and pile it and pile it . '' 
Even if the new containment systems are a success , it could take months for those living along the Gulf Coast to notice any improvement . 
Experts say oil could be washing up for another six months , and it may take years for wildlife populations harmed by the spill to rebound to levels seen before the leak . 
To collect oil , BP now has a containment cap sitting over a well bore that is siphoning oil and gas to a drill ship on the ocean surface . 
Separate lines are pulling oil and gas from beneath a stack of pipes above the seafloor to a drilling rig where the flow is burned . 
Engineers have been working since Wednesday to bring that system to full speed . 
The ability to contain oil should grow as BP and the federal government move toward getting oil-trapping equipment in place that could better withstand Gulf hurricanes . 
In addition , BP wants to take off the existing cap in July and replace it with one of three possible designs that would offer a tighter seal and siphon oil to two ships waiting above . 
Cutting back on the flow would give cleanup crews some breathing room . 
For example , the Coast Guard has put an emphasis on skimming the heavy oil as close to the damaged well as possible , before it breaks into thousands of smaller , unpredictable slicks that meander with the weather and can elude or outpace skimmers as they are pushed to shore . 
But if the oil flow was substantially reduced , about 15 offshore skimmers could start chasing ribbons of oil -- sometimes as long as 60 miles -- that spread away from the leak site , said Coast Guard Rear Adm. James Watson , who coordinates day-to-day oil spill operations . 
Watson was n't ready to make any plans just yet . 
`` I 've tempered my optimism over time with this spill , '' he said . 
