June 18 : This image from video provided by BP PLC shows oil continuing to gush millions of gallons a day , from the broken wellhead , at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP Anadarko Petroleum Corp. , which owns a quarter of BP PLC 's blown-out oil well in the Gulf of Mexico , late Friday blasted BP `` reckless decisions and actions '' that led to the well 's explosion . 
In recent years , oil giant BP PLC used a well design that has been called `` risky '' by Congressional investigators in more than one out of three of its deepwater wells in the Gulf of Mexico , significantly more often than most peers , a Wall Street Journal analysis of federal data shows . 
`` The mounting evidence clearly demonstrates that this tragedy was preventable and the direct result of BP 's reckless decisions and actions , '' said Hackett in the statement . 
`` We recognize that ultimately we have obligations under federal law related to the oil spill , but will look to BP to continue to pay all legitimate claims as they have repeatedly stated that they will do . '' 
The design was used on the well that exploded in the Gulf of Mexico on April 20 , killing 11 workers and causing America 's worst offshore oil spill . 
The only other major well design , which is more expensive , includes more safeguards against a natural-gas blowout of the kind that destroyed the Deepwater Horizon . 
A Wall Street Journal analysis of records provided by the U.S. Minerals Management Service shows that BP used the less costly design -- called `` long string '' -- on 35 percent of its deepwater wells since July 2003 , the earliest date the well-design data were available . 
Anadarko used it on 42 percent of its deepwater Gulf wells , though it says it does n't do so in wells of the type drilled by BP . 
BP chief executive officer Tony Hayward said in a statement that the company strongly disagreed with the allegations `` These allegations will neither distract the company 's focus on stopping the leak nor alter our commitment to restore the Gulf coast , '' Hayward said . 
`` Other parties besides BP may be responsible for costs and liabilities arising from the oil spill , and we expect those parties to live up to their obligations . '' 
Both companies used the design much more often , on average , than other major Gulf drillers . 
Out of 218 deepwater wells in the Gulf drilled since July 2003 , 26 percent used the long-string design . 
It derives its name from its use of a single , long `` string '' of pipe from the sea floor to the bottom of the well . 
Other big drillers use long-string design less frequently than BP , according to the Journal 's data analysis . 
Royal Dutch Shell PLC used long string designs on 8 percent of its wells and Chevron Corp. on 15 percent . 
Australian firm BHP Billiton PLC used long string on 4 percent of its wells . 
