U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Libyan officials say NATO hits civilian house TRIPOLI | Sun Jun 19 , 2011 10:53 pm IST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan officials said on Sunday a NATO strike had hit a civilian house in the capital Tripoli , killing several residents , and NATO said it was investigating the claim , which could sow new doubts about its mission . 
On another front in the four-month-old battle to force out Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , a doctor in the city of Misrata said eight rebel fighters had been killed and 36 wounded in fighting with government troops . 
In the early hours of Sunday , reporters were taken by Libyan government officials to a residential area in Tripoli 's Souq al-Juma district where they saw a body being pulled out of the rubble of a destroyed building . 
Later , in a hospital , they were shown the bodies of two children and three adults who , officials said , were among a total of seven people killed in the strike . 
`` There was intentional and deliberate targeting of the civilian houses , '' deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Kaim said at the site . 
`` This is another sign of the brutality of the West . '' 
There was no way for reporters to verify that all the bodies they were shown came from the building . 
`` NATO is looking into reports of civilian casualties following NATO air strikes in the early hours of June 19 , '' the alliance said in a statement from Naples , from where it is running the Libyan operation . 
`` The incident is said to have occurred in a residential area in northern Tripoli , following a deliberate strike which targeted a missile site operated by pro-Gaddafi forces . 
`` NATO regrets any loss of civilian lives , and is doing all it can to protect the people of Libya from the violence waged by the Gaddafi regime . 
`` We take all reports of civilian casualties very seriously and we will continue to look into the facts related to this event , '' the alliance said . 
`` NATO would be sorry if the review of this incident did indicate that it was caused by a NATO weapon . '' 
At the scene of the destroyed building on Sunday , clothes , smashed crockery and a child 's rubber duck could be seen littered around the area . 
The building is in a neighborhood where security forces have in the past few weeks put down anti-Gaddafi protests . 
`` Why is NATO doing this to us ? 
asked Ibrahim Ali , who said he lived on the same street as the wrecked building . 
`` NATO is a big problem for the Libyan people . 
NATO does n't have any business here , this is between the Libyan people . '' 
Another man , who gave his name as Tony , nodded towards the remains of the building and said : `` They -LRB- local people -RRB- do n't like this ... But they do n't like the regime either . '' 
On at least one occasion in the past , doubts have emerged about the reliability of Libyan claims of civilian casualties . 
In one case , Libyan officials presented a wounded child to foreign media as the victim of an air strike but medical staff passed a note to a foreign journalist saying she was hurt in a road accident . 
If it is proved that Sunday 's deaths were caused by a NATO air strike , it would be the first acknowledged incident of its kind in the campaign and could weaken the fragile resolve of some countries in the alliance . 
NATO has been pounding targets in Libya for months in what it says is an operation to protect civilians who rebelled against Gaddafi 's 41-year rule . 
The Libyan leader says it is an act of colonial aggression designed to steal oil . 
Strains are appearing within NATO member states as the campaign drags on for longer than most of its backers anticipated and Gaddafi remains in power -- even making a show of defiance last week by playing chess with a visiting official . 
Sunday marked three months since NATO warplanes went into action over Libya . 
Rebels from the city of Misrata , about 200 km -LRB- 130 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli , have been trying to push west towards the capital but on Sunday they took heavy casualties when they came under fire from pro-Gaddafi forces . 
A doctor at a field hospital near the frontline in Dafniyah , just west of Misrata , said eight fighters had been killed and 36 wounded . 
A Reuters reporter at the field hospital said he saw a procession of pick-up trucks arriving from the front carrying the wounded and the dead , some of them covered with blankets . 
`` Gaddafi 's forces were underground -LRB- in trenches -RRB- . 
We were patrolling and they ambushed us , '' said rebel fighter Mohammed Swelhi , whose friend , Mustafa , was one of two bodies brought from the front in the back of a truck . 
`` My cousin was injured yesterday . 
And today my friend was killed . 
My group , we 're all close friends , '' he said . 
Last week , NATO aircraft dropped leaflets around the frontline warning pro-Gaddafi fighters they would be targeted by attack helicopters if they did not lay down their arms . 
But rebels say there has been little sign of the alliance . 
`` We do n't know what NATO is doing , '' said the doctor , called Nury , who was tending the wounded at the field hospital . 
After four months of civil war , rebels control the eastern third of Libya , the Mediterranean port city of Misrata and much of the Western Mountains stretching to the border with Tunisia . 
But they remain far from seizing Gaddafi 's powerbase of Tripoli and its hinterland despite air support from the world 's most powerful military alliance . 
Speaking in the eastern city of Benghazi , the chief rebel oil official castigated Western powers for failing to make good on their promises to help the rebel cause . 
`` We are running out of everything . 
It 's a complete failure . 
Either they -LRB- Western nations -RRB- do n't understand or they do n't care . 
Nothing has materialised yet . 
And I really mean nothing , '' Ali Tarhouni said in an interview with Reuters . 
`` All of these people we talk to , all of these countries , at all these conferences , with their great grand speeches -- we appreciate -LRB- them -RRB- ... but in terms of finances they are a complete failure . 
Our people are dying , '' he said . 
