Abu Theeb is the leader of a band of Sunni insurgents that preys on US targets north of Baghdad . 
Last week he openly defied al-Qaida in Iraq by actively supporting the referendum . 
Ghaith Abdul-Ahad spent five days with him - and uncovered evidence of a growing split in the insurgency Abu Theeb is a tall , handsome , well-built man with a thin beard and thick eyebrows . 
His name is a nom de guerre : it means Father of the Wolf . 
He is a farmer during daylight and a commander of a mujahideen cell , a group of holy warriors , at night . 
He and his men roam the farmland north of Baghdad in search of prey - a US armored Humvee , perhaps , or an Iraqi army unit . 
On the eve of last week 's constitutional referendum , Abu Theeb , the leader of a group of Sunni insurgents , was to be found in the middle of a schoolyard in a village north of Baghdad . 
The school was to be a polling center the next day . 
He stood flanked by 10 bearded fighters in white robes and chequered headscarves . 
There were a few posters on the walls , and plastic ribbons marking out lanes where voters would queue , but other than Abu Theeb and his men , the building was deserted . 
The security guards hired by the referendum committee in Baghdad had failed to show up - not all that surprising an event in one of the most dangerous areas in Iraq . 
The local tribe , ie Abu Theeb and co , are notorious for kidnappings and executions . 
Abu Theeb looked around him , a commander inspecting the field before battle . 
He moved with his men around the school , inspecting the adjacent streets and the back gate , looking for weak points , looking for easy access for a car bomb or an armed onslaught . 
The school guard sheepishly followed the entourage around , a Kalashnikov on one shoulder . 
At one point , Abu Theeb grabbed a piece of paper and drew a sketch of the school , marking out where his men should be posted the next day . 
He turned to a short , chubby ginger-haired guy in his 30s with a big jihadi beard . 
`` You will be the commander tomorrow , '' he said . 
`` Distribute some of our weapons to the men . '' 
The stakes were high for Abu Theeb and his men . 
Al-Qaida forces in Iraq - forces that are , at least on paper , allies of the Sunni insurgents - had vowed to kill anyone who took part in the referendum . 
But in the Sunni areas of Iraq , the people and the local Iraqi insurgents among them had a different view : they were eager to vote . 
There was a widespread sense of regret about the boycotting of the last elections , which left the parliament in Baghdad dominated by Shia and Kurdish parties - and left the Sunnis , who held the power in Saddam 's Iraq , out in the cold . 
The Sunnis wanted to take part in last week 's referendum ; they wanted a `` no '' vote on the draft constitution . 
This left Abu Theeb , a man who has devoted himself and his resources to fighting the Americans , in a curious position . 
His battle on polling day would be to secure a safe and smooth voting for his people - in a referendum organised by the enemy . 
In doing so he would be going up against the al-Qaida forces , and risking a split in the insurgency in Iraq . 
I spent five days with Abu Theeb and his people last week , and I witnessed a very curious thing : a bunch of mujahideens talking politics and urging restraint . 
`` Politics for us is like filthy dead meat , '' Abu Theeb told me . 
`` We are not allowed to eat it , but if you are passing through the desert and your life depends on it , God says it 's OK . '' 
This is a profound shift in thinking for these insurgents , a shift that might just change the way things develop in Iraq . 
While we were at the school , Abu Theeb pulled one of his young men aside and rebuked him for an IED - improvised explosive device - bombing the night before : `` I thought we agreed that nothing will happen for the next few days . '' 
The short young man mumbled that it was n't his group - someone else must have done it . 
Abu Theeb 's village , where the polling station was based , is a small hamlet that lies on the banks of the Tigris river north of Baghdad . 
A serpent-like road passes through the village . 
The palm groves on either side of the road are pockmarked by bomb craters . 
A couple of thousand Sunni Arabs from one tribe live here . 
Everyone is related ; they say they can trace their history back to the prophet Muhammad . 
Women are rarely seen in public and almost everyone is a fundamentalist Salafi Muslim . 
The men sport big bushy beards and wear ankle-length dishdashas -LRB- robes -RRB- . 
Mosques are scattered everywhere and at prayer time the place grinds to a halt . 
There are two ways into the village . 
The official way in takes you through a 100m-long checkpoint of blast walls , concrete barriers and barbed wire . 
It is manned by masked Shia Iraqi soldiers from the south of the country and commanded by US soldiers . 
Cars and cards are checked regularly and the roads are closed down , forcing people to drive for hours through the farmlands around the village before hitting the main road again . 
Driving in and out through this checkpoint reminds one of a second world war movie of an eastern European town under German occupation . 
The locals call the checkpoint the Rafah crossing , in reference to the notorious checkpoint in Gaza . 
Then there is the unofficial way in . 
A narrow , bumpy farm road provides the mujahideens with safe access into the village away from the weary eyes of the Iraqi soldiers . 
This is the road Abu Theeb took in last week . 
I went with him on condition that I did nothing to reveal his identity or the location of the village . 
For the purposes of the assignment , I was advised to pray , fast and dress like the men of the village , although I am not religious . 
Abu Theeb was born in this village four decades ago . 
He was one of five brothers and several sisters and his father was an illiterate farmer who went everywhere with his short-wave radio and loved to talk politics . 
In the 80s , Abu Theeb 's eldest brother was killed fighting in the Iran-Iraq war . 
Abu Theeb studied law at university in Baghdad before joining the Institute of National Security , an elite academy reserved mostly for Sunni Arabs . 
It was the graduates of this academy who were used to staff Saddam 's secret services ; Abu Theeb was a loyal citizen , and he went on to a job in the security services . 
But his nationalism evaporated after Saddam 's invasion of Kuwait . 
`` I hated the government , '' he says . 
`` I realized that all that they were telling us about the nation and the leader was false . 
They had no pride , no honor . 
I wanted to leave , to take a long break , so I left the service to do religious studies . '' 
He joined an Islamic Sharia school to train as a cleric . 
There he fell in love with two subjects : the teachings of Ibn Taimia , the father of the fundamentalist Salafi school of thinking , and religious politics . 
Later , however , he was obliged to return to his old job at the Amn al-Aam , the General Security , one of Saddam 's feared security apparatuses , and there he stayed until the American occupation toppled the regime . 
`` When the fall happened , I went to a cleric I knew who was preaching jihad and asked him for weapons , '' he says . 
`` I was weeping . 
He said , ` Go away , things are too dangerous . ' 
I roamed the streets with a dagger in my pocket . 
I was too ashamed to come back home and see my family while Baghdad was under the occupation , dead bodies and bullet shells everywhere . '' 
He finally met up with a group of Syrian volunteers in Baghdad . 
They , like him , were looking for a fight with the Americans . 
He brought them back to his home , he says , and formed one of the first jihadi cells . 
They got to work . 
`` When the infidel conquers your home , it 's like seeing your women raped in front of your eyes and like your religion being insulted every day , '' says Abu Theeb . 
He joined others and started first with direct rocket-propelled grenade hits and small arms attacks on US convoys around his area , until a fellow Salafi fighter taught him how to set an IED using primitive techniques , a TV remote control and some artillery shells . 
A visiting Iraqi army general laid the ground rules for the group : IEDs were the most successful weapon , but should always be laid at least two kilometres outside the village to spare the people the wrath of the Americans . 
`` Everyone was fighting , men who under Saddam spent years as military deserters became zealous fighters , '' says Abu Theeb . 
`` Something like fire was inside us . 
We would go out to fight for days , leaving our families and wives behind . '' 
He and other Salafi fighters became known as the Anger Brigade , an insurgent group that has claimed responsibility for numerous attacks on US and Iraqi targets and is involved in kidnapping those who are perceived as collaborating with the much-hated occupation . 
This is truly a holy war for Abu Theeb . 
He tells me how once he was driving to Baghdad carrying a sack filled with anti-tank rocket heads for an operation in Baghdad . 
He was stopped at a checkpoint and American soldiers ordered him to step out and begun a car search . 
`` I prayed to God , '' he says . 
`` I told him , ` God , if I am doing what I am doing for your sake then spare me this . 
If it 's not , let them get me . ' 
The American soldier opened the boot where I had the sack filled with rocket heads . 
He moved it aside and started to search . 
When he finished and asked me to leave , I knew then I was blessed by God . '' 
God has not been so merciful with the rest of his family . 
One of his brothers and a nephew have died fighting the Americans ; another brother was killed a month ago as he was setting an IED on the side of the road . 
But Abu Theeb 's faith remains strong . 
For more than two years , Abu Theeb had been taking part in insurgent attacks on US and Iraqi targets , laying IEDs , carrying out ambushes and kidnappings . 
Then , about eight months ago , a group of Syrian men visited him . 
They identified themselves as part of the al-Qaida group in Iraq , and they asked for his cooperation in establishing a foothold for their organization in his area . 
`` They told me that they had support and money and wanted to open a new front here , '' says Abu Theeb . 
`` I said to them , ` What about the village - do you want this to become a new Fallujah ? ' '' 
Abu Theeb did n't want al-Qaida , even if their aims were ostensibly the same . 
`` When al-Qaida came here I was the first to fight it , '' he says . 
`` They went to the clerics and said , ` Denounce this man . 
If not , your blood will be spilled . ' 
They can kill and slaughter easily . '' 
Abu Theeb and other Salafi clerics and leaders of the insurgency north and south of Baghdad are now talking about a rift - a split between Iraqi Islamist and nationalistic insurgent groups , and the mainly foreign led and supported al-Qaida forces . 
They say that al-Qaida initially gained support among the Sunnis because of its ferocity and meticulous planning , and because it had money pouring in from jihadis all over the Arab world . 
Made up mostly of foreign Arabs , it quickly became the most feared insurgent group in Iraq , claiming responsibility for the bloodiest attacks against not only US and Iraqi forces but also civilians . 
`` If it was n't al-Qaida fighting with the Sunnis in Iraq the whole battle would have had a different outcome , '' says Abu Hafsa , another mujahideen commander based north of Baghdad . 
Abu Qutada , a mujahideen leader based in south Baghdad , agrees . 
`` Lots of the mujahideen groups are in need of money and weapons so they join the umbrella of al-Qaida for support , '' he says . 
But he adds : `` They differ with them in ideology . '' 
The tipping point came when al-Qaida , known then as the Tawhid al-Jihad , decided to target the Iraqi police and army and other Iraqi ministries and institutions . 
Its goal was to prevent the Americans establishing an Iraqi state that could lead the fight against the insurgency - and allow the Americans to take a back seat . 
`` They have experience in fighting and they did very clever stuff , '' says Abu Theeb . 
`` They attacked all the centres of the Iraqi state and prevented the Americans from creating a puppet state that they could hand everything to . 
The Iraqi resistance was occupied by fighting the Americans and could n't see that strategic goal . '' 
Perhaps inevitably , though , the insurgents turned out not to have the same stomach for Iraqi blood . 
`` Al-Qaida believes that anyone who does n't follow the Qur ` an literally is a Kaffir - apostate - and should be killed , '' says Abu Theeb . 
`` This is wrong . '' 
Al-Qaida marked down not only those who cooperated with the American occupation , but everyone who worked with the Iraqi government , police or army , as Kaffirs . 
Then they said that the entire Shia community were Kaffirs . 
For Sunnis like Abu Theeb , this was a step too far . 
The second serious stumbling block has been al-Qaida 's call for the establishment of an Islamic state -LRB- caliphate -RRB- based on the Taliban model in Afghanistan . 
This has already started taking place in towns and villages where al-Qaida is dominant . 
`` The resistance now is made up of nationalist and religious elements , '' says Abu Theeb . 
`` By calling for a caliphate you will alienate not only the resistance but the support we get from Syria and the gulf countries . '' 
The last thing these countries want is a Taliban state as a neighbor . 
Al-Qaida 's policies have drawn a furious response from the Iraqi security forces and the Shia militias , and it is Sunnis who have suffered . 
Scores have been executed after being kidnapped by paramilitary units . 
In Abu Theeb 's area alone , more than 300 Sunni families have taken refuge after fleeing Shia areas in Baghdad . 
`` Every time al-Qaida attacks a Shia mosque we are making all the Shias our enemies , '' he says . 
`` We are cementing them against us . '' 
Later he says : `` We have lost more men to the Shias than we have lost to the Americans . '' 
This rift in the insurgency has already gone far beyond angry words . 
Clashes erupted between al-Qaida fighters and Iraqi mujahideen cells after al-Qaida killed a group of Iraqi insurgents who they claimed were spying for the Americans . 
Back in the village , politics has become a hot issue . 
Everywhere - in the mosques after prayers , at weddings , in the main market and in private mujahideen circles - the talk is of politics . 
Abu Theeb says his move into politics has come at a price : he has had to shave off his beard so that he can visit Baghdad . 
For weeks he has been traveling , visiting houses , urging people to register to vote . 
`` It 's a new jihad , '' he says . 
`` There is time for fighting and a time for politics . '' 
I went back to the school with Abu Theeb on polling day . 
There was a festival atmosphere . 
Two of his guards were already at their positions , but the rest were more relaxed - their weapons lay against the wall and on tables . 
`` No one will attack , '' said Abu Theeb . 
Inside the classroom that had become the polling station , an old sheik sat on a wooden bench . 
`` The judge and the monitors did n't come from Baghdad - they said this is a hot area - so the sheik of the village is going be the monitor , '' said Abu Theeb . 
People began to trickle in . 
The officials present soon decided that it was not realistic to expect the women to come in , so each man who came in with an ID card was given a whole stack of ballot papers . 
`` Nine papers to Haji Abu Hussein , '' shouted a registration official . 
Another official sitting on another table handed Haji Abu Hussein the nine ballots . 
The man took his ballots , but instead of voting in private in the ballot box , he publicly ticked the `` no '' boxes , folded the papers , and then chucked them in the box . 
By midday people had stopped coming and the officials started ticking the boxes on ballot papers themselves . 
The next day , America and the authorities were crowing about how well the referendum had gone ; yesterday - after a `` yes '' vote had been returned - leading Sunni politicians accused the Shia in the south of stuffing ballot boxes . 
Well , some of the Sunnis in the north are certainly guilty of it . 
Two days after the balloting , Abu Theeb and two other clerics sat on the floor of a mosque debating the political future of their group and the Sunnis in general . 
`` We should keep all the options open , '' Abu Theeb told them . 
Even a coalition with the enemy . 
