Maura Wood , Senior Program Manager , Coastal Louisiana Restoration for National Wildlife Federation takes a sample of water in a heavily oiled marsh near Pass a Loutre , Louisiana , May 20 , 2010 . 
`` In responding to this oil spill , it is critical that all actions be conducted in a transparent manner , with all data and information related to the spill readily available to the United States government and the American people , '' Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Lisa Jackson said in a letter . 
The officials said in a letter to BP CEO Tony Hayward that despite claims by BP that it was striving to keep the public and the government informed , `` those efforts , to date , have fallen short in both their scope and effectiveness . '' 
The statement followed allegations earlier in the day that BP had engaged in a `` cover-up '' about the extent of the damage and the amount of crude flowing unchecked from its ruptured well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
TV images of oil sloshing into Louisiana 's marshes has underscored the gravity of the situation and raised public concern and anger about the unfolding catastrophe , keeping it high up on the political agenda in Washington . 
BP shares closed up one percent Thursday but the markets have raked around $ 30 billion from its value in the month since the rig explosion , which killed 11 workers and sparked the disaster-in-the-making . 
BP said Thursday it was siphoning 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- per day of oil from the gusher , from 3,000 barrels a day previously . 
`` The oil plume escaping from the riser pipe has visibly declined today , '' BP spokesman Mark Proegler said after the company announced that a mile-long tube was tapping into the larger of two leaks from the well . 
However , live video feed of the leak , provided by BP , showed a black plume of crude oil still billowing out into the deep waters . 
BP has been estimating the leak was flowing at a rate of 5,000 barrels per day , but scientists and the government have questioned that figure . 
Scientists analyzing video of the oil gushing from the seabed have pegged the spill 's volume at about 70,000 barrels -LRB- 2.9 million gallons\/11 million liters -RRB- per day . 
`` It 's just not working , '' U.S. Senator Barbara Boxer , who heads the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee , told CNN as she watched the BP video . 
The California Democrat denounced a `` cover-up '' of the real size of the oil spill . 
U.S. Representative Edward Markey , who requested the footage , was also unimpressed . 
`` BP has stonewalled on releasing the video for 23 days . 
... If you look at the video you can see plumes of oil spilling into the Gulf far in excess of 5,000 barrels per day , '' he told reporters in Washington . 
Proegler and other BP spokesmen made clear the increased containment , while an advance , was not siphoning all the escaping oil . 
`` We 're not claiming that we stopped it -- although that is our final objective . 
We 're saying that this is what we 're capturing now , '' he said . 
The U.S. government , grappling with a potentially huge environmental and economic disaster , also said Thursday it would not rely only on data provided by BP , but would make its own checks on the magnitude of the leak . 
In other developments , the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ordered BP to identify safer dispersants within 24 hours that can be used to contain the spill . 
The EPA Thursday directed BP to begin using this safer dispersant within 72 hours . 
If BP can not identify an available alternative dispersant , the company must provide EPA and the Coast Guard with the reasons they believe no other dispersant meets required standards . 
The use of dispersants , including those manufactured by Nalco Holding Co. , at such high rates and at such deep levels has set off alarm bells with some environmentalists , who worry the chemicals may have a lasting negative impact . 
Sheets of heavy oil came ashore in Louisiana 's wetlands on Wednesday for the first time since the rig exploded a month ago . 
The marshes are nurseries for shrimp , oysters , crabs and fish that make Louisiana the top commercial seafood producer in the continental United States . 
Fishing is now banned in a large part of the Gulf waters because of the spill . 
In Pass-a-Loutre , Louisiana , thick sheets of gooey brown oil swamped islands of marsh grass at the southern tip of a Mississippi River channel Thursday . 
`` To see the extent to which it is oiled and the depth into the island is stunning , '' said Maura Wood of the National Wildlife Federation 's Coastal Louisiana Restoration Project . 
The oil pollution covers only a fragment of the vast network of waterways , channels and islands that make up the Delta region , but environmentalists fear it is just the start . 
`` It 's going to take a long time for us to recover from BP 's mess , '' boat captain Richard Blink said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
To do so we must let the crisis reveal the solution rather than just looking to the patterns of the past . 
So far these efforts of the past have led to failure and a growing menace . 
Let us observe the Biblical magnitude of this event by taking full responsibility for our mind , our actions , and the world . 
The action and reaction of BP has been absolutely pathetic ; Any barrel\/day number they give us next should be multiplied by 10 . 
This is gonna get ugly ; and its not even closed yet ; BP is still trying to re-coup what they 're going to lose in the cleanup efforts by siphoning off `` 3000 barrels\/day '' -LRB- Which is probably a high end estimate by BP -RRB- All in all just another day in the office for BP ... . 
BP is obviously lying about the magnitude of the gulf oil spill to keep investors buying stock at such a low price to help finance the clean up . 
Every negative story headlined on Google Finance under NYSE : BP , is quickly removed . 
I 've noticed that on a daily basis . 
Someone is obviously removing the negative stories or requesting their removal . 
This spill is very dangerous to both the economy , as well as to the entire ecology surrouding the gulf , and shore . 
I do not understand how investors can not recognize this . 
The spill is obviously more then 5000 barrels a day . 
It is not just one scientist speaking out , but plenty . 
BP and the Coast Guard barred reporters from the coast to take pictures . 
This spill is definitally more then the 1989 Exxon Mobil , and it has definitally surpassed the Q1 profits . 
The Atlantis platform is going to be shut down due to a law suit which is crucial for their profits , but theyre also being sued for conspiracy . 
BP has too long been eating til they were fat while neglecting safety responsibility . 
Its besides the fact the oil has been spilled GREATLY into the ecology . 
But what about the 11 lives that were lost ? 
I think not only the public has spoken , but the government is embarassed by BP . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
