TRIPOLI | Fri Mar 18 , 2011 7:22 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The United States accused Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi on Friday of defying international demands for an immediate ceasefire , hours after President Barack Obama said he faced military action if he did not comply . 
A U.S. National Security official said Gaddafi 's forces were continuing to advance toward the eastern rebel stronghold of Benghazi , despite a ceasefire announcement by the Libyan government earlier in the day . 
In Benghazi , rebels said they feared an attack by Gaddafi 's forces , while in the western rebel-held city Misrata , residents said they had faced a day of heavy bombing . 
`` All attacks against civilians must stop , '' Obama said , a day after the U.N. Security Council passed a resolution authorizing international military intervention to protect civilians in Libya . 
Underlining a commitment to provide protection to people across the country -- and not just in the rebel-held east -- Obama also specifically called on Gaddafi 's forces to pull back from the western cities of Zawiyah and Misrata , as well as the eastern town of Ajdabiya : `` Gaddafi must stop his troops from advancing on Benghazi , pull them back from Ajdabiya , Misrata and Zawiyah , and establish water , electricity and gas supplies to all areas . 
Humanitarian assistance must be allowed to reach the people of Libya ... `` Let me be clear , these terms are not negotiable ... If Gaddafi does not comply ... the resolution will be enforced through military action . '' 
His comments were echoed in a statement that Paris issued on behalf of the United States , Britain , France and Arab states . 
GADDAFI TROOPS ADVANCING , OFFICIAL SAYS In Washington , a national security official , who spoke on condition of anonymity , said the troop movements by Gaddafi 's forces toward Benghazi were `` purposeful '' . 
The assessment was based on official reporting reaching U.S. national security agencies in Washington , he said . 
Asked by CNN whether Gaddafi was in violation of the U.N. resolution , the U.S. envoy to the United Nations , Susan Rice , said : `` Yes , he is . '' 
In Tripoli the government said there had been no bombing since it announced the ceasefire . 
`` We have had no bombardment of any kind since the ceasefire was declared , '' Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Kaim told journalists when asked about reports of continued government operations in Misrata and other parts of the country . 
Kaim said Libya was asking China , Germany , Malta and Turkey to send observers to monitor its adherence to the ceasefire . 
A doctor in Misrata contacted by phone in the evening said there had been heavy bombing through the day . 
`` Now they are on the outskirts of the city and I can still hear bombing from time to time , '' he said . 
Rebels in Benghazi dismissed Gaddafi 's ceasefire declaration as a ruse . 
`` He is lying . 
His troops are advancing . 
We do n't believe what Gaddafi says , '' said Mohammed Ishmael al-Tajouri , from the rebel coalition in Benghazi . 
`` When he comes to Benghazi he will be fighting . 
There is no negotiating with Gaddafi . '' 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said everything was ready to launch military strikes in Libya . 
France and Britain have both been strong advocates of military action . 
After embarking on wars in Afghanistan and Iraq , the United States had insisted it would participate in rather than lead any military action . 
Obama said the United States would not deploy ground troops in Libya . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It 's their backyard , not ours , and the US has no compelling reason to get involved in a Libyan civil war . 
U.S. Undersecretary of State William Burns said he was concerned Gaddafi , dubbed the ` mad dog of the Middle East ' by president Ronald Reagan in 1986 , could `` return to terrorism and violent extremism '' and create turmoil in the region . 
What he forgets to add is we are throwing out support behind radical Muslims who are known for `` terrorism and violent extremism '' . 
How soon we forget the mistakes of out past . 
Hundreds of thousands of bullets and grenades have been used in the Libyan civil war but less than 500 have found their mark . 
Somebody is not shooting straight or this is a pseudo war whose beneficiaries are the media . 
Without dramatization of reality they would go out of business . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
