BRUSSELS | Fri Mar 18 , 2011 12:45 pm EDT BRUSSELS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A Western and Arab military campaign against Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi could be launched within hours and cripple his forces -- perhaps drive him from power -- within weeks . 
But it is not without risks . 
Thursday 's U.N. Security Council vote backing military action in Libya offers intervening powers a very broad mandate , by authorizing `` all necessary measures '' to protect civilians . 
It is unclear how far the allies want to go , notably in view of Gaddafi 's initial response of offering a ceasefire . 
But it is clear their firepower gives them many possibilities . 
Military analysts said the resolution could mean a campaign extending beyond simply preventing government planes operating in a no-fly zone around Benghazi and other rebel-held areas and might be expected to include strikes against air bases , missile sites , command centers , heavy artillery units and tanks . 
They said a coalition led by Britain and France and backed by the United States and Arab countries would be able to deploy formidable air capabilities -- including French Mirage 2000 and Rafale fighters , British Typhoon and Tornado strike aircraft and U.S. F-22s -- against Gaddafi 's fairly ragged resources . 
`` The terms of the resolution are very wide-ranging , '' said Shashank Joshi at London 's Royal United Services Institute -LRB- RUSI -RRB- , suggesting it could lead to overthrowing Gaddafi . 
`` Over time we may not just see bombing of units close to Benghazi ; we may see powers saying we are authorized to remove this threat . '' 
The air armada would be backed by airborne early-warning and tanker aircraft and British Nimrod spy planes , against a Libyan air force that may be able to field as few as 40 of its notional combat strength of 200-plus aircraft , said Douglas Barrie of the International Institute for Strategic Studies . 
Analysts said the attackers could use a broad range of bases across southern Europe , including in Italy , British bases in Cyprus and Gibraltar and French bases in Corsica and southern France -- as well as , potentially , bases in Gulf states . 
A French official said the operation could also involve missiles fired from warships in the Mediterranean . 
Barak Seener , a Middle East expert at RUSI said the Libyan armed forces would be able to put up little contest : `` I would give it a month , '' he said . 
`` It will be striking targets of the regime and it will be rapidly eroding the regime 's command and control . 
I do n't see this as a time-consuming exercise . '' 
Seener said Western forces , sticking to U.N. instructions not to invade , would seek to turn the war decisively against Gaddafi by aiding the nearly defeated rebels . 
They would supply them with communication equipment , anti-tank and anti-aircraft systems and also send special forces to train their troops . 
`` And they will use the no-fly zone to offer the opposition intelligence on the regime 's movements and force concentrations , '' he said , painting a picture of a decisive intervention on the hitherto losing side in Libya 's civil war . 
Seener said that as well as the Rafale , a multi-purpose strike aircraft , France could use the Super Etendard , a carrier-borne strike fighter supported by VC-10 and C-135 FR refueling tankers and AWACS reconnaissance aircraft . 
He said France would have about 30 carrier-based aircraft available , while the United State had indicated it would only use land-based aircraft . 
These may come from Italy . 
French aircraft could also fly out of land bases in mainland France and Corsica and from Italy , 500-1 ,400 km from Tripoli . 
Britain , meanwhile would employ Tornado GR4s , Typhoons and air-to-air refueling and surveillance aircraft , while Canada is sending six CF-18 Hornets . 
Saudi Arabia , which has Tornados , F-15s and Typhoons , and other Arabs states -- the UAE and Qatar -- would probably provide a token number of aircraft , he said . 
`` The first ground strikes will be carried out by Rafales , Mirage 2000Ds and Tornado GR4s , firing precision weapons -- laser-guided bombs , GPS guided -LRB- A2SM -RRB- and Scalp or Storm Shadow missiles , '' he said . 
`` The bombers will be escorted by fighters to protect them and go after any Libyan planes sent to intercept . '' 
Joshi said that because the rebels lacked the power to topple Gaddafi militarily the allies ' strategy would have to be based on first removing his ability to threaten Benghazi , then a combination of political and military pressure . 
`` The hope will be that there will either be a coup or disintegration of the regime from the top , '' he said . 
While analysts forecast that first strikes against Gaddafi could be launched in the next day or two -- possibly as early as Saturday , when Arab and Western leaders are scheduled to meet in Paris -- some analysts cautioned it could be too late to avoid a messy partition of the country . 
`` It looks like Gaddafi will stay in power in Tripoli for some time to come and a form of stalemate will emerge , bringing a partition between the east and west , '' said Henry Wilkinson of the Janusian Security Consultants . 
Joshi said it was hard to predict how long the campaign would last , but noted that the NATO operation in Kosovo in 1999 , which was forecast to take weeks , had dragged on for months . 
`` There 's no guarantee , '' he said . 
`` Gaddafi could pull back to Sirte and make clear he 's no longer threatening Benghazi and put the coalition in a position of having to decide whether to bomb him there , which could look like a provocative act . 
`` So it could result in stalemate that could go on for months . 
And the longer it goes on the more Arab public opinion will go against it , because you will see creeping civilian casualties , and the more you will see this coalition , which is a very artificial thing , slowly fracture . '' 
Analysts also pointed to the potential costs of a long drawn out campaign , at a time of economic crisis and austerity . 
While an initial air campaign could be launched with `` tens of aircraft , '' Joshi said , it was eventually likely to have to involve hundreds and cost in excess of $ 100 million a week . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
