First UK swine flu patient death Prof. John Oxford : `` We are preparing for a more severe outbreak in Autumn '' The swine flu virus has claimed its first victim in the UK , after a female patient died in a Scottish hospital . 
The victim is understood to be a woman aged 38 who gave birth prematurely while being treated at the Royal Alexandra Hospital in Paisley . 
The death is the first outside the Americas , where more than 140 people have died since the pandemic began . 
Swine flu has now infected almost 500 people in Scotland alone , out of 1,261 cases in the UK . 
The patient was one of 10 people being treated for swine flu in the greater Glasgow area . 
A statement issued by the Scottish Government said : `` With regret , we can confirm that one of the patients who had been in hospital , and had been confirmed as suffering from the H1N1 virus , has died today . 
`` The patient had underlying health conditions . '' 
It 's worth remembering that seasonal flu kills several thousand people in the UK each winter Fergus Walsh , BBC medical correspondent Scottish Health Secretary Nicola Sturgeon said : `` I 'd like to express my condolences to the patient 's family and friends . 
This is a tragedy for those concerned and they have my heartfelt sympathy . 
`` Tragic though today 's death is , I would like to emphasise that the vast majority of those who have H1N1 are suffering from relatively mild symptoms . '' 
The BBC 's medical correspondent Fergus Walsh said : `` Swine flu does present a slightly higher risk to those with existing respiratory illness , asthma , cardiovascular disease and obesity . '' 
He added : `` It 's worth remembering that seasonal flu kills several thousand people in the UK each winter . 
The difference with H1N1 swine flu is that the virus is almost exclusively targeting people under 65 . '' 
Thirty-five new cases of swine flu in Scotland were confirmed on Sunday . 
Together with 61 new cases in England and one case in Northern Ireland confirmed on Sunday , a total of 1,261 people have now caught the virus in the UK . 
Another 486 possible UK cases are being investigated . 
Virologist Professor John Oxford said that despite the death , the public should not panic . 
`` I still think the chances of picking up the virus are remote . 
It is not going to get any worse during the summer . '' 
Professor Oxford said he did not think the the public had become complacent and said the country was well prepared in terms of anti-viral drugs . 
The UK government outlined measures it has taken to combat the outbreak earlier this week . 
Ministers urged people not to alter their normal behavior and follow hand hygiene guidelines . 
