Ms Fleming had health problems before contracting the flu virus The family of the first person in Europe to die after being diagnosed with swine flu has suffered a double tragedy with the death of her baby . 
Jacqueline Fleming , 38 , from Glasgow , died on Sunday at the Royal Alexandra Hospital in Paisley . 
Her son Jack , who was born 11 weeks early , died on Monday in a special care baby unit at the same hospital . 
The baby was not infected with the Influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus . 
He was two weeks old when he died . 
Ms Fleming had been suffering from underlying health problems since the birth of her son . 
In a statement , her partner William McCann said it was an extremely distressing and difficult time for the family . 
He said : `` My beautiful son was born on the first of June 2009 , 11 weeks early . 
`` He suffered from a number of complications and despite his brave fight he passed away earlier this evening at the Special Care Baby Unit at the Royal Alexandra Hospital in Paisley . '' 
She was a really nice lady , really kind , a quiet woman , just a family person really Ms Fleming lived with her two other children - one aged 18 and one of primary school age - and her long-term partner in the family home in Thornliebank , just south of Glasgow . 
William Docherty , who knew Ms Fleming , told BBC Scotland he believed she had been admitted to hospital following a stroke . 
A female friend of the family said : `` I think they are taking it really badly . 
She was in hospital for a couple of weeks and there were days she was getting better and days she was taking a turn for the worse . 
`` They hoped she was going to pull through and it was a shock when she died . 
The family are really devastated . '' 
She added : `` She was a really nice lady , really kind , a quiet woman , just a family person really . '' 
Scotland Health Secretary Nicola Sturgeon said : `` The death of baby Jack , especially coming so soon after the death of his mother , is a tragedy and I extend my deepest condolences to their family and friends for this unimaginably painful loss . '' 
The Scottish Government said Scotland had no new laboratory confirmed cases of swine flu . 
However , GPs in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area are now , in certain circumstances , diagnosing patients on the basis of clinical symptoms alone - without laboratory confirmation . 
There had been 71 such diagnoses , the government said . 
Scotland therefore currently has 498 confirmed cases , plus 71 which have been clinically diagnosed . 
Jacqueline Fleming lived in Crebar Street in the Thornliebank area In England , the Health Protection Agency said another 59 cases had been confirmed . 
Earlier , Ms Sturgeon said that while Ms Fleming 's death was tragic the public should take some reassurance from the fact that most cases of the virus were `` relatively mild '' . 
She said : `` It is important to stress that in any flu outbreak , unfortunately , we will see a small number of deaths and that does n't change the fact that for the vast majority of people contracting this virus the symptoms are relatively mild . '' 
