BP switches on live video from oil leak Gush of oil from Deepwater Horizon oil spill now being broadcast live after BP accused of withholding information from ocean floor A still of live video from the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Spillcam One month after the fiery collapse of the Deepwater Horizon , BP bowed to demands from scientists and members of Congress this week and has posted a live video feed of the gusher of oil on the ocean floor . 
The decision came only hours after a hearing in Congress in which BP was accused of withholding data from the ocean floor , and blocking efforts by independent scientists to come up with estimates for the amount of crude spewing into the Gulf each day . 
Ed Markey , who presided over the hearing , said BP would post the footage on the website of his house subcommitte on energy independence and global warming as early as Wednesday night . 
It was delayed but is now live . 
The footage could help defuse rising anger at BP from scientists and news organizations at the oil company 's reluctance even to discuss the size of the spill . 
BP has refused to share data gathered by cameras on its submersible robots . 
Its officials have also insisted repeatedly that it is impossible to determine the size of the spill . 
The lack of disclosure put BP under fire yesterday . 
`` Oil has been spewing into the ocean for 30 days yet the true extent of this spill remains a mystery , '' an angry Markey told the hearing yesterday . 
`` BP thinks this is their ocean so they should control information about the spill . '' 
The Obama administration too was criticised for sticking to its early estimates of 5,000 barrels a day a much lower estimate than those produced by independent scientists . 
The coast guard said this week it was assembling a team of experts to produce an estimate of the spill . 
Earlier yesterday , four independent scientists told Markey 's committee that BP 's refusal to release the footage was blocking independent efforts to estimate the size of the spill . 
Richard Camilli , a scientist at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute , said BP had intitially reached out to experts for help in measuring the spill . 
He was set to fly to Houston to join the effort at 3am on 5 May . 
A day later , BP called off the visit . 
`` The rationale was that they were on a very tight time schedule , '' he said . 
`` The greater priority was to place the containment structure over the main leak '' an effort that failed . 
Frank Muller-Karger , an oceanographer at the University of South Florida , told the hearing the full consequences of the spill or of the chemicals used in the clean-up effort remained unknown . 
`` I think this is a problem we are going to have to live with for years rather than months , '' he said . 
Before last night 's decision , BP had released just two short pieces of video from the ocean floor frustrating scientists who had been trying to estimate the size of the spill . 
But experts still managed to use the first clip , which was barely 30 seconds long and low-resolution , to produce estimates that were many times larger than the Obama administration estimate of 5,000 barrels a day . 
Steve Wereley , an associate professor at Purdue University who was also at yesterday 's briefing , came up with an estimate of 70,000 barrels a day . 
He told the committee yesterday he could not conceive of a scenario where the flow of oil from the ruptured well was only 5,000 barrels a day . 
`` All outsider estimates are considerably higher than BP 's . '' 
