Birds fly over oil on the water near Breton Sound Island , on the southern most tip of the Chandeleur Islands in the Gulf of Mexico , south of Louisiana , April 29 , 2010 . 
LONDON | Fri Apr 30 , 2010 3:26 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc will compensate all those affected by an oil spill from one of its wells in the Gulf of Mexico , said its chief executive , who admitted that the disaster could hit plans to open new areas off the U.S. coast to drilling . 
`` We are taking full responsibility for the spill and we will clean it up , and where people can present legitimate claims for damages we will honor them . 
We are going to be very , very aggressive in all of that , '' Tony Hayward told Reuters in an interview on Friday . 
The massive spill , which started when an oil rig caught fire and sank last week , washed up to wildlife refuges and fishing grounds on the Louisiana coast on Friday . 
The cost to the fishing industry in Louisiana could be $ 2.5 billion , while the impact on tourism along Florida 's panhandle coast could be $ 3 billion , Neil McMahon , analyst at investment firm Bernstein , said in a research note on Friday . 
The spill could also hamper President Barack Obama 's plans to open some offshore areas of the U.S. where oil exploration is currently barred to drilling , Hayward said . 
`` There may be an industry issue around what may or may not be opened , '' he said . 
However the CEO hopes an effective response to the spill , including a flotilla of around 80 vessels and several aircraft , would reassure people about the risks of drilling . 
`` It would be bizarre to say it should n't influence the debate . 
How the debate will come out , I think ultimately will be judged by the success we have in dealing with this incident , '' he said . 
Regulations on drilling safety will also come under scrutiny , Hayward predicted . 
`` Rightly , there will be a reaction . 
Whenever you have something of this significance , it 's right that regulators should look very hard at what they can do to further ensure that something like this never happens again , '' he said . 
He said possible changes could relate to testing of equipment like the blow-out preventer on the ocean floor which failed to operate correctly and shut off the flow of oil , although he added it would be impossible to say how testing could be improved until the cause of the accident was known . 
Failures of blow-out preventers are extremely rare and the equipment is regularly tested . 
The scale of the disaster could also lead to changes in the rules on who is allowed to operate licenses in the deeper waters of the Gulf of Mexico , analysts said . 
The government could limit operating licenses to larger companies -- like BP -- which have the deep pockets and operational capability to mount large cleanup operations . 
BP shares closed down 1.5 percent on Friday , bringing the total drop in the shares since the rig disaster was announced to around 13 percent -- a loss of around $ 20 billion in its market capitalization . 
Analysts expect the final cost of the incident to BP to be under $ 10 billion , and so said the price drop represents a buying opportunity . 
BP has spent the last five years trying to rebuild its reputation in the U.S. , after it took a big hit from a refinery explosion in 2005 in Texas which killed 15 workers and oil and gas leaks in Alaska in 2006 -- both of which regulators blamed on cost-cutting . 
Eleven workers are missing , presumed dead , following the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , which was operated by Swiss-based Transocean Ltd , the largest independent driller in the world . 
BP owns 65 percent of the block in which the well was being drilled , and is field operator . 
U.S. explorer Anadarko Petroleum Corp owns 25 percent . 
The partners in the field are responsible for the cleanup costs on a basis proportionate with their shareholding , although BP has the leadership role because of its operatorship of the block . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Bergin , Editing by Andrew Callus and Gerald E. McCormick -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
That 's exactly what EXXON & Alyeska Pipeline did when the Exxon Valdez hit Bligh Reef . 
And Exxon \* still \* has n't paid up . 
They just keep taking it back to court . 
They 're waiting for all the claimants to die off ... This is just crowd control . 
Once things die down , their excellent , well-educated , high-paid amoral lawyers will get them off the hook . 
WHY was there no safety switch ? 
BP should not only pay for the clean-up , but be fined $ 20 million per day for every day the leak continues . 
They 've had over a week to plan and mobilize whatever is necessary to stop the spill . 
Remember , BP announced right after the oil rig disaster that there was no leak -- I guess 42,000 gallons per day is hard to hide . 
The amount of the leak is n't the announced 42,000 , it is actually at least 200,000 . 
The spin control has started already and the people hurt the most will never be compensated , how do you replace a career ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
