HOUSTON\/SEATTLE , April 30 | Fri Apr 30 , 2010 5:23 pm EDT HOUSTON\/SEATTLE , April 30 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The explosion of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig that caused a massive crude oil slick in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico will cost billions of dollars for the companies that worked on the rig . 
Oil began washing up on Louisiana 's coast and commercial fishing areas on Friday as shrimpers and fishermen and survivors of the blast flooded courthouses with lawsuits . 
`` This is a multi-billion dollar event , '' said Keith Hall , an attorney with the firm Stone Pigman in New Orleans . 
`` There are going to be huge environmental clean-up costs . '' 
The explosion killed 11 workers and sank the rig . 
The oil well , which the companies have been unable to cap , was gushing about 5,000 barrels of crude per day . 
The rig was owned and operated by Zug , Switzerland-based Transocean Ltd RIGN . 
S. British oil major BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- hired Transocean to drill the well , and oilfield services companies Halliburton Co -LRB- HAL . 
N -RRB- and Cameron International Corp -LRB- CAM . 
N -RRB- were also doing work on the rig . 
BP Chief Executive Officer Tony Hayward told Reuters on Friday the company will compensate all those affected by the oil spill . 
-LRB- IDn : nLDE63T1SP -RRB- Oil majors generally do not buy coverage for clean-up costs from spills , as it is too expensive or unavailable . 
The other companies on the project do hold insurance , but Hall said potential liability could outstrip any policy payouts . 
Transocean said its insurance covers the total loss of the Deepwater Horizon and wreck removal . 
The rig had an insured value of $ 560 million . 
-LRB- IDn : nN26150882 -RRB- . 
Cameron International Corp -LRB- CAM . 
N -RRB- , which supplied the device that failed to prevent the well blow out said it had a $ 500 million policy for any claims . 
-LRB- ID : nWEN3872 -RRB- . 
The global insurance industry is already estimating that property insurance losses will likely exceed $ 1 billion , while liability claims could dwarf that and take years to play out . 
Plaintiffs attorney have already targeted the companies with lawsuits seeking compensation for economic loss and loss of life or injury . 
Brent Coon , the Texas lawyer who spearheaded civil litigation against BP in the aftermath of the 2005 explosion at its Texas City , Texas refinery that killed 15 workers , said his firm is representing a worker who survived the explosion in a lawsuit against BP , Transocean Halliburton and Cameron . 
His firm is seeking a temporary restraining order against the companies to mandate that they preserve all documents and e-mails related to the disaster in anticipation of drawn-out litigation . 
Coon 's client , Stephen Stone , 24 , of Katy , Texas , was asleep when the explosion happened and escaped on a lifeboat . 
`` It 's like being in a war , to be caught in those kind of infernos with people screaming and not knowing whether you 'll live or die , '' Coon said . 
At least four lawsuits naming all or some of the companies have been filed in U.S. District Court in New Orleans , attorney Hall said . 
Shrimpers in Louisiana and Alabama have filed class-action lawsuits against the companies claiming anticipated economic losses from the disaster . 
-LRB- ID : nN29134097 -RRB- . 
Oilfield service company Halliburton Co -LRB- HAL . 
N -RRB- provided cementing on the well to stabilize its walls . 
BP also faces costs related to the U.S. Oil Pollution Act of 1990 -- enacted after the Exxon Mobil Corp -LRB- XOM . 
N -RRB- Valdez spill -- and the U.S. Clean Water Act . 
The Valdez spill of 250,000 barrels of oil into the Prince William Sound in Alaska cost Exxon about nearly $ 4 billion in compensatory payments , cleanup payments , settlements and fines , according to the company 's web site . 
Oil rig accidents bring a patchwork of regular insurance coverage , reinsurance , and self-insurance mechanisms , said Claire Wilkinson at the U.S. Insurance Information Institute , the industry 's trade group . 
`` The great unknown here will be the environmental pollution liability issue . 
These kinds of events take many years to unfold , '' she said . 
`` You could draw a parallel with Exxon Valdez -- 20 years later , the final costs are still unknown . '' 
Munich Re -LRB- MUVGn . 
DE -RRB- , the world 's biggest reinsurer , has said it could pay up to $ 100 million for the accident , but warned that it is too early to calculate the toll . 
Bermuda 's PartnerRe -LRB- PRE . 
N -RRB- expects to pay claims of up to $ 70 million . 
Even if losses exceed $ 1 billion , it does not appear to be an insurance industry-threatening event . 
The closest comparison is the explosion of the Piper Alpha rig off the British coast in 1988 , killing 167 , which ended up costing insurers $ 3.6 billion in today 's dollars , according to Swiss Re . 
By comparison , insurers put the price tag of the 2001 attack on New York 's World Trade Center at $ 23 billion in today 's dollars . 
Hurricane Katrina , which ravaged the U.S. Gulf Coast , cost insurers $ 71 billion . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
`` B. S. ! '' 
Fossil fuels are a burden , as well as those who ignore this , `` YOU ? '' 
Now you know why ! 
Wake up and learn a lesson and pay attention to what your about to read . 
People like us are fuming mad and this says it all ! 
Do you like to watch your gulf change colors to Black ? 
How do you think this will affect the wild life and conservation of this earth ? 
Are you people so STUPID not to listen ? 
Yes , you are so stupid not to listen . 
If there ever was a more stupid group of beings your all of what is required . 
But what do you do ? 
Walk around with NO brains and sitting on them . 
Now that not only goes for those of the gulf coast , but every one of you idiots that reads this and thinking `` who the hell does this guy think he is ? '' 
When the hell are you going to realize we do n't need fossil fuels ? 
When are you going to realize the professionals have all stopped researching for the energy we all need ? 
So wake up before it 's to late ! 
You dummies that 's correct ! 
They have all gone off researching in a field that is so complex they do n't know which end of a stick is which ! 
And you are so stupid to believe they will find the answers ! 
That they can solve a simple situation with another complex problem ! 
What do you want ? 
Life , DISASTER or disease and more complexity in life under a sick society , Lead by a false godliness ? 
You have been sitting on your brains ignoring the ONLY profound energy research , We have been asking for help for many years , Since 1980 . 
Just a simple , but small donation . 
No , not only to keep the wolf away from the door . 
But to help us completely eliminate the total use of all fossil fuels , You ignore the only research that has any potential , to completely stop the extinction of life . 
We gave up asking with a website , But took it off , because of lack of interest from ignorant people like all of you ! 
Do you not realize this energy will absolutely replace the use of all fossil fuels . 
The FACT remains NO ONE is doing this research for constant magnetic acceleration . 
Every one is off on a tangent so far off from solving this problem . 
If you believe that your leaders will solve the dilemma they created , you are more stupid than you actually are letting on ! 
What you see today will get worse ! 
That goes double for all of you so called GODLY people ! 
Your bible tells and speaks of all the death and destruction coming to this earth . 
Can you NOT see the idiots you are by allowing your government and industry leaders to flounder the earth for the greed and selfishness of a dollar ? 
You pray and ask amiss . 
You do n't see any damned thing of good happening . 
Do some thing right for a change ! 
Wake up before it 's to late . 
When you wait and do nothing , you are a fool just like the bible says you are ! 
Why do you think Christ said , `` it 's better to live among the meek and lowly than to rule among fools . '' 
That includes the followers of your leaders . 
Can you NOT see you idiot Americans of your money it says `` in God we trust '' Since when did God say to worship the all mighty dollar ? 
That goes for every one on this planet , so do n't think your the only ones being told the truth . 
Go ahead and carry on like nothing has happened , You will continue to destroy this earth by doing absolutely nothing . 
Development of destruction for and by the OIL industry , of a select few . 
just so these people are the only ones to work and make a so called good living . 
The fight over a necessary evil of oil will continue in all the water 's of this earth . 
You brainless people , Destroy the water and sea life and you kill this earth . 
You hear all the big hypocrite names of society including all the dummies of Hollywood , fighting for a better society asking to help the underprivileged of the 3rd world while ignoring the main problems of society -LRB- your followers of a Satanic leadership -RRB- . 
-LRB- Satan , A silent God seeking the destruction there of this earth ! 
just to line a pocket -RRB- When you had the time and the right to stop this before it 's to late . 
Think these big names of society will save the north with their plea for help ? 
`` B.S. '' Your all sick not doing enough except eat , sleep , drink and be merry , You fool . 
Now who is going to pay for all of this ? 
Who is also going to make a fortune from cleaning up this mess , While you should ask who NOW will benefit , and from prior to the mess they made ? 
Is it the same group of people just playing foolish games with the life of this earth ? 
YOUR CHILDREN 'S FUTURE ! 
Who 's destroying it for what ? 
`` MONEY '' That 's all they 're interested in . 
They do n't know how to give , LOVE ! 
You and they should all be ashamed of yourselves . 
All these years we have NEVER asked for a fortune , but only enough to help get us by . 
If you do n't believe us , remember to put your head between your legs and kiss it good bye ! 
We are as honest as the day is light and have told you exactly how we see it . 
Your stupid media reporting system stinks ! 
While their aim is to repeatedly bombard you with useless advertising , for the same idiots ruining this earth . 
They do all this and do n't speak up against the leaders of HELL . 
Allowing them to continue their agenda . 
That goes double for all you green movement groups , We been asking you for help that you ignored . 
We were told not to use such adjectives . 
But what other language do you idiots understand ? 
This earth belongs to everyone , NOT JUST YOU ! 
Blame those who for no other reason want more than they need . 
Do you think these leaders from the oil companies will be footing the bill ? 
You can bet your bottom dollar it 's not coming out of their personal pockets , Where it should come from ! 
But your money as a tax payer shall be paying for the clean up . 
Not only with your money but with lose of wild life and the ecology of the gulf . 
Where are these green groups ? 
Are they screaming disaster ? 
No their brains are stuck in AWE ! 
While their brains are stagnant over the mess . 
They 'll show up sooner or later with mediocre plaques etc. . 
Mean while your debt gets greater and their pockets get filled . 
Where 's all these groups along with your philanthropists , big mouths when this happened ? 
Oops , sorry if I offended all of you that are collecting the big dividends on oil stocks ! 
When the oil is no longer needed , Who will you blame for your loss ? 
You will wish you had invested a little some thing in C.M.A. energy research . 
Well when that happens , `` SORRY IT 'S TO LATE ! '' 
Stop the use of fossil fuels -LRB- NOW -RRB- by Donating to , % D Chura -LRB- that 's to prevent theft by mail etc -RRB- Wow . 
blah , blah , blah . 
BP is going to lose 1\/2 its market value on this whole disaster . 
BP should be forced to make a larger percentage of its own workers labor to clean the spill , including and especially the executives . 
Why is it that they are n't made to labor visibly and publicly to clean up their own mess ? 
That 's what a truly responsible set of leaders would do with such an awful disaster ; admit responsibility , then work as hard as possible to fix it . 
Why can they just say , as they have been saying , that they are `` trying with their best efforts '' ? 
We all know that they should be doing much more and that they will yet keep waiting for others to bail them out . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
