It is the duty of the young to go to the barricades for foolish causes , but today 's students would rather drink than demonstrate Wednesday 27 April 2005 01.50 BST At a recent Oxbridge dinner , I heard a college dean remark that he had taken part in two political demonstrations lately , one against the Iraq war and the other against the ban on foxhunting . 
By contrast , it was some years since his students had marched further than the pub . 
When undergraduates were told about a forthcoming rent review , college authorities awaited a howl of outrage . 
Instead , to their amazement , the proposal was received with polite acquiescence . 
This was not because the students in question are rich . 
Rather , it is because few today are willing to rouse themselves to protest about anything at all . 
Our conversation about all this seemed comic . 
Here we were , a gathering of men and women of whom few were under 40 and most a good deal more , lamenting campus tranquillity . 
It is fair to suggest that more anger was apparent at our dinner table about the shortcomings of Blair 's government , the Iraq war and WMD , than among a host of twenty-somethings in their rooms across the quad . 
Evidence suggests that this lack of student excitement is endemic , as it has been for a couple of decades . 
There are pockets of activism . 
The Iraq war prompted one huge spasm of protest in London , but this was exceptional . 
How can we be surprised that the Apathy party is likely to prevail at this general election ? 
If the best-educated section of British voters do not see any point in making a fuss , then why should millions living in relative economic contentment up and down the land ? 
Real anger today seems the privilege of a small metropolitan circle focused on the media , though characteristically many of its members kid themselves that they reflect popular views . 
I never thought I should hear myself , well , protesting , about student inertia . 
In the 1960s and thereafter , when successive generations of long-haired weirdos seemed never to leave the streets , when a banner was a more important part of a student 's equipment than his library ticket , I was a cross little Conservative . 
My kind watched in disdain as university faculty buildings were trashed , files ransacked , teachers abused . 
There seemed a silliness about many protests , which attained its nadir in the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament . 
The eagerness of Foots and Benns to offer a cry of anguish against their own society as a substitute for rational thought about the threat from the Soviet Union appeared pathetic . 
Forty years on , it seems much easier than I found it then to recognize how important it is for the young to be angry about something - it does not much matter what . 
Old Jacob Bronowski , a 60s figure if ever there was one , was surely right when he wrote about university life in 1973 : `` It is important that students bring a certain ragamuffin , barefoot irreverence to their studies ; they are not here to worship what is known , but to question it . '' 
This principle obviously extends beyond the lecture room , to life . 
Today , I feel a respect for the 60s protesters -LRB- if not for the decade 's violent extremists -RRB- that at the time I lacked the imagination to muster . 
True , they were often protesting for the fun of the game , rather than because they had thought coherently about the merits of the cause . 
Their enthusiasm for Mao Zedong and Ho Chi Minh -LRB- no liberal democrat , he -RRB- was absurdly naive , as even Jane Fonda concedes . 
Yet they were right that the Vietnam war was a barbaric American folly . 
It was good that they shouted slogans and asked questions , because somebody had to . 
Maybe even the CND protesters contributed something , by articulating revulsion . 
The wise men on both sides of the Atlantic knew that a nuclear conflict meant the end of civilisation , but we now know that some generals , on the American as well as the Soviet side , were occasionally tempted to think otherwise . 
All this brings us back to today 's students . 
It is said that they are too preoccupied with the struggle to prepare themselves to find jobs to have time for political frivolities . 
These are the university kids whom Camille Paglia described contemptuously as `` an army of pedestrian , toadying careerists '' . 
I do not buy this line . 
Even if a minority are working harder than we ever did , most still have plenty of leisure . 
They simply choose to spend it in different ways . 
They would rather drink than demonstrate . 
They are more passionate about sport than the fate of Iraq . 
It seems bizarre to be promoting the cause of student activism . 
Yet surely anyone who cares about British democracy should be bothered about our culture of acquiescence , not least in the re-election of a British prime minister who committed the nation to war on the basis of massive falsehoods , some of George Bush 's making but most of his own . 
Where are the Peter Hains , Jack Straws , Tariq Alis ? 
Where is the fierce , intolerant conviction that old men and women are getting it wrong , that it is time for a new generation to seize the levers ? 
The excuse will not wash that life has become so serious that , for a student , self-preservation is all . 
It seems more plausible that the young are succumbing to the material complacency that is paralysing the peoples of several western democracies , rendering them apparently unwilling to consider idealistic issues at all . 
They profess some interest in the environment . 
They want to save whales , but it is hard to imagine them renouncing the wares of Sony and Sanyo in the cause , as the Hains renounced apartheid sherry . 
They are dismayed by horrors in Africa , but would rather spend Saturday afternoon watching Man U than demonstrating outside Downing Street about western supineness . 
They shrug : what difference can we make ? 
Yet the young are supposed to cherish vain hopes and go to the barricades for foolish causes . 
A world in which a college dean protests while his students swot in their rooms or head for the pub is topsy-turvy indeed . 
It does not matter what they protest about , if they will only bestir themselves to become agitated about something . 
They might even demonstrate against Peter Hain . 
