What was the legal advice ? 
Three days before the first US missiles hit Baghdad , Lord Goldsmith , the attorney general , answered a question in the Lords on the legal basis for the use of military force . 
In nine short paragraphs he set out his reasoning : that even without the `` second resolution '' UK diplomats had been frantically trying to secure , existing UN resolutions permitted an invasion . 
His argument was that the security council 's authorisation for the 1991 Gulf war -LRB- resolution 678 -RRB- could be reactivated if Iraq were found to be in material breach of its ceasefire conditions -LRB- resolution 687 -RRB- . 
Since resolution 1441 , unanimously passed the previous November , stated that Iraq had not `` fully complied with its obligations to disarm '' , the authority to use force was automatically revived , Lord Goldsmith wrote . 
His view was that if the resolution demanded another meeting of the security council to authorise war it would have said so . 
All 1441 required , he wrote , was `` discussion by the security council of the Iraq 's failures '' . 
Key UN personnel including Kofi Annan , the secretary general , and Hans Blix , the chief weapons inspector , later disputed the legal status of the invasion under international law . 
Plenty of international lawyers also disagree with the reasoning of Lord Goldsmith 's nine paragraphs . 
Tony Blair , the prime minister , insists the written answer of March 17 was a `` fair summary '' of the advice he was given and Lord Goldsmith said it was `` consistent '' with the longer document . 
But leaked documents and disclosures suggest the full 13 pages Lord Goldsmith wrote for the prime minister 10 days before were more ambiguous . 
A summary of the advice , obtained by the Guardian and Channel 4 News , said resolution 1441 was `` capable in principle '' of reauthorising 678 -LRB- the gist of his written answer -RRB- but it added two qualifications omitted on March 17 . 
First , that the language of 1441 suggests `` differences of view within the -LRB- security -RRB- council '' on the legal impact of 1441 so the safest legal course would be to secure a second resolution . 
Second , that the eventual argument he did deploy - the reactivation of 678 - would only be `` sustainable if there are strong factual grounds for concluding Iraq has failed to take the final opportunity '' to comply with the Gulf war ceasefire . 
`` In other words , '' read the summary of Lord Goldsmith 's advice to the prime minister , `` we would need to demonstrate hard evidence of non-compliance and non-cooperation . 
Given the structure of the resolution as a whole , the views of Unmovic and the IAEA -LRB- the two UN weapons inspections authorities -RRB- will be highly significant in this respect . '' 
What were the views of the weapons inspectors ? 
Hans Blix , the head of Unmovic , moved to the opinion that Iraq was beginning to comply with 1441 's call for it demonstrate it had disarmed . 
On February 14 2003 he delivered a report to the security council listing examples of Iraqi compliance and questioning some of the US intelligence behind Colin Powell UN presentation on Saddam Hussein 's weapons programs . 
He followed up on February 28 with a more mixed assessment but marked out Iraq 's commitment to comply with a deadline to destroy its illegal Samoud 2 missiles as a positive development . 
The Swede 's final report to the council , delivered on March 7 , was also ambivalent but Mr Blix stressed the disarmament under way : `` We are not watching the destruction of toothpicks , '' he told the security council . 
Mr Blix 's reports divided security council opinion . 
March 7 , the day Lord Goldsmith suggested a second resolution to authorise force would offer the `` safest legal course '' and the day of the final Unmovic report , was the day this second resolution became increasingly unlikely . 
Jack Straw , the foreign secretary , proposed the UN set an ultimatum for Iraq to demonstrate `` full , unconditional , immediate and active cooperation '' by March 17 , but France made it clear it would veto such a resolution . 
Britain then proposed setting `` six tests '' for Iraq to meet if it was to avoid war . 
The idea galvanised some diplomatic support but not enough to suggest Britain and the US could win a second resolution . 
On March 12 , with the hope of a such a resolution fading , Admiral Sir Michael Boyce , chief of defense staff , asked the prime minister for an unequivocal statement on the legality of war under resolution 1441 . 
The next day , Lord Goldsmith saw Lord Falconer and Baroness Morgan , two of Mr Blair 's closest advisers , at an unminuted Downing Street meeting , and expressed his `` clear view '' that war would be lawful under 1441 . 
Did Lord Goldsmith change his mind ? 
Previous disclosures suggest he did . 
Elizabeth Wilmshurst , deputy legal adviser to the Foreign Office , resigned in March 2003 because she did not believe war with Iraq was legal . 
Her letter setting out why said Lord Goldsmith `` gave us to understand '' he agreed with Foreign Office lawyers that the war was illegal without a new UN resolution but changed his advice twice just before the war to bring it in line with `` what is now the official line '' . 
The summary certainly reveals doubts . 
The attorney general says in conclusion that he could not be sure that if the `` reasonable case '' for reactivating 678 -LRB- the case that became the nine published paragraphs -RRB- ever came to court `` the court would agree with the view '' . 
This detail - and the reference that the published argument was one he heard in Washington - appear to make for a tricky week ahead for the prime minister . 
