Wednesday 27 April 2005 16.50 BST Private Johnson Beharry after receiving his Victoria Cross for his deeds in Iraq . 
Photograph : Fiona Hanson\/PA The Iraq war hero Johnson Beharry , who twice saved the crew of his armored vehicle from ambushes , received the Victoria Cross today and was told by the Queen : `` You 're very special . '' 
Private Beharry , 25 , who is originally from the Caribbean island of Grenada , is the first person to receive Britain 's highest military honor since the Falklands war in 1982 and the first living recipient of a VC since 1965 . 
It is thought that his actions in Iraq saved the lives of more than 30 of his colleagues . 
Speaking today after receiving the medal at a ceremony at Buckingham Palace , Pte Beharry , of the Princess of Wales 's Royal Regiment , said the Queen had told him that `` she does n't get to present the VC very often '' . 
Pte Beharry , from Tidworth , Hampshire , was struck by a bullet as he guided a Warrior armored convoy through the flashpoint Iraqi town of Al-Amara last May . 
He jumped into a hail of bullets three times to rescue injured colleagues before driving his vehicle to safety . 
A month later , he saved more lives during another ferocious fire fight and suffered serious head injuries when a rocket-propelled grenade -LRB- RPG -RRB- exploded a foot away from his head . 
As blood poured into his eyes , he managed to reverse his Warrior out of the ambush before he lost consciousness and went into a coma . 
Still recovering from his wounds and bearing a scar across his forehead , he said today : `` I know I 'm lucky to be alive . 
Every day in Iraq , when I went out on patrol , I thought I would n't be coming back - then at the end of the day I thought , ` That was a lucky one . ' '' 
The citation for his VC reads : `` For his repeated extreme gallantry and unquestioned valor , despite intense direct attacks , personal injury and damage to his vehicle in the face of relentless enemy action , Pte Beharry deserves the highest possible recognition . '' 
But Pte Beharry , who was accompanied to the palace by his wife , Lynthia , and his aunt Irene and uncle Raymond , played down his bravery . 
`` When I hear what I did , I ca n't really believe it was me . 
But what I did was my choice - I knew I had to get everyone out because I would n't have been able to live with myself otherwise . 
I think it 's the training that just kicks in , '' he said . 
He said celebrations had been put on hold during his recovery . 
`` There 's too much happening at the moment , '' he said . 
`` I never dreamt this would happen to me ; I never thought I 'd meet so many important people . 
`` I 'm still receiving treatment for my injuries - I 'm getting physio and seeing specialists - so I 'm limited in what I can do . 
I hope to return to service but I do n't know when that will be and I would go back to Iraq if I had to . '' 
Pte Beharry was joined at today 's ceremony by around 140 other British troops awarded honors for their service around the world . 
His commanding officers , Lieutenant Colonel Matthew Maer and Major James Coote , received the Distinguished Service Order for their leadership during the campaign . 
`` Pte Beharry 's actions were superb , '' said Lt Col Maer . 
`` The VC is hard won and he is following in a long and distinguished line of people awarded the honor . 
All of us , in the army and the nation , should be proud of him . 
And we should be proud of all the other recipients of honors won in Iraq - they reflect a team effort . '' 
Pte Beharry moved to the UK from Grenada in 1999 and worked as a painter and decorator before becoming a British soldier in 2001 . 
He is one of a growing number of troops recruited into the army from the Commonwealth . 
He is the first to be awarded the VC since Lieutenant Colonel H Jones and Sergeant Ian McKay received posthumous awards after the Falklands war against Argentina . 
Today Pte Beharry outranked Britain 's top soldier , General Sir Michael Jackson , for the day . 
The junior soldier 's investiture took precedence to the general 's who received the honor of Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath . 
When news of Pte Beharry 's VC was announced in March , Sir Michael said he had never felt more proud of the British army . 
Meanwhile , Ellen MacArthur , who broke the record for sailing solo around the world in February , became Dame Ellen . 
At 28 , the yachtswoman is the youngest person to receive the honor . 
Actress Anna Massey collected a CBE - invested as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire - for services to drama . 
