Wednesday 27 April 2005 07.20 BST The Gulf state of Qatar is considering privatising its satellite TV channel , al-Jazeera , because of pressure from the US and a de facto advertising boycott by Arab countries offended by its critical coverage . 
Reporters at the station fear that if the channel is privatised commercial pressures could force it to tone down its coverage . 
Al-Jazeera 's coverage of politics has embroiled Qatar in disputes with almost all of its neighbors , including Saudi Arabia and Iran . 
According to Wadah Khanfar , the station 's director , the consultancy firm Ernst and Young has been hired to look into possible privatisation models , though he said no final decision had yet been taken . 
Reporters fear that the power of advertisers and shareholders could lead to self-censorship if the channel is privatised . 
Because of its taboo-breaking coverage al-Jazeera has an audience of some 35-40 million but attracts few advertisers . 
Saudi Arabia leads the de facto advert boycott , which al-Jazeera 's head of business news , Ahmed Abdul Mohsen al-Qady , described as `` the only thing the Arab information ministers can all agree on '' . 
In the absence of ad revenues a government subsidy keeps the station afloat . 
It is also feared that powerful Saudis would buy the station if shares were floated on Qatar 's stock market . 
The pan-Arab satellite station , founded in 1996 , helped to start the Arab world 's media revolution . 
Along with the internet , satellite television means autocracies can no longer monopolise the flow of information . 
A viewer in neighbouring Bahrain said : `` A critical station is something completely new in this region . 
We have never before had a TV program or a newspaper that criticises the government . '' 
Qatar is unapologetically pro-US , which is unusual in a region where rulers often denounce Washington to domestic audiences . 
It hosted US forces during the Iraq war . 
But Washington objects to some of al-Jazeera 's coverage , including that of al-Qaida , the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and Iraq . 
Hans Wechsel , regional director of the US state department 's Middle East partnership initiative , said : `` We have issues with them giving a platform to people who are calling for violence . 
It 's not a matter of government interference , it 's strictly an issue of ethics . 
After all , we raise ethical concerns with journalists in the US too . '' 
But Hafez al-Mirazi , an Egyptian who runs the channel 's Washington bureau , said : `` The US must know that the country hosting their airbase is not funding al-Qaida . 
They just have a problem with us showing any civilian casualties in Iraq . '' 
Mr Mirazi , who previously worked for Voice Of America , added : `` The White House has been spoilt by Fox News . 
The current administration is unusually sensitive to any criticism . 
The situation now is ` either you 're just like Fox , or you 're against us ' . '' 
Some say the station represents a big step forward for Arab democracy , which Washington advocates . 
Mouafac Harb , director of al-Jazeera 's less popular US-funded rival , al-Hurra , said : `` Al-Jazeera has hijacked the role of the mosque as the primary source of information and views . 
Al-Jazeera is the only political process in the Middle East . '' 
In a region where there is intense anti-US sentiment a private-sector al-Jazeera could well be more critical of the superpower . 
At present the station invites US officials to put forward their point of view . 
Hugh Miles , the author of Al-Jazeera : How Arab TV News Challenged The World , said : `` They have shown five hours of bin Laden 's speeches in total - and 500 hours of Bush . '' 
Qatar , a tiny emirate whose population is 700,000 , was a minnow in regional politics until it discovered it was sitting on the world 's third-biggest gas reserves . 
Now the country is punching above its weight in Arab politics . 
`` Al-Jazeera put this country on the map , '' said Mr Qady , speaking in the Qatari capital of Doha . 
`` Who had heard of Qatar before ? '' 
