Conservative party co-chairman , Liam Fox , and shadow chief secretary to the treasury , George Osborne , unveil the latest Conservative campaign poster . 
Photograph : Daniel Berehulak\/Getty Michael Howard yesterday paved the way for a bitter end to the general election when the Tories launched a nationwide poster campaign explicitly condemning Tony Blair as a liar . 
In an echo of the Conservatives ' notorious `` demon eyes '' of 1997 , the leadership unveiled a poster of a shifty-looking Mr Blair standing next to a stark message . 
`` If he 's prepared to lie to take us to war , he 's prepared to lie to win an election , '' it says in black lettering on a dark red background . 
In a play on Labor 's latest message imploring people to vote for what they value , it adds : `` If you value the truth , vote for it . '' 
Mr Howard was last night unapologetic about the poster , which includes language that would be ruled out of order in the House of Commons . 
`` I 'm a very direct person . 
I say it as it is , '' he said during a visit to Birmingham . 
`` Character is an issue at this election . 
It is about trust . '' 
At his morning press conference , Mr Howard defended his decision to describe the prime minister as a liar for three reasons : The so called `` dodgy dossier '' of February 2003 , which the prime minister claimed was based on intelligence but was in fact `` pulled off '' the internet ; The prime minister 's claim in September 2002 that intelligence about Iraqi weapons of mass destruction was `` extensive , detailed and authoritative '' when Lord Butler depicted it in his report last year as `` limited , sporadic and patchy '' ; The prime minister and Lord Goldsmith , the attorney general , had `` directly contradicted each other '' about advice on the legality of the Iraq war . 
The poster is a gamble for Mr Howard - on the day after he admitted he was `` two goals down '' - because he was such an enthusiastic supporter of military action . 
But he believes that voters across the spectrum , including opponents and supporters of the war , will share his belief that Iraq highlighted wider questions about the prime minister 's trustworthiness . 
One aide said : `` Trust really is the fundamental issue . 
War is the lightning conductor but he lied on top-up fees . 
So Michael is saying you ca n't trust Labor on tax - because of the 66 stealth taxes - and you ca n't trust him on health because he said in 1997 there was 24 hours to save the NHS . 
Can you trust anyone who says that and then fails to deliver ? '' 
Labor will have mixed feelings about the poster because the prime minister needs no reminding that anger about Iraq has made him one of the party 's main liabilities . 
But Labor strategists believe the Tories ' decision to attack him in such personal terms shows Mr Howard `` has nothing to say '' about the voters ' main concerns on schools and hospitals . 
In a sign that the Tories are embarking on a negative end to the campaign , one of Australia 's toughest political operators has flown in to help the party . 
Mark Textor , who has allegedly deployed the US tactic of `` push polling '' to spread damaging information about opponents under the guise of questions , was photographed by the Labor party entering Tory HQ . 
The Conservatives said they had never hidden the fact that Mr Textor , a business partner of the party 's Australian campaign director , Lynton Crosby , would help out . 
