Ruined , cordoned Falluja is emerging as the decade 's monument to brutality Wednesday 27 April 2005 17.57 BST Robert Zoellick is the archetypal US government insider , a man with a brilliant technical mind but zero experience of any coalface or war front . 
Sliding effortlessly between ivy league academia , the US treasury and corporate boardrooms -LRB- including an advisory post with the scandalous Enron -RRB- , his latest position is the number-two slot at the state department . 
Yet this ultimate `` man of the suites '' did something earlier this month that put the prime minister and the foreign secretary to shame . 
On their numerous visits to Iraq , neither has ever dared to go outside the heavily fortified green zones of Baghdad and Basra to see life as Iraqis have to live it . 
They come home after photo opportunities , briefings and pep talks with British troops and claim to know what is going on in the country they invaded , when in fact they have seen almost nothing . 
Zoellick , by contrast , on his first trip to Iraq , asked to see Falluja . 
A city of some 300,000 , which was alleged to be the stronghold of armed resistance to the occupation . 
Two US attempts were made to destroy this symbol of defiance last year . 
The first , in April , fizzled out after Iraqi politicians , including many who supported the invasion of their country , condemned the use of air strikes to terrorise an entire city . 
The Americans called off the attack , but not before hundreds of families had fled and more than 600 people had been killed . 
Six months later the Americans tried again . 
This time Washington 's allies had been talked to in advance . 
Consistent US propaganda about the presence in Falluja of a top al-Qaida figure , Abu Musab al-Zarqawi , was used to create a climate of acquiescence in the US-appointed Iraqi government . 
Shia leaders were told that bringing Falluja under control was the only way to prevent a Sunni-inspired civil war . 
Blair was invited to share responsibility by sending British troops to block escape routes from Falluja and prevent supplies entering once the siege began . 
Warnings of the onslaught prompted the vast majority of Falluja 's 300,000 people to flee . 
The city was then declared a free-fire zone on the grounds that the only people left behind must be `` terrorists '' . 
Three weeks after the attack was launched last November , the Americans claimed victory . 
They say they killed about 1,300 people ; one week into the siege , a BBC reporter put the unofficial death toll at 2,000 . 
But details of what happened and who the dead were remain obscure . 
Were many unarmed civilians , as Baghdad-based human rights groups report ? 
Even if they were trying to defend their homes by fighting the Americans , does that make them `` terrorists '' ? 
Journalists `` embedded '' with US forces filmed atrocities , including the killing of a wounded prisoner , but no reporter could get anything like a full picture . 
Since the siege ended , tight US restric tions - as well as the danger of hostage-taking that prevents reporters from traveling in most parts of Iraq - have put the devastated city virtually off limits . 
In this context Zoellick 's trip , which was covered by a small group of US journalists , was illuminating . 
The deputy secretary of state had to travel to this `` liberated '' city in a Black Hawk helicopter flying low over palm trees to avoid being shot down . 
He wore a flak jacket under his suit even though Falluja 's streets were largely deserted . 
His convoy of eight armored vehicles went `` so quickly past an open-air bakery reopened with a US-provided micro-loan that workers tossing dough could be glanced only in the blink of an eye , '' as the Washington Post reported . 
`` Blasted husks of buildings still line block after block , '' the journalist added . 
Meeting hand-picked Iraqis in a US base , Zoellick was bombarded with complaints about the pace of US reconstruction aid and frequent intimidation of citizens by American soldiers . 
Although a state department factsheet claimed 95 % of residents had water in their homes , Falluja 's mayor said it was contaminated by sewage and unsafe . 
Other glimpses of life in Falluja come from Dr Hafid al-Dulaimi , head of the city 's compensation commission , who reports that 36,000 homes were destroyed in the US onslaught , along with 8,400 shops . 
Sixty nurseries and schools were ruined , along with 65 mosques and religious sanctuaries . 
Daud Salman , an Iraqi journalist with the Institute for War and Peace Reporting , on a visit to Falluja two weeks ago , found that only a quarter of the city 's residents had gone back . 
Thousands remain in tents on the outskirts . 
The Iraqi Red Crescent finds it hard to go in to help the sick because of the US cordon around the city . 
Burhan Fasa'a , a cameraman for the Lebanese Broadcasting Company , reported during the siege that dead family members were buried in their gardens because people could not leave their homes . 
Refugees told one of us that civilians carrying white flags were gunned down by American soldiers . 
Corpses were tied to US tanks and paraded around like trophies . 
Justin Alexander , a volunteer for Christian Peacemaker Teams , recently found hundreds living in tents in the grounds of their homes , or in a single patched-up room . 
A strict system of identity cards blocks access to anyone whose papers give a birthplace outside Falluja , so long-term residents born elsewhere can not go home . 
`` Fallujans feel the remnants of their city have been turned into a giant prison , '' he reports . 
Many complain that soldiers of the Iraqi national guard , the fledgling new army , loot shops during the night-time curfew and detain people in order to take a bribe for their release . 
They are suspected of being members of the Badr Brigade , a Shia militia that wants revenge against Sunnis . 
One thing is certain : the attack on Falluja has done nothing to still the insurgency against the US-British occupation nor produced the death of al-Zarqawi - any more than the invasion of Afghanistan achieved the capture or death of Osama bin Laden . 
Thousands of bereaved and homeless Falluja families have a new reason to hate the US and its allies . 
At least Zoellick went to see . 
He gave no hint of the impression that the trip left him with , but is too smart not to have understood something of the reality . 
The lesson ought not to be lost on Blair and Straw . 
Every time the prime minister claims it is time to `` move on '' from the issue of the war 's legality and rejoice at Iraq 's transformation since Saddam Hussein was toppled , the answer must be : `` Remember Falluja . '' 
When the foreign secretary next visits Iraq , he should put on a flak jacket and tour the city that Britain had a share in destroying . 
The government keeps hoping Iraq will go away as an election issue . 
It stubbornly refuses to do so . 
Voters are not only angry that the war was illegal , illegitimate and unnecessary . 
The treatment inflicted on Iraqis since the invasion by the US and Britain is equally important . 
In the 1930s the Spanish city of Guernica became a symbol of wanton murder and destruction . 
In the 1990s Grozny was cruelly flattened by the Russians ; it still lies in ruins . 
This decade 's unforgettable monument to brutality and overkill is Falluja , a text-book case of how not to handle an insurgency , and a reminder that unpopular occupations will always degenerate into desperation and atrocity . 
Jonathan Steele is the Guardian 's senior foreign correspondent ; Dahr Jamail is a freelance American journalist . 
