Turkish border guards have been ordered to allow Syrians in More than 2,000 people have already crossed the border , Ankara says . 
The UN 's human rights chief has condemned Syria 's treatment of its people as `` unacceptable '' . 
Meanwhile , Brazil has become the latest nation - after China and Russia - to express concern over a proposed UN resolution to condemn Syria 's actions . 
Brazilian Foreign Minister Antonio Patriota said such a resolution could inflame tensions in the Middle East . 
`` Syria is a very pivotal country when you look at Middle East stability . 
The last thing we want to do is to contribute to exacerbating tensions in what could be considered one of the most tense regions in the world . '' 
The draft - proposed by Britain and France - stops short of authorising concrete action , but even so it is not clear when or if it might be put to a vote , correspondents say . 
Russia and China have already said they strongly oppose the resolution , with Moscow insisting that Damascus must settle its internal conflict without any foreign interference . 
Owen Bennett-Jones BBC News , Yayladagi Yayladagi is now home to hundreds of refugees living in white canvas tents provided by the Red Crescent . 
The people living in the camp are prevented by the Turkish authorities from speaking to the media , but others who are mingling with the Turkish population more generally and living with relatives are giving some accounts of what is happening in Syria . 
One group of three who has just reached Turkey says there are now 50 tanks around Jisr al-Shughour and they have little doubt about what will happen . 
But the military seems to be taking its time . 
And if , as a Syrian government spokesperson suggests , the army does go on the offensive in north-west Syria , then the scale of the population movement could be substantially increased . 
Russian foreign ministry spokesman Alexander Lukashevich said Moscow was against such a move because the situation in Syria did not threaten international peace and security . 
The anticipated crackdown on Jisr al-Shughour is in response to claims by Damascus that armed gangs killed 120 members of the security forces there . 
It says local residents have requested the army 's intervention to restore peace and quiet . 
But dissenting accounts say the violence was sparked by deserting soldiers , and that loyal troops have massacred peaceful civilians . 
Human rights groups say more than 1,100 people have been killed since protests began in February against the rule of President Bashar al-Assad , and it now appears several hundred security forces may also have died . 
In the town of Yayladagi on the Turkish side of the Syrian border , many refugees are sheltering in a tent city run by the Red Crescent , says the BBC 's Owen Bennett-Jones , who is there . 
There are plans to set up a second camp in Altinozu . 
A Turkish official who spoke anonymously earlier told the BBC the influx of Syrians was sharply increasing , and that the latest arrivals included several dozen wounded in security crackdowns . 
Most of the refugees were too frightened to speak to our correspondent . 
But one man , who spoke on condition his identity be concealed , said he had made a three-hour trek from Jisr al-Shughour , dodging Syrian soldiers along the way . 
`` The circumstances there are very difficult , '' the man told our correspondent . 
`` They are planning to invade . '' 
He said an estimated 30,000 Syrian soldiers were massing in a nearby village - but added that hundreds of soldiers had also deserted and were also gathering on the border hoping to make an escape into Turkey . 
Another refugee said 13 or 14 tanks were now surrounding Jisr al-Shughour . 
The refugees ' testimony can not be independently verified , but appears to chime with the testimony of others , such as `` Youssef '' , an unofficial spokesman for the refugees who spoke to the BBC World Service . 
Most international journalists have been denied entry into Syria . 
Reem Haddad said : '' They are fleeing from the armed groups who have massacred 120 people '' Reem Haddad , a spokeswoman for the Syrian information ministry , confirmed in an interview with the BBC that Syrian troops were gathering around Jisr al-Shughour . 
But she said they had been asked by residents to restore peace and quiet after the violence she blamed on `` armed groups '' . 
She said there was no influx of refugees into Turkey , but just the normal passage of Syrians across to the border to Turkish villages where their relatives lived . 
In another development , a committee set up by the Syrian government to examine the circumstances of the death of a 13-year-old boy , Hamza al-Khatib , has delivered its findings . 
Protesters say Khatib was tortured to death and he became a symbol of the Syrian uprising . 
The committee found that there were `` no effects of severity or violence or torture acts '' on Khatib 's body , except bullet wounds - apparently backing the government account that Khatib died solely from gunshot wounds sustained when he attended anti-government demonstrations in Deraa on 29 April . 
The UN human rights chief , Navi Pillay , and the Pope have urged Damascus to show restraint , with Ms Pillay strongly condemning the Syrian government . 
`` What we 're seeing now in Syria is so atrocious , I felt that I had to strongly condemn the real excesses that are taking -LRB- place -RRB- there in terms of the regime 's oppression of the ordinary aspirations of their own people , '' she told the BBC . 
Pope Benedict XVI said Syria must recognize `` the inalienable dignity of all people '' if it wished to achieve stability . 
The recent protests `` show the urgent need for real reforms '' , the news agency AFP quoted him as saying . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
