Monday 29 August 2005 02.36 BST Not since the Rumble in the Jungle , when Muhammad Ali fought George Foreman in Kinshasa in 1974 , can there have been such an eagerly anticipated punch-up as the one due to take place in New York in a fortnight . 
Odds as to whether the bout will go the distance , or on who can deliver a knockout punch , are already being offered as ring-side seats are sought . 
The Grapple in the Big Apple will pit `` Gorgeous '' George Galloway , the MP , against Christopher Hitchens , the writer and polemicist , in a public debate over Iraq and US and British foreign policy . 
Political junkies in America are drooling at the prospect . 
When the anti-war Respect MP for Bethnal Green visited Washington earlier this summer to deliver a lecture on Iraq to a gobsmacked Senate and to denounce allegations made against him by Republican senators , he briefly exchanged verbal fisticuffs with the pro-war Hitchens , and accused him of being a `` drink-sodden former Trotskyist popinjay '' . 
Now it 's time for a re-match . 
The event will take place on September 14 in the Mason Hall at the Baruch College performing arts center in the Gramercy Park area of Manhattan . 
It may not have quite the whiff of Madison Square Gardens , and the cornermen will be more likely to have to deal with wounded pride than bloodied cheekbones , but the venom will be as potent as in any title bout . 
`` Galloway is the most electrifying man in political entertainment , '' says one US political blogger . 
`` Hopefully , George will follow up on his ... ` drink-sodden former Trotskyist popinjay ' jibe . 
That will take some beating , but I am confident he can top it . '' 
Galloway is described on promotional material for his American talking tour as `` the Brit who set Congress straight about Iraq '' . 
The referee - or moderator - will be Amy Goodman , veteran broadcaster for the leftist Pacifica radio network , who has a no-nonsense style of dealing with any troublemakers . 
Supporters of Hitchens are hoping their man can prevail . 
He was seen in light training at the Hay-on-Wye festival , when he dispatched anti-smokers who objected to his lighting up with a couple of low blows . 
On the conservative New Criterion magazine 's website , one fan ponders : `` Heck , I thought the UK deported Galloway back to Egypt with the rest of the clerics ... This is one cage match I surely plan to see . '' 
