By Jonathan Marcus BBC Defense and Diplomatic Correspondent , in Tunis Syrian opposition protesters clashed with police outside the talks in Tunis Urgency but also frustration marked this inaugural gathering of the Friends of Syria grouping . 
Urgency because of the worsening situation on the ground - but frustration because even the participants knew than none of the measures discussed at the Tunis meeting are likely to bring about the fall of the regime of Bashar al-Assad anytime soon . 
Rumour has it that the Saudi Foreign Minister , Prince Saud al-Faisal , walked out early in frustration at the limited ambitions for this meeting . 
Or did he , as his officials say , have to go to a bilateral meeting ? 
It is clear the Saudis do feel unhappy with the pace of developments and the kind of consensus-driven diplomacy that dominates these kinds of events . 
In a meeting with US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , Prince Saud al-Faisal was asked if he thought arming the Syrian opposition was a good idea . 
`` I think it 's an excellent idea , '' he replied , suggesting that direction in which his country 's stance may be heading . 
I asked one prominent Western minister if he thought that certain Gulf countries might already be funding or delivering arms supplies to the Syrian opposition . 
His answer was non-committal - accompanied by a smile and a wink - suggesting perhaps that this assertion was not too far from the truth . 
For now it is events on the ground that are set to determine Syria 's fate , not diplomatic maneuvers beyond its borders '' So what was achieved here in Tunis ? 
The main Syrian opposition group - the Syrian National Council - received a boost to its standing . 
It is now to be seen by Western and Arab League governments as a legitimate representative of the Syrian people . 
Not `` the '' legitimate representative - it is not yet a government-in-waiting . 
The hope is that it will step up its efforts to appeal to all sectors of Syrian society and that other groups will coalesce around it to form a much more representative body . 
In truth though , diplomats have to deal with the opposition they have , not the one they would like . 
There was also agreement to step up preparations to get humanitarian aid into cities like Homs . 
The US and others are putting up money . 
But this all depends upon the Syrian authorities granting humanitarian access . 
The small-scale evacuation of casualties from Homs by the International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- and the Syrian Red Crescent Society is a small positive step , but nobody knows if it will lead to similar humanitarian opportunities . 
The reinforcement of economic and diplomatic sanctions was discussed too , but as British Foreign Secretary William Hague admitted , their effect would be cumulative over time rather than immediate . 
Hillary Clinton launched a stinging attack on Russia and China There were , however , some diplomatic fireworks . 
Speaking at the end of the meeting , Mrs Clinton launched a stinging attack against Russia and China for their behavior in blocking a Syria resolution at the UN Security Council . 
Indeed Moscow came in for additional scorn for continuing to arm the Syrian military . 
There is no disguising the dismay and some anger here , especially at Russia 's position , though the condemnation directed at Moscow could be counter-productive . 
Indeed , if there is to be any kind of transition in Syria - short of the wholesale collapse of the regime - Russian diplomacy , given its close friendship with the Assad family over the years , could be an asset . 
So the success or failure of this meeting really depends upon how you view it . 
In diplomatic terms there were some modest achievements . 
New mechanisms have been put in place to keep the Syrian crisis at the forefront of the international agenda . 
Former UN Secretary General Kofi Annan has been appointed as the joint UN and Arab League Special Envoy for Syria . 
And the Friends of Syria group is set to meet again soon - first in Turkey and then in France . 
It looks like preparations for the long haul . 
Viewed perhaps from the perspective of some of the key actors in the region and especially from the Syrian opposition 's point of view , this meeting fell way short . 
It did little to change one fundamental fact . 
For now it is events on the ground that are set to determine Syria 's fate , not diplomatic maneuvers beyond its borders . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
