May 28 : President Obama picks up a `` tar ball '' during a tour of areas impacted by the Gulf Coast oil spill in Port Fourchon , La. . 
He returns to the region on Monday . 
AP2010 President Obama will address the nation Tuesday night to talk about the Gulf of Mexico oil spill as the White House prepares a plan to require oil giant BP to set up an escrow account to pay for lost income to local businesses as a result of the April 20 explosion . 
The 8 p.m. ET speech will take place from the White House shortly after the president returns from a two-day trip to the Gulf . 
The president is expected to address efforts to contain the spill , the timeline for capturing the oil , the long-term recovery and restoration of the Gulf region and regulatory reform efforts at the Mineral Management Service . 
`` This is an ongoing crisis , much like an epidemic , '' David Axelrod told NBC television 's '' Meet the Press . '' 
The 10-15 minute speech will provide more details about a BP escrow fund the president wants established for fishers and trawlers whose livelihoods have been shot as a result of the spill . 
The administration wants a third-party reclamation process rather than BP managing distribution of funds . 
The next day , the president will make clear in his meeting with BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg and others about his expectation of BP 's responsibility for caring for people affected by the spill . 
`` Our mission is to hold them accountable in every appropriate way , '' Axelrod said . 
The speech comes as the Obama administration faces criticism for a slow reaction time to the Gulf spill , including the approval for the construction of barriers and assistance to the states . 
At the same time , frustration is growing about the slow pace of the cleanup and BP 's inability to stop the flow while the estimates on the leak have grown exponentially . 
On Sunday , Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid sent a letter signed by 54 Democratic senators to BP CEO Tony Hayward demanding his company create a $ 20 billion account to pay for economic damages and cleanup costs . 
Currently , lawmakers are debating how much to change the law that limits a company 's liability to $ 75 million . 
`` Establishment of this account would serve as an act of good faith and as a first step towards ensuring that there will be no delay in payments or attempt to evade responsibility for damages , '' the 54 senators wrote . 
`` Although creating this account at this level in no way limits BP 's liability , we believe it will do more to improve BP 's public image than the costly public relations campaign your company has launched , '' the senators wrote . 
BP 's board is to meet on Monday to discuss deferring its second-quarter dividend and putting the money into escrow until the company 's liabilities from the spill are known . 
The amount of money set aside will be part of White House discussions with BP executives on Wednesday , but Axelrod said it should be `` substantial . '' 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
