Friday , October 22 , 2010 ; 8:45 PM The Interior Department is reviewing its first request to conduct deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico since it lifted the ban on such activities last week , officials said Friday . 
The Center for Biological Diversity filed suit in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia Friday , charging that Interior Secretary Ken Salazar violated the National Environmental Policy Act by failing to prepare an environmental impact statement and `` provide the public with relevant environmental information on the effects of commencing drilling . '' 
A group of oil and gas company representatives met with top Interior officials a day earlier to lobby for faster offshore drilling permitting along with the creation of a new Ocean Safety Institute under the Interior Department that would be a public and private partnership and focus on rig safety , spill containment and spill cleanup . 
The American Petroleum Institute , Chevron , Transocean , Exxon Mobil , Conoco Phillips , BP , Shell Oil , Diamond Offshore and Hercules were represented . 
Interior spokeswoman Kendra Barkoff said they met `` to discuss strategies for further developing and making available blowout containment capabilities moving forward , '' but did not elaborate beyond that . 
James W. Noe , senior vice president and general counsel of Hercules , a leading shallow-water drilling company , said he and his colleagues were concerned that without adequate industry input , government officials would create drilling rules that would pick `` winners and losers . 
That 's not a model that works . '' 
Noe added that despite Salazar 's decision Oct. 12 to end the moratorium on deepwater drilling in the gulf , federal officials were not approving permits fast enough . 
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement has issued half a dozen permits for drilling new shallow-water wells in the past couple of weeks , bringing the total number of new well permits to 13 since the April 20 Macondo blowout , which is only one more than had been issued in April alone prior to accident . 
`` The industry 's not dead . 
But there 's only so much fiddling around you can do on existing wells , '' Noe said , adding , `` We 've seen several hundred layoffs , but not the massive layoffs we feared . '' 
Faced with complaints , Noe said BOEMRE Director Michael Bromwich had said there were only 10 new well permits pending . 
But Noe said that 's because of a backlog of exploration and development plans that have not been approved . 
The number of those awaiting action was 69 as of Aug. 17 , he said , and since then BOEMRE has stopped releasing figures . 
Each of those plans includes about three to five wells . 
At the same time , Interior is facing a legal challenge from the Center for Biological Diversity , which questions whether Salazar adequately evaluated the environmental risks involved in deepwater drilling when he lifted the moratorium last week . 
At the time of the announcement , Salazar declared that the new well permitting and workplace safety rules the government had adopted recently had `` significantly reduced those risks '' associated with deepwater energy exploration . 
The brief seeking an injunction of the policy challenges those assumptions , saying , `` the secretary has not cured serious underlying problems that contributed to the April 20 , 2010 blowout of the Deepwater Horizon drill rig , and massive oil spill , namely , excluding drilling plans from environmental review . 
Therefore , the Secretary is repeating the same errors in allowing risky drilling to proceed without analyzing the significant environmental effects . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
