LONDON | Wed Apr 20 , 2011 8:23 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Economic optimism in Britain has risen to its highest level since last July following surprise falls in unemployment and inflation , a poll published on Wednesday showed . 
Satisfaction with the government has also improved slightly , although overall support for the Liberal Democrats has dropped to single figures . 
A year ago , more than 30 percent of people said they would vote for the Lib Dems , their pre-election peak , and just over 20 percent actually did so on election day in May . 
Now just nine percent of those who plan to vote would now choose the party , the April Reuters\/Ipsos MORI political monitor shows . 
The Lib Dem 's popularity has plunged since they entered into the coalition and dropped many of their flagship policies , notably free university education . 
`` The Liberal Democrats are struggling to maintain voters ' support and the party is suffering from perceptions that the coalition is divided , '' Ipsos MORI 's Helen Cleary said . 
`` It is seen as dominated by its coalition partners , with two-thirds of the public believing that the Conservatives are making most of the decisions in the government . '' 
The Conservatives and Labor are neck and neck in support at 40 percent , a rise of three percentage points for the Conservatives compared to last month . 
That coincided with a rise in satisfaction with the government to 37 percent , its highest level so far this year , though 55 percent remain dissatisfied . 
Economic optimism has also improved in the wake of official figures showing surprise drops in both unemployment and inflation . 
Three in 10 of those surveyed think the economy will improve over the next 12 months , the highest level of optimism about Britain 's short term economic future since last July . 
Two-fifths -LRB- 42 percent -RRB- think that the situation will get worse over the next 12 months , although this is the first month of 2011 in which less than half have been pessimistic about Britain 's economic situation . 
The public remain sceptical that a coalition government is good for Britain , which could spell trouble for those hoping to sway voters in a referendum on voting reform on May 5 , the anniversary of last year 's general election . 
Liberal Democrats , and some Labor politicians , want to see a change that opponents , including the Conservatives , argue would make coalition government more likely . 
Coalition government is extremely rare in the UK . 
The Reuters\/Ipsos MORI poll showed most people believe it is a bad thing for the country that no party achieved an overall majority at last year 's general election -LRB- 58 percent -RRB- , an increase since last May -LRB- 52 percent -RRB- . 
Ipsos MORI interviewed a representative sample of 1,000 adults aged 18 + across Great Britain . 
Interviews were conducted by telephone 15-17th April 2011 . 
Data are weighted to match the profile of the population . 
-LRB- Reporting by Jodie Ginsberg ; Editing by Jon Hemming -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
And 37 % is satisfied with government policies . 
These people who are optimisic must be living in the moon . 
Free is great , but someone , somewhere has to pay for it . 
That 's why socialism can not work . 
Are the voters upset because the Lib Dems do n't produce , or because they are beginning to realize the high cost of `` free '' ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
