A young Libyan protester holds a sign with the Arabic writing the tyrant of Libya during an anti-government demonstration in the eastern Libyan town of Derna . 
The Libyan capital was a ghost town Thursday morning , witnesses said , as anti-government protesters declared victory elsewhere after reportedly seizing control of the third largest city . 
Misrata - also spelled as Misurata - is now in the hands of the opposition , who have driven out the mercenaries , according to witnesses and multiple media reports . 
Witnesses and multiple reports also said that the town of Az Zintan was under opposition control . 
The opposition also controls the second-largest city of Benghazi , where crowds cheered as international journalists drove through the city . 
The only shooting that could be heard was celebratory gunfire . 
`` When they saw us arrive , they just exploded with cheers and clapping , people saying `` thank you , thank you '' in English . 
Throwing candy and dates inside the car , '' CNN 's Ben Wedeman told `` AC360 . '' 
-LRB- a href = `` The Libyan capital was a ghost town Thursday morning , witnesses said , as anti-government protesters declared victory elsewhere after reportedly seizing control of the third largest city . 
Misrata - also spelled as Misurata - is now in the hands of the opposition , who have driven out the mercenaries , according to witnesses and multiple media reports . 
Witnesses and multiple reports also said that the town of Az Zintan was under opposition control . 
The opposition also controls the second-largest city of Benghazi , where crowds cheered as international journalists drove through the city . 
The only shooting that could be heard was celebratory gunfire . 
`` When they saw us arrive , they just exploded with cheers and clapping , people saying `` thank you , thank you '' in English . 
Throwing candy and dates inside the car , '' CNN 's Ben Wedeman told `` AC360 . '' 
Read more ... Why Obama was so direct while taking to Mubarak ? 
Mubarak - step down I mean now ! 
Why Obama is not using similar words against Kadafi , that for decades promoted terror and anti American policy ? 
Following an interesting post I have to share with you ! 
Gadhafi has been tied to Rev. Jeremiah Wright , Obama s spiritual adviser for more than 23 years . 
The Libyan dictator also has financed and strongly supported the Nation of Islam and its leader , Louis Farrakhan . 
Obama has ties to Farrakhan and his controversial group Jeremiah Wright , former pastor of Obama s longtime Chicago church , went with Farrakhan to visit Gadhafi in 1984 . 
February 25th , 2011 4:07 am ET I just that the C.I.A. is not involved this time . 
We have no business interfering in that country 's internal affairs . 
Just let the chips fall where they may . 
3 Questions and 3 answers . 
Why Obama and the West was so direct while taking to Mubarak ? 
Mubarak - step down I mean now ! 
Why Obama is not using similar words against Kadafi , that for decades promoted terror , Europeans Islamisation and anti American policy ? 
1 : Oil in Libya not in Egypt . 
2 ; \*\*\* The west is ready to give away moral values for economical benefit On the reception of the Lockerbie bomber in Libya , Kaddafi son words to the bomber read by a mouth movement expert were that his freedom was on the economical negotiations with UK . 
Next the bomber was received by father Kaddafi . 
Those actions convey to the Arabs the message that the terrorists are heroes . 
3 : Following an interesting post I have to share with you ! 
Gadhafi has been tied to Rev. Jeremiah Wright , Obama s spiritual adviser for more than 23 years . 
The Libyan dictator also has financed and strongly supported the Nation of Islam and its leader , Louis Farrakhan . 
Obama has ties to Farrakhan and his controversial group Jeremiah Wright , former pastor of Obama s longtime Chicago church , went with Farrakhan to visit Gadhafi in 1984 . 
\*\*\* Obama policy , starting day one is a total loss ! 
February 25th , 2011 7:58 am ET it is amazing . 
where is united nation ? 
where is u. s ? 
loss of life is nothing for them if it is note take place in a big country or europe . 
my god who can hear the cry of civilians in libya ? 
who can help them ? 
they are saying these world is interconconnected and united but where is the effect ? 
just seeing the massacreto present the report finally ? 
February 25th , 2011 2:16 pm ET Opposition groups in Libya are armed with machine guns and machetes . 
Even half the military has defected to support the opposition . 
Hence what is happening in Libya is an armed revolution . 
It certainly is n't a group of peaceful protesters being cut down by a mad dog dictator . 
Even the opposition admit they have captured cities with force . 
The western media has turned on Gaddafi but has not produced a genuine alternative leader which is any better than Gaddafi . 
Whats the deal here ? 
Are we suppose to support an armed gang without knowing if its eventual leader is better than Gaddafi ?? . 
What happens in Libya is not the business of any outside nation . 
But Libya has oil which the west needs . 
Can you imagine when the USA had it 's civil war , if Europeans claimed business interests in America need to be protected via sanctions or force . 
This would have been unjustifiable interference in another countries business . 
So why does Britain and America constantly feel they have a right to interfere with other countries ? 
Libya 's issues are for Libyans to resolve , but all middle east protest movements are being co-opted by the west . 
How about a fair policy of non interference in other peoples issues . 
How about an even handed approach such as no financial aid to any state in the region and let them sought their own lives out . 
Lets not pretend the west is acting is self defense , the west is more than capable of defending its own territory . 
So why not just keep our noses out of others business ? 
This also applies to Israel . 
Why not let them sought their own problems out ? 
If the anger all their neighbors to the point where Israel is invaded , tough luck on Israel . 
If Israel feels provoked by Arabs and invades them , tough luck on the Arabs . 
But currently the west has supports Israel with the biggest military in the region , allowed them to break international law and then tries to pretend it is neutral . 
Just let them all have space to sought themselves out and no more aid or military favors to anyone . 
Alternatively lets just own up and admit we are all still colonialists at heart . 
We have the power to control other people land . 
We want their oil and we want them subservient to our interests . 
This might not be moral , but at least it would be open , honest and without all the BS hypocrisy about democracy . 
Democracy being good as long as it is the democratic leader the west wants etc. . . 
February 25th , 2011 2:39 pm ET p.s. how long before Egypt also realizes it 's been cheated out of its revolution . 
Mubaraks hand picked men remain in control and nothing has really changed . 
Within six months -LRB- when real elections are due -RRB- Egypt 's revolution will not look so peaceful any more . 
But the real elephant in the room is Pakistan . 
All these revolts have been inspired by rising food prices . 
-LRB- Because the dollar is the worlds reserve currency and because the Federal reserve has created enormous inflation by pumping in trillions of new dollars . 
QE1 & QE2 have caused the dollar to lose tremendous value and poor people cant buy so much food -RRB- Pakistan is the biggest grain importer in the world !! Its people are starting to starve like those in the middle east , but Pakistan has nuclear weapons . 
There is en enormous chance that Pakistan will be the first nuclear power to experience civil war before the end of the year . 
But why does n't the media examine the consequences of the revolts which it gleefully covers with extreme prejudice ?? February 26th , 2011 9:15 am ET It is really heartening to see the people protesting in Libya and seizing control of the cities . 
It is a great moment of history and for Arab civilization . 
In the Middle East , the thugs and dictators were ruling . 
And democracy must come whatever the cost may be . 
I appeal to the people of Libya and other countries in the middle East that they should not tolerate the dictators and kings anymore . 
They suck the blood of the general mass . 
All these years they have exploited the common man in the name of good rule , but in fact they have been busy in filling up their coffers . 
Whenever there is a news of protests in the middle east i really rejoice that at last the people are demanding change in the form of the government . 
The people around the world are with you . 
Do not fear the might of the dictators and thugs , very soon they will flee the country . 
They just do not have option . 
And they have to go . 
Congratulations to the people of Arabian countries for rising against the thugs . 
February 26th , 2011 12:06 pm ET its about time that the libyan people must show their unity in ousting a desperate dictator . 
Imagine for 42 years the people were made to believe that the kind of leadership he -LRB- khadafi -RRB- perpertrated in libya is the only key to a prosperous nation . 
But what had happened now ? 
This oil rich nation started to crumble . . 
khadafi is hellbent on staying to power . 
No matter what , he will continue to use force and psychological warfares . . 
Dictators are made to use this methods . 
All I can say is the Libyan people must continue and advance their struggle . 
Protect the conquered cities in the east ... and most importantly unite for one common enemy against the madman . 
February 26th , 2011 4:06 pm ET From the shores of Tripoli As I sit in Kuwait , a cloudy day for a celebration , but none the less the Kuwaitis have and are celebrating their 50th year of Independence -LRB- 25 Feb -RRB- and their 20th year of Liberation Day -LRB- 26 Feb -RRB- and we are watching the Kuwaitis in their usual elevated sense of nationalism and patriotism -LRB- akin to our 4th of July -RRB- move forward into their life in a very jubilant manner . 
I remember quite well the sense of relief when Iraq and it s barbaric occupation of Kuwait came to an end at the concerted effort of the coalition forces , not the least of which was the United States . 
We are now observing the many activities of nations here in the Middle East as they go through the struggles to move forward and build democratic nations . 
Currently , the largest and most notable effort is in Libya . 
Freedom from oppression and freedom of choice does not come free , and never will . 
Americans , who established a nation , built from wilderness and paid for by the blood of men and women who desired to live a free life in a democratic society with a government whom they controlled are now looking as they have progressed for several hundred years from the meager beginnings as pilgrims to the nowadays pioneers in the countries of the Middle East . 
Those pioneers desire the same basic human rights as felt by their brethren in many other places in the world . 
When Americans sit idly by , great evil is furthered by those who would oppress the ones who feed them . 
We have seen this all over the world and unfortunately , as even we recognize the wrong , we are slow to respond to the cries of the oppressed . 
It happened in Germany , most notably , prior to the outbreak of World War II and several times since . 
We are currently fighting in several locations around the world were people have been oppressed and downtrodden , rights denied , lives lost and freedoms forbidden by those who have claimed to be leaders . 
As times have marched on , so has technology and the atrocities of today , are witnessed and commented on ... today . 
WE also have the ability to react today and not by just sucking in our breath as we see and hear of such unacceptable actions such as what is apparent in Libya . 
Americans are great businessmen , probably the greatest in the world . 
Our economy , our business systems and finance are efficient and profitable . 
The world has recognized this for some time . 
Our country is a beloved country and most wanted after by most countries , if not simply a great enjoyment to visit . 
The people of the Middle East have a great love for the United States . 
They may not always agree with our President , our international politics and relations with other countries , but greatly love the country and its people . 
This point is something which , I believe our politicians have missed , ignored or simply have no idea on how to capitalize from the benefit of such an asset in foreign relations actions . 
WE have wavered between the balance of power , sovereign recognition of powers in countries , benefits of business and economics , the benefits of balance in the lesser of evils and so on . 
In most cases this is the best anyone could do . 
In the worst case , which is where we usually find ourselves , we can please all the people and all the countries all the time . 
WE have helped many and been criticized for doing so by just as many . 
The question remains , as any individual must ask , did I do the right thing ? 
You can t please everyone , but you can be true to your ethics and principles in doing what is right , what is fair and what is generous to help others . 
Simply put , it is the American way and also the way of a vast majority of other people on this planet . 
Our inaction towards Libya is pathetic . 
We are looking at a country which , has not been our friend , but could be . 
We are looking at a country that needs and whose people greatly need and have asked for our guidance , help , support and any assistance which we could easily provide . 
It is now obvious to the world that things are not right there with the ruler , Gaddafi , killing his own people and oppressing the country in the way it now appears . 
WE have nothing to lose at this point . 
We don t have to go in like the Marines did long ago . 
WE don t need to arrive en masse and occupy the country after saving it . 
WE do need to show support with more than a limp speech and a wait and see attitude . 
The entire Middle East is upset to say the least with Gaddafi and what is happening . 
The vast supporters of the opposition in Libya wish they could do something to help . 
The Arab world will without doubt , sit , watch , and not take any direct action to save the people of Libya . 
Now , for the less liberal , less weak approach we need to make some threats of a rather direct type -LRB- sanctions are meaningless and only hurt the folks we should be helping -RRB- . 
WE should , and we easily have the resources sitting in the Mediterranean , park an aircraft carrier , a destroyer , a missile frigate and a contingency of US Marines off the coast of Libya and provide some sort of direct intervention into the situation if the Gaddafi government does not cease and desist immediately . 
WE can do this and guess what , who cares if we get another black eye kicking a bully out and taking care of some people who need our help . 
WE might even make a few new friends . 
If I were calling the shots , the threats would only be a veiled pretext to just carrying out what needs to be done in a rather surgical manner anyway . 
You get what you ask for . 
February 26th , 2011 6:11 pm ET One question that is shouting in our face and nobody seems to be aware of it : WHY DOES N'T THE ARAB LEAGUE INTERVENE ???? There is talk of NATO and US military intervention to stop the unbelievable atrocities of Gaddaffi against his own people , of gathering up UN support for such an action . 
The problem is we all know what will happen after a NATO or US military action ; it will eventually be seen and portrayed as another imperialist action by the west , trying to impose its own values on an arab state , and doing it anyway only for the oil there . 
This will in turn weaken the moral standing in the arab world of those that genuinely want democracy and freedom . 
The only solution is for the Arab League to intervene on the ground to stop this madness , and thus preventing any `` western imperialism '' argument against the local democracy advocates later on . 
It has already given verbal condemnation of Gaddafi 's actions , and they should prove that these are not empty words . 
February 27th , 2011 1:45 am ET News of former Justice Minister Mustafa Abdul Jalil to head the Libya by replacing Gadhafi is great & healthy news . 
It is an indication that Gadhafi & his sons have given up to people pressure & voices of world in response to USA & UNO sanctions whatever . 
It is better for Gadhafi to transfer the power to Justice Abdul & other countries in the Mid-East should also respond with similar action wherever the turmoil is to hand over power to Justices ex of Courts to facilitate legal & democratic Govt . 
with written Constitutions to avoid exploitation of people & natural national resources for few elite & political families . 
It is time for Iran too To give up fake Islamic spiritualism & hand over power to people of Iran who are struggling since last election frauds to Justice of Supreme Court if they have one or opposition group to move forward with legitimate & legal agenda of Iran Democracy which was supposed to be after dethroning Shah of Iran & expected by people of Iran & young generation of Iran who struggling for liberty , freedom & development . 
Who is this `` Kadafi '' you speak of ??? You pretend to know something and yet you have no clue how to spell a name which has been splashed all over the media for two weeks ??? Yes , you must know so much ... A squirrel in a tree has more knowledge than you . 
I guess you must be one of those orthodox Jewish Israelis who does n't go to school or get a job , but lives freely of the Israeli state -LRB- US taxes -RRB- to study orthodox Jewish mythology . 
Your ideas are probably really popular in your mentally challenged environment . 
February 27th , 2011 10:01 pm ET It was explained why the U.S. and\/or Obama is low-key on this country and what 's happening ! 
The reason is\/was to protecct any Americans i.e. , not to have them taken Americans hostages ! 
February 27th , 2011 10:05 pm ET It was explained why the U.S. and\/or Obama is\/was low-key on Libya and what 's happening there ! 
The reason is\/was to protect Americans i.e. , not to have Americans taken as hostages . 
Israel does not have the biggest military in the ME although it may be the strongest and best organized . 
It , without doubt , has the most thorough , honest and transparent legal division which ensures that international law is consulted before every mission and any deviation from approved codes of conduct is subsequently investigated and if necessary refered to external investigation . 
If is argued by some that the Israeli army would be even stronger if it did not have to spend almost 80 % of the military aid it receives from the US back in the US which although providing for thousands of American jobs also hinders Israel 's ability to increase further its own advanced military developments . 
-LRB- Israel receives only military aid . 
No economic aid so forget your claims that Israeli education , or ultra-orthodox lack of it , is paid for by US taxpayers . 
Save that argument for the hate and anti-semitism that is taught in Arab schools\/midrassas throughout the region paid for by US and EU etc taxes -RRB- . 
Meanwhile , as you may have been implying , the US and others have provided far more support to regimes in the ME which are finally being revealed for what they are . 
You fail to question the West 's neutrality in that respect when their hypocrisy and moral compromise is staring you in the face . 
Everyone kicks up to the level of his personal potential . 
Good example : John A. - kicks very low ! 
- Fight forever to impose worldwide a 7 century culture - Making revolution and busting Islamism 's Muslim brotherhood Islamist - Politicians agenda do n't call to deal with Muslim society issues March 1st , 2011 10:30 am ET Miriam , Even Israel 's Jewish Virtual Library explains your ideas are as delusional as your friend Ariely 's . 
A pro Israeli Library states American aids to Israel is -LRB- but they forget to mention many other benefits , because the real numbers would terrify American tax payers -RRB- : Altogether , since 1949 , Israel has received more than $ 106 billion in assistance . 
This includes the four special allocations , the $ 10 billion in loan guarantees -LRB- spread over five years -RRB- approved in 1992 , the $ 9 billion in guarantees offered in 2003 , and a variety of other smaller assistance-related accounts , such as refugee resettlement -LRB- nearly $ 1.6 billion overall since 1973 -RRB- , the American Schools and Hospitals Abroad Program -LRB- ASHA -RRB- , which supports schools , libraries and medical centers that demonstrate American ideas and practices -LRB- -LRB- $ 144 million -RRB- , and cooperative development programs -LRB- a total of $ 186 million since 1981 -RRB- . 
The total does not include funds for joint military projects like the Arrow missile -LRB- for which Israel has received more than $ 1 billion in grants since 1986 -RRB- , which are provided through the Defense budget . 
President Bush requested $ 60 million for the Arrow for FY2003 and $ 136 million in FY2004 . 
The United States also has provided $ 53 million for the Boost Phase Intercept program and $ 139 million for the Tactical High Energy Laser program under development in Israel to complement the Arrow . 
Though the totals are impressive , the value of assistance to Israel has been eroded by inflation . 
While aid levels remained constant in total dollars from 1987 until 1999 , the real value steadily declined . 
On the other side of the coin , Israel does receive aid on more favorable terms than other nations . 
For example , all economic aid is given directly to the Israeli government rather than allocated under a specific program . 
Also , starting in 1982 , Israel began to receive all its economic aid in a lump sum early in the fiscal year instead of in quarterly installments as is done for other countries . 
Israel also receives offsets on FMS purchases -LRB- U.S. contractors agree to offset some of the cost of military equipment by buying components or materials from Israel -RRB- . 
It was inevitable that Libyans would sack Gadahafi despite the propaganda he attempted to spread at a time even the military turned against him . 
Mercenaries in Libya were only interested in loot . 
Whatever they could derive from the chaos . 
He lost his legitimacy the moment the protests began and the honorable thing for him to have done was to quit . 
It 's really worthy of celebration . 
Bravo to Libyans and the rest of the world . 
Cheers guys and all the best . 
It can only get better . 
Ok guys and I 'm always much obliged . 
Firstly , the Jewish Virtual Library is not Israeli and is a reference library encyclopedia . 
Since you provided the link , it is easy for everyone to see that you have selectively copied and pasted a couple of paragraphs obviously written number of years ago . 
The whole article has clearly - been updated several times over several years . 
You conveniently do n't include the details of how there is no longer any US economic aid to Israel , that US economic grants to Israel ended in 1959 and until 1985 aid consisted of loans that were repaid . 
One can also read that before 1971 , Arab states received three times more aid than Israel , plus additional aid from the USSR , Europe , Asia etc. . 
So , far from being delusional , the facts are clear . 
Israel does not receive economic aid from the US . 
What you have succeeded in doing is bringing to are attention the fact that you have a persistent ability to be very selective in your copy and pastes , conveniently obscuring the whole picture . 
You 've also enabled us to again refute many other claims you have repeatedly made about US military aid and support for Israel . 
March 5th , 2011 1:38 pm ET John A ur such a smart ass . . 
I bet u eat books for breakfast . 
haha Miriam , obviously your not good with economics . 
American loans paid to Israel at preferential rates , are given as a lump sum at the beginning of each year . 
This allows Israel to gain interest which would normally benefit American tax payers . 
Not to mention the long history of fuel subsidies etc. . . 
Not to mention all the American businesses which set up in Israel to create Israeli jobs and not American jobs . 
Most of Israels tech industry is an off shoot of American business with guaranteed American orders and free technology transfers . 
Orders given to Israel which could have been given to American businesses and American workers . 
You think that is n't economic aid ?? Clearly this does n't even include the free gift of 3 billion every year on military aid . 
Miriam , as Hilary Clinton said the USA has lost the information war . 
Because everyone knows the USA and her ally Israel lie , lie and lie some more . 
Marc , Is the term `` smart '' an insult in America ? 
That would explain a lot hahaha March 7th , 2011 5:40 am ET Obama is afraid of kadafi , am a nigerian when i was in lybian 7yrs ago 3 of my friends where hang to death coldely by lybian authority while because they were found guilty by toasting a girl at noon in the aftenoon , this man kadafi need to be naked nd floog him mercilessly ... You think a new era of democracy and public good will start with a merciless flogging ? 
Perhaps you should go back to your cave and return to this blog after you have had time to evolve ... Lets say in another 2000 years ... Loan guarantees are not grants and no US funds are transferred to Israel . 
There is absolutely no effect on US domestic programs and they have no impact on US taxpayers , unless Israel defaults which it has never done . 
The only effect on the US is the conditional increased expenditure by Israel in the US . 
It is widely agreed that the loan guarantees are no longer needed by Israel and that their continuation is probably a US measure designed to be able to pressure Israel with conditions . 
Since this is a ME blog , it would be interesting if you would occasionally enlighten us about US and EU aid , loans , grants , guarantees etc etc to all the other countries in the region . 
We would all be shocked at the tax-payers ' cost in supporting the anti-democratic , dictatorial , autocratic , oil-controlling , terror-supporting , already wealthy regimes . 
Its really hard to believe you cant already understand . 
But imagine you went to a bank , without any security and was offered a 3 billion dollars loan and at a cheaper interest rate than everyone else . 
The loan is also repeated every year in lump sum which you can place in your bank to invest and make more money from . 
Are you not intelligent enough to exploit this unique privilege ? 
Miriam , its time that you start to be honest with yourself . 
Its not that everyone who disagrees with you is wrong . 
Its not that you are a horrible person . 
Its simply you have not been blessed the basic intelligence needed to understand the world you live in . 
Probably you are great at sport , art or music . 
But leave economics , law , business , politics to others , as clearly these subjects far , far are beyond you . 
March 9th , 2011 3:17 pm ET And Miriam , you rightly state Israel is not the only country receiving aid in the middle east . 
For example , America funded the dictator Mubarak if Mubarak agreed to close the Gaza boarder and kiss Israels behind . 
America also funds the Saudi dictatorship , if they agree to send oil to Israel and kiss Israels behind . 
All the aid sent to the region is either to directly fund lazy Israels existence or to buy friends in the region for anti social Israel . 
Do you think the people of Egypt benefited from the billions sent to arm the dictator Mubarak . 
Was that money sent to create freedom and democracy ? 
Or was it even more American tax payers money being used to prop up illegitimate allies for the criminal state of Israel ? 
In return Israel remains as Americas key attack threat to the oil regions . 
If the Saudi 's do n't do what America wants , the CIA can let a car bomb of in Jerusalem , blame the Arabs and give Israel the green light to invade in supposed retaliation . 
Thats all the Jews are being used for in the middle east . 
Come on , how many times has Israel invaded its neighbors and for how many decades has Israel been unable to find a peaceful solution . 
Even the entire Arab league offered peace and recognition of Israel , if it withdrew to its internationally recognized boarders of 1967 . 
Bup there is no way Israel wants peace , theres no way America will allow peace . 
Israel is there to be Americas out of control rottweiler and use terror to manipulate middle east politics . 
The games up Miriam . 
Its all becoming to obvious . 
The stars and stripes fly over Iraq . 
America threaten war with Iran , they prop up most other regions with dictators who receive instructions from Washington . 
America is the only nation that supports Israel at the UN . 
The picture is clear . 
Israel has nothing to do with Judaism or any other religion . 
Israel is just one of several American strategies to destabilize the middle easter and control its oil . 
There never were any `` internationally recognized 1967 borders '' . 
There were recognized 1949 Armistice Lines , accepted by Israel but subsequently rejected by Arabs , confirmed by their repeated attacks across those lines preceding the 1967 war . 
In fact it was internationally recognized that those lines were never to become borders since they were indefensible and had no political or legal significance . 
Peace agreements with Jordan and Egypt were based on those facts and Palestinian negotiators are fully aware of those facts but that does n't stop them deceiving others with their rhetoric . 
The Jewish Agency\/Israel accepted all UN resolutions concerning partition and negotiation , the same resolutions rejected by some or all of the Arabs . 
For example , the three `` No 's '' of the Arab League in Khartoum , no peace , no negotiation , no recognition . 
Go ahead propagating lies , but everyone should know that that 's what they are . 
The world may not like Khadafi , but he 's the only moslem in the middle east that does n't wait for `` consensus '' or look over his shoulder to see if he has backing or whatever . 
The SOB is one smart north african that will not hesitate to slaughter several thousand fellow moslems to maintain his way of life , and that of his buddies . 
Trust me , after the smoke settles and the other moslem nations do NOTHING , the sand will swallow up the mass graves of the few thousand brave that opposed him . 
Amazingly , the `` great '' moslem leader , Egypt will sit on its hands and show the world that islam is a do nothing , cowardly theology that is only capable of killing those that are less capable of a good fight . 
However many moslems this madman kills ... IT 'S A DAMN GOOD START !!! March 21st , 2011 9:20 am ET We are broke , the US is in shambles and we are now ramping up yet another middle east war ? 
This is crazy and misdirected . 
No more wars take care of US business and your own people none of these other country help us in our own civil war . . 
Its time to STAND AS ONE AND TAKE BACK OUR GOVERMENT AND STOP THE BULLYING . . 
If they want to kill each other then so be it . 
I do not want to see my tax dollars going to these other countrys that do NOT GIVE A CRAP ABOUT U. . . 
HOW MUCH WILL YOU GUYS TAKE BEFOR YOU STAND UP FOR YOURSELFES AND YOUR KIDS . . 
REMEMBER THIS OUR GOVERMENT HAS KILLED ITS OWN PEOPLE AND NO ONE WAS THERE TO HELP US ... THINK ABOUT IT !!! THE RATE WASHINGTON IS GOING YOUR GRANDKIDS VERY WELL MAY GROW UP IN A 3rd WORLD COUNTRY . . 
Comments are moderated by CNN , in accordance with the CNN Comment Policy , and may not appear on this blog until they have been reviewed and deemed appropriate for posting . 
Also , due to the volume of comments we receive , not all comments will be posted . 
Welcome to the Inside the Middle East blog where CNN 's journalists post news , views and video from across the region . 
This is also a place where you can start the discussion so please keep your comments coming . 
We highlight not only current news stories but also anecdotes and issues that do n't always make the top of the headlines . 
Inside the Middle East airs the first week of every month on the following days and times : 
