Huckabee 's comments included criticizing President Obama over Libya , taking aim at fellow potential presidential candidate Mitch Daniels on social issues , and Mitt Romney on the issue of health care . 
On his feelings about the Libya crisis : `` I think I 'd make it very clear that the United States is not going to stand by and watch a country slaughter its own people in cold blood , that there is a sense in which there 's a virtual genocide going on . 
I 'm still hopeful that Libya 's army will take Gadhafi out and I think that 's the solution we can all hope for . 
There 's clearly a man who has virtually escaped the asylum who is in a position of extraordinary power . '' 
`` But when a person starts talking about killing his own citizens and then following up on it , creating rivers of blood in his own streets and blowing up the one resource that his country has to give it a foundation for any economic hope , he 's clearly a mad man and this is a person who is maniacal and now we are beginning to learn that he did in fact order the bombing of Pan Am 103 over the Lockabee , the disco in Berlin . 
You know these are acts of international terrorism and I expect more than a strongly worded letter from the UN . '' 
On what actions he 'd take toward Libya if he was president : `` I think a no-fly zone would be absolute -- yeah a no fly zone very important because that way you keep him from flying mercenaries in , maybe even a naval armada somewhere off the 3 mile international boundaries , just as a presence , and even to say we stand ready to do what is necessary to make sure there 's not an act of genocide against those people . '' 
On whether President Obama is being too timid in his handling of the crisis : `` In light of the urgency , but I do n't have the NSA report sitting in front of me . 
So I 'm always a little careful to say , here 's what I would do , because I think you have to base a decision based on good intelligence and information which a person in my capacity as an ordinary citizen at this point simply does n't have . '' 
On the role his new book plays in his presidential decision-making process : `` This is the message . 
If people read this book and say those are some ideas I can relate to , these are ideas I think would be good for the country , then that 's going to help me believe that there is real support for what I stand for . 
I do n't think politics and running for president is just about can I go through the political manipulations to get the job . 
It 's , if I get that job , do the people of the country support what I would do and I think I owe it to them to say , ` Here 's what I do , here 's where I stand . 
These are my principals . ' '' 
On Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels ' call for a `` truce '' on social issues until economic problems are dealt with : `` I make it very clear , in the very first chapter , I establish that the issues about family and marriage are economic issues . 
We have a 300 billion dollar a year dad deficit in this country . 
That 's the cost that the taxpayers for dads who disappear and let the government pick up the tabs for their kids . 
We have an issue also where two thirds of the children of this country who live in poverty would n't live in poverty if their mothers were married to the fathers of those kids . 
So when people say , ' I do n't want to talk about social issues ' - and let me be very clear , I love Mitch Daniels . 
I think he would be a great presidential candidate , I think he would be a good president , but I 'm not arguing with Mitch Daniels . 
I 'm making the case that you can not say these are peripheral issues if you really are concerned about the economy because there is an economic consequence of a broken family . '' 
On overturning Roe v. Wade : `` I think it 's a bully pulpit and it goes beyond just Roe versus Wade . 
See , all that did was say that the states no longer could make the decision , the federal government would . 
If you turned it back to the states , some states would have more liberal abortion than they have now . 
It would n't necessarily fix anything and then you have this geographical morality which I find absurd . 
That is the logic of the civil war , that you can have some states where slavery is okay and others where it is n't . 
That does n't make sense . 
If it 's right then everybody ought to abide by it . 
If it 's wrong , them everyone ought to change . 
So the question is , is it right for one human being to take the life of another human being because it represents a financial burden or a social disruption ? 
Now that 's an argument we can have but once we 've had it , we have to decide that either it is okay or is n't okay . 
I say it 's not okay . '' 
`` I think the president stepped off into a deep hole when he decided arbitrarily and I think illegally that his attorney general and his justice department will not even defend the law of the land which is the Defense of Marriage Act . 
I think I 've spent a page , maybe a page and a half of that entire book dealing with this issue . 
It 'll probably get a lot of controversy . 
I invite people to read it for themselves . 
Read it and if they think that I 'm off-base , fine -- then they can sell it at a used book store . 
`` Government should legislate affirmation of what marriage is . 
Marriage is not whatever we want it to be . 
Marriage is a man and a woman committed in a relationship for life , that 's all it 's ever been . 
Thirty-three states have had this on the ballot . 
Thirty-three , including very liberal states like Maine and California , and in every one of those states , no exceptions , none , those states have affirmed marriage to mean what it has traditionally meant . 
On Mitt Romney 's imposition of a universal health care plan in Massachusetts when he was governor : `` I think the objective analysis of the Massachusetts plan has been that it is done exactly opposite of what it was supposed to do . 
It was supposed to lower costs , it raised costs . 
Supposed to create access , people now have a hard time getting into the doctor . 
It was supposed to open up broader levels of coverage , now people are having to cut back coverage because they ca n't afford everything that they put out there on the plate I do n't think this is a political killer for Governor Romney , but I think he has to come out and say , ` States are supposed to take bold actions . ' '' 
I mention in the book the quote by Louis Brandeis , Supreme Court justice back in 1932 , who talked about states as a laboratory so that you test it in a state , not the whole country . 
If it works you do it , if it does n't work you do n't inflict it upon the other fifty states . '' 
He needs to explain why can not win the primary . 
That way he can stop waisting our time . 
He will lose the primary again , and he knows it . 
February 24 , 2011 03:14 pm at 3:14 pm | Unless someone is feeding him information that he should not have , he has no idea what the President know or why the WH is doing this or that . 
So until your in charge , shut up . 
February 24 , 2011 03:15 pm at 3:15 pm | DemoCommunists for a Better Way - Bankruptcy Obama has been a JOKE when it comes to Libya . 
He was more out spoken with Mubarack , one of our allies . 
Where are our aircraft carriers ? 
No where to be seen . 
I heard there was ONE US warship ship in the Med , a destroyer . 
Obama has shown the world just how weak kneed he is . 
And hundreds , maybe thousands , will die because of it . 
February 24 , 2011 03:18 pm at 3:18 pm | Keep your nose out of Libya 's business . 
You may be or have some authority here , but last I checked it 's somewhat diminished by the fact that you are not now holding office . 
Keep your opinions to yourself , and please allow the Libyan people the respect they deserve by letting them fix their country the way they want to . 
February 24 , 2011 03:32 pm at 3:32 pm | Obama is clueless on how to handle foreign affairs . 
Or did you forget he picked Biden as his foreign policy expert ? 
Yeah , what a disaster and other countries know it . 
February 24 , 2011 03:34 pm at 3:34 pm | The no fly zone is not entirely up to Obama and Huck is right he is not privy to the information needed to pass an opinion . 
He should share that with Republican leader Palin . 
The efforts in Libya are not just that of the US and people have to realize there is a lot at stake here and a no fly zone is a gamble that could go horribly wrong . 
Obama was excellent on this issue by making sure that he did not cock off towards Gadhafi before the Americans in Libya were secured . 
Gadhafi could potentially blow up the oilfeilds and kill thousands of innocent people and this has to be handled properly just like Obama is doing . 
Good for Huck in keeping the right tone here February 24 , 2011 03:35 pm at 3:35 pm | Yes , I see it now . 
Huckabee would be a good president for Libya . 
And I 'm sure ` DemoCommunists for a Better Way -- Bankruptcy ' will vote for him too . 
If there are two people who deserve to be in Libya , it is those two , becasue they have clearly given up on being in any western country that embraces the Enlightenment . 
February 24 , 2011 03:56 pm at 3:56 pm | Does the man understand the term civil war ? 
It is not our job to go into ither countries and do anything ! 
This is not gencide , this is civil unrest . 
It 's mind boggling to think Republicans of which he is one , will oppose healthcare for our citizens on the basis of states rights , yet expect the President to step into Lybia 's problems . 
And what of the 5000 please US troops our goverment has allowe dto die for no reason - we should not have invaded Iraq , yet he does n't condemn us for sending our men and women over ther . 
Sound hypocritcal to me February 24 , 2011 03:59 pm at 3:59 pm | Why was a question directed to Huckabee regarding the Republicans efforts to union busting ? 
He seems to have an answer for ever thing . 
President Obama is doing just fine . 
The previous administration left this country in the ditch and it is going to take years to get this ship right . 
We have two wars that we are currently engaged in that is a big drain our economy and the damage that banks did to us with the toxic loans is more than enough . 
All of this corruption and no one is being prosecuted because of what ? 
We also have the Kouch brothers that are influencing the Republicans to bust the unions to put more money in their pockets . 
So IMO the President is doing just fine . 
February 24 , 2011 04:06 pm at 4:06 pm | Frankly , I do n't mind Huckabee as a person , seems likable though I completely disagree with his beliefs . 
Way too religious for office . 
February 24 , 2011 04:18 pm at 4:18 pm | February 24 , 2011 04:21 pm at 4:21 pm | equal means equal ! 
all americans , gay or straight or somewhere in between , should have the same basic rights and that includes the right to marry . 
they may not want to exercise that right as often as newt gingrich has but they should have that option . 
February 24 , 2011 04:23 pm at 4:23 pm | -LRB- Insert Repub dipster 's name here -RRB- comments included criticizing President Obama over -LRB- anything and everything -RRB- . 
Only a fool would ever listen to these media whores who continue to flap their lips and are completely uninformed -LRB- they do n't get high-level briefings -RRB- and have absolutely no responsibility with the outcome of the situations President Obama deals with every day . 
It 's such a sad commentary on our nation that we have so many willing to do so much to try to make our president and our country fail , simply to gain personal and political power . 
February 24 , 2011 04:25 pm at 4:25 pm | Why is n't Huckabee advocating we attack North Korea ? 
The government there has been starving its people to death for years . 
How about invading Saudi Arabia because their religious police would rather let girls be burned alined in a school than let firefighters help them ? 
When Scotland pardoned the Lockerbie bombers , should we have invaded Great Britain ? 
What about Somalia and the former Yugoslavia ; did Huckabee support our efforts there or did he sit on the sidelines and criticize President Clinton -LRB- because he 's a Democrat -RRB- ? 
February 24 , 2011 04:30 pm at 4:30 pm | Why do these arrogant Republicans think that our every response to a situation is to invade another country ? 
First of all , do n't any of them realize it 's not like turning on a switch ? 
And have n't they learned A DARN THING from Iraq ? 
Contrary to what all these Republicans believe , the world does not always want us to waltz in and impose our military might on them . 
Some countries actually want to determine their own destinies . 
February 24 , 2011 04:32 pm at 4:32 pm | DemoCommunists for a Better Way -- Bankruptcy : When was the last time you were privy to high-level military and diplomatic intelligence ? 
Based on the stupidity of your comment , a better question is , When have you ever been privy to any kind of intelligence ? 
February 24 , 2011 04:34 pm at 4:34 pm | OK boys and girls , I know foreign policy is n't your strong suit , but Libya is a sovereign nation . 
Its in a state of civil war . 
That means we can not intervene under international law . 
Nobody can unless the UN decided to go in with a UN force and mandate . 
February 24 , 2011 04:34 pm at 4:34 pm | Huckabee is a fraud . 
One of his reasons for not announcing his presidential bid is because `` if he gets sick he wo n't have insurance for he and his family '' if he quits his lucritive paying job . 
This man is no more than snake oil salesman . 
February 24 , 2011 04:37 pm at 4:37 pm | Two men charged in death of Chicago girl who performed in inauguration event - wp . 
me\/p4HKM -191 H Rove and Trump ` all good Republicans , ' says McDonnell - wp . 
me\/p4HKM -191 E 6:28 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Apple CEO Tim Cook to be Obama 's State of the Union guest - wp . 
me\/p4HKM -191 A CNN 's GUT CHECK for February 11 , 2013 - wp . 
