NEW ORLEANS -- A law professor being paid $ 950 an hour with BP 's money has declared that the czar of the $ 20 billion claims fund for Gulf oil spill victims is independent of the oil giant . 
Fund administrator Ken Feinberg said Thursday he has agreed to pay New York University professor Stephen Gillers for his advice . 
Since being hired , Gillers has written a letter stating that Feinberg is neutral and not subject to BP 's direction or control . 
Feinberg said the Gulf Coast Claims Facility , created to administer payments from the fund to people and businesses , is billing BP for Gillers ' services . 
Some victims , lawyers and state officials unhappy with the claims process have questioned Feinberg 's independence and suggested he is a pawn in a BP effort to limit its liability . 
A statement Thursday from the Gulf Coast Claims Facility said Feinberg asked Gillers for advice about a Nov. 24 letter from Louisiana Attorney General James `` Buddy '' Caldwell questioning the independence of the fund and Feinberg 's role as the independent administrator . 
In a letter to Feinberg , Gillers wrote : `` You are not in an attorney-client relationship with BP . 
You are an independent administrator and owe none of the attributes of the attorney-client relationship -LRB- e.g. , loyalty , confidentiality -RRB- to BP . 
By ` independent ' I mean -LRB- and I think the context is clear -RRB- that you are independent of BP . 
You are not subject to its direction or control . '' 
The total amount Gillers will be paid is unclear . 
He told The Associated Press he is billing $ 950 an hour for his services and an assistant is billing $ 475 an hour . 
Gillers said he and the assistant have not calculated exactly how many hours they spent on the work , which Gillers said is now finished . 
GCCF spokeswoman Debra DeShong Reed said neither Feinberg nor the fund have any past relationship with Gillers . 
She said he was chosen because he is a nationally recognized expert in the field of legal ethics . 
Gillers said his work for Feinberg included reading the letter Caldwell sent Feinberg , reading court papers filed by lawyers suing BP , and researching rules governing lawyers in Gulf Coast states and in Washington , where Feinberg 's law firm is located . 
Both Gillers and Feinberg said they do n't believe there is anything wrong with using BP money to pay for the advice . 
`` Is he being paid by BP money ? 
Yes , '' Feinberg said . 
`` Who else is going to pay for the entire cost of this program ? 
You ca n't ask claimants to pay , you ca n't ask states and federal governments to pay . 
The buck stops with BP and BP has agreed to pay the entire cost of the infrastructure of this program . '' 
But Anthony Kennon , mayor of Orange Beach , Ala. , has questions about the relationship between Feinberg and BP . 
`` He can proclaim independence as much as he wants , '' said Kennon , whose community was hard hit by the oil spill . 
`` The only thing that will show true independence is if he makes those people whole who were harmed by the oil spill . 
We have not been made whole by a long shot . '' 
Lawyers who have already filed more than 300 lawsuits on behalf of Gulf residents and businesses say Feinberg should stop calling himself independent . 
They asked a federal judge last week to order changes to the release form people must sign if they accept a final payment from Feinberg . 
Feinberg currently requires people who accept final payments to agree not to sue BP or any other responsible party , including companies involved with the Deepwater Horizon rig that exploded April 20 off Louisiana 's coast . 
The blast killed 11 workers and led to 200 million gallons of oil spewing from BP 's well a mile beneath the Gulf of Mexico , according to government estimates that BP disputes . 
The lawyers say people should only have to give up the right to sue BP for compensatory damages , but they should still be allowed to go after BP in court for punitive damages . 
And , the lawyers say , people who accept final payments from the fund should be allowed to sue other responsible parties for both compensatory and punitive damages . 
So far , the fund has paid out roughly $ 2.6 billion . 
Money left over in the fund is expected to be returned to BP . 
