NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen : `` We are there to protect civilians ... and that will be our focus . '' 
NEW : NATO is expected to control no-fly zone by end of the day Monday NATO 's secretary general says NATO 's goal is to protect civilians `` We are not in Libya to arm people , but to protect people , '' he said NATO is taking the lead in enforcing the U.N. resolution Tune in to CNN tonight at 7 ET for live coverage of President Obama 's speech on Libya . 
Then at 8 and 9 p.m. , get expert analysis on '' In the Arena '' and '' Piers Morgan Tonight '' -- only on CNN . 
Brussels , Belgium -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- NATO 's secretary general ruled out arming Libyan rebels Monday as the alliance continued to take over command and control of the entire Libyan mission . 
The first NATO sorties to maintain the no-fly zone over Libya flew on Sunday , NATO officials said . 
The alliance is expected to be in complete command of the no-fly zone by the end of the day Monday . 
The mission of protecting civilians is expected to be under full NATO control by the end of the week , they said . 
By taking control of the full mission , NATO will allow the United States to step out of its lead role and more into a supporting one as requested by the Obama administration . 
In an interview with CNN here at NATO headquarters , Anders Fogh Rasmussen said , `` The U.N. mandate authorizes the enforcement of an arms embargo , '' and that NATO has decided to participate . 
`` We are not in Libya to arm people , but to protect people , '' he said . 
NATO takes over Libya mission Libyan rebels continue westward push Obama to speak on Libya Monday What does Obama need to say Monday ? 
The ambiguity of the U.N. Security Council Resolution about Libya has made for a wide range of opinion among nations about exactly the kind of intervention that is permitted in order to `` protect civilians . '' 
In an interview Sunday , U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates would not rule out the possibility of arming the rebels . 
`` No decision has been made about that at this point . 
The Security Council resolution would permit it . 
The second resolution , 1973 , would permit it . 
But no decisions have been made by our government about it , '' Gates told NBC 's `` Meet the Press . '' 
Some NATO sources acknowledged to CNN that they expect the scope of the rules of engagement to be more narrow than the coalition 's thus far , but they caution that as the situation on the ground changes , so too will the character of the NATO mission . 
`` Our mandate is very clear : We are there to protect civilians against attacks , no more , no less , and that will be our focus , '' Rasmussen said . 
He was unwilling to further characterize the nature of the rules of engagement . 
`` I will leave it to the military commanders to take decisions in concrete operations . 
We have decided in the NATO council on the overall political framework in full accordance with the U.N. mandate , and that is to protect civilians . 
And then we will leave it to the commanders to take daily decisions . '' 
The rules of engagement and the use of force to protect civilians have been contentious issues as NATO sought consensus to take over the Libyan mission . 
Turkey and Germany were among a handful of alliance members that want a more strict interpretation of the U.N. mandate . 
France , in particular , had been seeking more latitude to further embolden the rebels to topple Moammar Gadhafi . 
Rasmussen ruled out the possibility of any NATO member country carrying out a parallel campaign in Libya , including France . 
`` No , NATO is about solidarity , and the fact that NATO takes over the operation means that we have a unity of command '' he said . 
CNN 's Diana Magnay contributed to this report . 
