President Obama 's speech about U.S. military involvement in Libya lasted about 30 minutes and consisted of approximately 3,360 words . 
If you missed it , here 's what you need to know from the speech -- all in `` just '' 1,350 words . 
\*\* please note : this is an edited down version of the president 's speech , as prepared for delivery \*\* Good evening . 
Tonight , I d like to update the American people on the international effort that we have led in Libya what we have done , what we plan to do , and why this matters to us Mindful of the risks and costs of military action , we are naturally reluctant to use force to solve the world s many challenges . 
But when our interests and values are at stake , we have a responsibility to act . 
That is what happened in Libya over the course of these last six weeks . 
For more than four decades , the Libyan people have been ruled by a tyrant Moammar Gaddafi . 
He has denied his people freedom , exploited their wealth , murdered opponents at home and abroad , and terrorized innocent people around the world including Americans who were killed by Libyan agents . 
Last month , Gaddafi s grip of fear appeared to give way to the promise of freedom . 
In cities and towns across the country , Libyans took to the streets to claim their basic human rights . 
Faced with this opposition , Gaddafi began attacking his people . 
Ten days ago , having tried to end the violence without using force , the international community offered Gaddafi a final chance to stop his campaign of killing , or face the consequences . 
Rather than stand down , his forces continued their advance , bearing down on the city of Benghazi At this point , the United States and the world faced a choice We knew that if we waited one more day , Benghazi a city nearly the size of Charlotte could suffer a massacre that would have reverberated across the region and stained the conscience of the world . 
It was not in our national interest to let that happen . 
I refused to let that happen . 
And so nine days ago , after consulting the bipartisan leadership of Congress , I authorized military action to stop the killing and enforce UN Security Council Resolution 1973 . 
We struck regime forces approaching Benghazi to save that city and the people within it And tonight , I can report that we have stopped Gaddafi s deadly advance . 
To summarize , then : in just one month , the United States has worked with our international partners to mobilize a broad coalition , secure an international mandate to protect civilians , stop an advancing army , prevent a massacre , and establish a No Fly Zone with our allies and partners . 
To lend some perspective on how rapidly this military and diplomatic response came together , when people were being brutalized in Bosnia in the 1990s , it took the international community more than a year to intervene with air power to protect civilians . 
Moreover , we have accomplished these objectives consistent with the pledge that I made to the American people at the outset of our military operations . 
I said that America s role would be limited ; that we would not put ground troops into Libya ; that we would focus our unique capabilities on the front end of the operation , and that we would transfer responsibility to our allies and partners . 
Tonight , we are fulfilling that pledge . 
Our most effective alliance , NATO , has taken command of the enforcement of the arms embargo and No Fly Zone . 
Last night , NATO decided to take on the additional responsibility of protecting Libyan civilians . 
This transfer from the United States to NATO will take place on Wednesday . 
In that effort , the United States will play a supporting role . . 
Because of this transition . 
the risk and cost of this operation to our military , and to American taxpayers will be reduced significantly . 
Despite the success of our efforts over the past week , I know that some Americans continue to have questions about our efforts in Libya . 
Gaddafi has not yet stepped down from power , and until he does , Libya will remain dangerous . 
Moreover , even after Gaddafi does leave power , forty years of tyranny has left Libya fractured and without strong civil institutions . 
The transition to a legitimate government that is responsive to the Libyan people will be a difficult task . 
And while the United States will do our part to help , it will be a task for the international community , and more importantly a task for the Libyan people themselves . 
In fact , much of the debate in Washington has put forward a false choice when it comes to Libya . 
On the one hand , some question why America should intervene at all even in limited ways in this distant land . 
It is true that America can not use our military wherever repression occurs . 
And given the costs and risks of intervention , we must always measure our interests against the need for action . 
But that can not be an argument for never acting on behalf of what s right . 
In this particular country Libya ; at this particular moment , we were faced with the prospect of violence on a horrific scale . 
Some nations may be able to turn a blind eye to atrocities in other countries . 
The United States of America is different . 
And as President , I refused to wait for the images of slaughter and mass graves before taking action . 
Now , just as there are those who have argued against intervention in Libya , there are others who have suggested that we broaden our military mission beyond the task of protecting the Libyan people , and do whatever it takes to bring down Gaddafi and usher in a new government . 
Of course , there is no question that Libya and the world will be better off with Gaddafi out of power . 
I , along with many other world leaders , have embraced that goal , and will actively pursue it through non-military means . 
But broadening our military mission to include regime change would be a mistake If we tried to overthrow Gaddafi by force , our coalition would splinter . 
We would likely have to put U.S. troops on the ground , or risk killing many civilians from the air . 
The dangers faced by our men and women in uniform would be far greater . 
So would the costs , and our share of the responsibility for what comes next . 
To be blunt , we went down that road in Iraq . 
Thanks to the extraordinary sacrifices of our troops and the determination of our diplomats , we are hopeful about Iraq s future . 
But regime change there took eight years , thousands of American and Iraqi lives , and nearly a trillion dollars . 
That is not something we can afford to repeat in Libya . 
As Commander-in-Chief , I have no greater responsibility than keeping this country safe . 
And no decision weighs on me more than when to deploy our men and women in uniform . 
There will be times , though , when our safety is not directly threatened , but our interests and values are In such cases , we should not be afraid to act but the burden of action should not be America s alone . 
As we have in Libya , our task is instead to mobilize the international community for collective action . 
Because contrary to the claims of some , American leadership is not simply a matter of going it alone and bearing all of the burden ourselves . 
Real leadership creates the conditions and coalitions for others to step up as well ; to work with allies and partners so that they bear their share of the burden and pay their share of the costs ; and to see that the principles of justice and human dignity are upheld by all . 
My fellow Americans , I know that at a time of upheaval overseas when the news is filled with conflict and change it can be tempting to turn away from the world . 
But let us also remember that for generations , we have done the hard work of protecting our own people , as well as millions around the globe . 
We have done so because we know that our own future is safer and brighter if more of mankind can live with the bright light of freedom and dignity . 
Tonight , let us give thanks for the Americans who are serving through these trying times , and the coalition that is carrying our effort forward ; and let us look to the future with confidence and hope not only for our own country , but for all those yearning for freedom around the world . 
Thank you , God Bless you , and may God Bless the United States of America . 
Tunisia , Egypt , Libya Protests , and the likes , share one thing in common . 
It would boil down to unstoppable wave and movement of freedom . 
March 29 , 2011 at 12:43 am | Reply March 29 , 2011 at 12:59 am | Reply I am a long time CNN fan , but was most frustrated with tonight 's `` covrerage '' of the President 's speech on Libya . 
In particular John King , normally a smart man and equally savvy Wolf Blitzer tortured us and their guests respectively with the same questions . 
I lost respect for their repetitious harranging of Fareed Zakaria and Wesley Clark , who both made outstanding and insightful comments on the speech . 
More of them as commentators please particularly on this subject , and John and Wolf , how many times can you ask the same question ? 
Situations like what is happening in the region are by definition fluid and to not appreciate nuances is incomprehensible . 
How can one expect an `` exit strategy '' while the situation is unfolding by the hour and not the day ? 
You two sounded like GOP `` plants '' in your less than subtle criticism of the President not being more specific . 
it is not good for Americans , who have been `` dumbed down '' enought by the likes of black and white sound bite thinkers . 
You 're better than that ... at least I hope that this was an off night . 
As a political `` junkie '' I was so appalled by you two in particular that not only did it seem as if iwas in the movie `` Groundhog Day , '' but I had to go to Law and Order re-runs just to settle down . 
And with that I 'll rest my case . 
March 29 , 2011 at 1:17 am | Reply The Democrats pounded President Bush for years , asking why he have entered two wars without an exit strategy . 
I is only true that we should ask the same of the Democrat President . 
March 30 , 2011 at 3:01 pm | Reply This was a perfect speech outlining the most intelligent path any US president could possibly take and have taken regarding intervention in Libya . 
There is no height of praise that overstates President Obama 's valor in his approach to helping the world and the Libyan people in the past days . 
It was absolutely optimal . 
I am glad I am not a republican struggling to find some modicum of error in President Obama 's choices to advance my own political position . 
I would open my mouth and whatever contradictory words seeped out would make me feel like an idiot . 
March 29 , 2011 at 3:09 am | Reply I was satisfied with the speach he said exactly what I felt this mission was about in the first place . 
I had no false ideas and knew the presidant would get critizided from all sides . 
He is is correct on being a true leader means to create a team a team than can work together and help bear the burden you can witness that in all successful corparations and grat sports team Duh and with this nato team I expect grat things in the world to happen as long as they stick together March 29 , 2011 at 10:11 am | Reply Hypocrite ! 
Now , that it suites his purpose he tells us that American 's do n't turn a blind eye to atrocities . 
He tells us that our own future is safer and brighter if more of mankind can live with the bright light of freedom and dignity . 
Then why did we do NOTHING when there were mass protests in Iran in 2009 ? 
Why , when the people of Iran were asking for help & support , for the same freedoms that we say we support around the world , we sat on our hands , did NOTHING , said NOTHING ! 
Hypocrisy at it 's very best ! 
March 29 , 2011 at 2:59 pm | Reply @ Eli -- It was not President Obama who wanted to go in . 
He reluctantly did so after the UN decided to intervene . 
So your question should be to the UN . 
You can not blame everything on President Obama . 
March 29 , 2011 at 9:22 pm | Reply @Eli , evidently the UN nor CONRESS saw fit to intervene ! 
We as ` blogging politicians ' , evidently did n't PUSH for intervention either ! 
So who are REALLY the hypocrites ? 
PRESIDENT OBAMA works , if at all possible within the boundaries of the law . 
AMERICA was put in mainly in support of the humanitarian crisis ! 
` He tells us that our own futures are safer and brighter ... ' ? 
Well now , did n't GWB say just about the same thing when he pull down HUSSEIN ? 
IRAQ was truly ` THE ILLEGALEST WAR OF THE CENTURY ' , PERIOD ! 
March 30 , 2011 at 1:54 pm | Reply Liz , please remind me again , just how was the war in Iraq illegal ? 
Let 's see , he got congress approval , some 80 % of Americans were behind the war , oh yea , and the UN had approved the removal of Hussein . 
March 30 , 2011 at 3:05 pm | Reply When did the UN approve anything other than sanctions ? 
Or are we in FOX territory ? 
`` Following Sean Hannity 's lead , The Washington Times falsely suggested that the United Nations supported President Bush 's invasion of Iraq . 
In fact , the U.N. Security Council did not back Bush 's invasion of Iraq , and then-Secretary General Kofi Annan suggested the invasion was ` illegal . ' '' 
People seem to forget hitsory a lot these days . 
it was only 40 years ago that Psychologists at UC Davis declared homosexuality not a mental disorder ? 
I know that has little comparison to what you were talking about but I 'm smelling what you 're stepping in . 
August 1 , 2012 at 10:56 pm | Reply The connection for world Islamic terror somehow always can be traced back to Syria and Iran . 
Trouble is that we have a Wimp in Chief in the White House who was supposed to make things better with Iran and has only made it worse . 
And when Obama had the chance to help the Iranian people who were begging him for at least verbal support , he was on vacation and cared less . 
But when an ally of the US , Mubarak was in trouble , Obama ditched him under the bus just like he did his mentor Rev. Jeremiah Wright . 
March 30 , 2011 at 2:06 pm | Reply It was to halite a historically documented fact that almost all social and economic disaster in the past century and half , have been a direct result of lunatic leftist policies . 
See socialism , communism , Maoism . . 
and all other isms . 
It is as if this -LRB- mostly lest educated lot -RRB- are convinced that hey know best . 
They are usually the noisiest in all political forums but once their planned policies fail they quickly move on to another bizarre set of actions . 
See their most recent hoax , Global Warming . 
March 30 , 2011 at 2:07 pm | Reply Jay , why are you saying DEMOCRATS are the only ones who were asking about an exit strategy ? 
There were a few REPUBLICANS questioning the same thing . 
There was not 80 % of AMERICANS behind that war and I mean from ANY party ! 
We all wondered what in the hades was going on when we knew BIN LADEN was n't there ! 
Then early on we found out there were no WMDs ! 
We found out that was just lies and trickery ! 
We finally heard about the ` oil potential ' ! 
So what 80 % of AMERICANS are you talking about ? 
That 's just lies ! 
March 30 , 2011 at 5:19 pm | Reply May 2003 A Gallup poll made on behalf of CNN and the newspaper USA Today concluded that 79 % of Americans thought the Iraq War was justified , with or without conclusive evidence of illegal weapons . 
March 31 , 2011 at 4:35 am | Reply Bush 's administration was saying we could n't wait for conclusive evidence because `` the smoking gun will be a mushroom cloud . '' 
Of course people were for the war when Bush was saying in the SOTU to Congress that Saddam was buying uranium from Africa . 
Every justification Bush gave for the war at the time -LRB- the humanitarian aspect was not a factor -RRB- was proved false . 
All the intelligence was forged or extremely dubious , foreign governments said it , the CIA knew it , and if Bush did n't know it then there was a huge problem with his administration . 
April 1 , 2011 at 10:46 pm | Yes , we sure did start asking when were we going to get our boys and girls back home ! 
We were n't really asking for an ` exit strategy ' persay ; we just wanted to know when they were getting out of there ; out of IRAQ , period ! 
We did n't care about strategy , it could have been by any means necessary ! 
The mission changed 2 or 3 times after there were no weapons ; it became lets go get HUSSEIN ; then let 's stay here in these civil wars to protect the people ! 
Let 's go get this oil and money while we 're here ! 
March 30 , 2011 at 5:35 pm | Reply On March 30 , 2011 at 3:38 pm , Liz Carter in Georgia said `` Many past presidents have adjusted and re-adjusted earlier views and goals , once they become privvy to the full scope of all the information surrounding issues ! '' 
I guess you would have to say that President Bush was just readjusting earlier goals . 
March 31 , 2011 at 4:42 am | Reply YOUR ALL AS ____ HOLES WHAT DO ANY OF YOU KNOW ABOUT THIS PRESIDENT HOW MANY OF YOU HAVE READ HIS BOOKS BEFORE BECOMING PRESIDENT ?????????? NOT A F ____ ING ONE OF YOU , YOU ARE JUST A BUNCH OF CARD CARRYING `` DEM 'S '' YOU WOULD VOTE FOR SCUM WHICH YOU HAVE . 
READ READ AND LEARN YOU DUMMIES ... ... March 30 , 2011 at 9:57 pm | Reply @HO - HO , If you ran for president , and I listened to your plans and goals to make AMERICA a better AMERICA for it 's citizens and they were GOOD ; and especially if you were a DEMOCRAT , and was competing against a ` way of life ' killing REPUBLICANT , I would vote for you ! 
Whether I had read your books or not ! 
Yes , I 'm a card carrying DEMOCRAT , who did vote for REAGAN , OK ? 
I saw just about all of his movies ! 
Seriously , I vote for the man , mosttimes , not just the PARTY ! 
I thought REAGAN was a good president ! 
March 30 , 2011 at 11:51 pm | Reply V salute da fighting souls who r determined2grant fresh air2those civilians in need . 
great initiative , alwaz , gr8 ! 
March 31 , 2011 at 12:08 am | Reply Yes ! 
That 's what I 'm saying ! 
He was n't the most competent anyway ! 
The greedy , money-mongering system probably did draw him in on a view that was n't clear to him of what the end results were going to be on the wars . 
All he saw was money , money , and more money ! 
CHENEY was the BIG DOG ! 
He sat down in his bunker and practically manipulated BUSH into doing whatever he wanted . 
CHENEY was PRESIDENT INCOGNITO since he was smartest ; or at least the most well read ! 
But BUSH was the PRESIDENT . 
The buck stops there ! 
March 31 , 2011 at 7:34 pm | Reply The difference is even though many AMERICANS were against many of the BUSH\/CHENEY decisions , especially the war ones , we ultimately went along with them because there was n't much we could do about them . 
We could disagree until we were blue in the face , the cowboys went right on doing what they wanted to do ! 
We did n't hear nor see media cycles pushing coverage of ANTI-BUSH pundits , contributors , analysts , even journalists , graphs and polls supposedly indicating AMERICAN intolerance to the decisions 24\/7\/365 ! 
March 31 , 2011 at 7:58 pm | Reply April 1 , 2011 at 6:22 pm | Reply @salvatore ; they have been trying to rewrite , smudge , erase , adjust , smooth-over , make right , justify , validate and refabricate mostly everything BUSH did when he was PRESIDENT ! 
The media has been on a mission to send the perception to the masses that BUSH was n't half bad . 
Everything he did , right or wrong was RIGHT ad legal ! 
Everybody in the world knows that he did n't have UN approval to send our troops to IRAQ ! 
They figure if they ease that lie out here long enough the masses will start to belive it ! 
April 6 , 2011 at 7:01 am | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
Go inside the White House and on the road with CNN 's reporters , producers , and photojournalists . 
1600 provides you with an ALL ACCESS PASS inside the gates and behind the scenes . 
CNN 's White House team is unmatched in the news we break , the content we generate , and the sheer size of the team . 
But do n't let this be a one-way conversation , send us news tips and feedback ! 
Some presidential movements are OTR , or off-the-record , to the public and press until the president 's motorcade arrives at the previously undisclosed location . 
