2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
In mid-January , autocratic Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali fled the country and an interim government took over . 
The success of the Tunisian protests in prompting regime change soon spurred similar protests across North Africa and the Middle East . 
Here is what 's happening today : -LRB- 11:39 p.m. Monday ET , 5:39 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- Fareed Zakaria , host of CNN 's `` Fareed Zakaria GPS , '' reacts to U.S. President Barack Obama 's televised address on Libya : -LRB- 11:28 p.m. Monday ET , 5:28 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's youngest son , who runs the country 's elite special forces for his father 's regime , was on an internship program in the United States when public unrest exploded in Libya last month , CNN 's Pam Benson reports . 
Khamis Gadhafi abruptly cut off his visit and returned to Libya , where he has led the 32nd Reinforced Brigade , known at the Khamis Brigade , in its suppression of rebel forces . 
ABC News was the first to report Khamis ' recent stay in the U.S. . 
The brigade 's headquarters was the target of six Tomahawk missiles overnight , according to Vice Adm. William Gortney of the Joint Staff . 
Libya 's state TV on Monday night broadcast live footage from Gadhafi 's Tripoli compound of Khamis dressed in uniform and greeting people . 
Prior to the broadcast there had been unconfirmed reports that the younger Gadhafi had died from injuries he suffered when a plane flown by a disgruntled Libyan pilot crashed into a military compound while he was there . 
-LRB- 7:55 p.m. Monday ET , 1:55 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- The world had a `` unique ability to stop '' violence `` on a horrific scale '' in Libya by acting in a broad coalition with the support of Arab countries , U.S. President Barack Obama said in his televised address on Libya . 
`` I am convinced that a failure to act in Libya would have carried a far greater price for America , '' he said . 
He also said that while there is no question that Libya would be better off without Moammar Gadhafi as leader , the United States will actively pursue his ouster through non-military means . 
But broadening the military mission `` to include regime change would be a mistake , '' Obama said . 
The transition to a `` legitimate government '' in Libya is `` a task for the international community , and more importantly , a task for the Libyan people themselves , '' Obama said , adding : `` If we tried to overthrow Gadhafi by force , our coalition would splinter . '' 
-LRB- 7:38 p.m. Monday ET , 1:38 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- - U.S. President Barack Obama , addressing the Libyan situation in a televised speech , said he ordered U.S. warships into the Mediterranean off Libya because of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's `` brutal repression '' of his people and `` a looming humanitarian crisis . '' 
`` It was not in our national interest '' to let the citizens of Benghazi - a rebel stronghold on which pro-Gadhafi forces were advancing before coalition airstrikes - suffer a massacre at the hands of Gadhafi 's forces , Obama said . 
It would have `` stained the conscience of the world , '' he said . 
-LRB- 7:03 p.m. Monday ET , 1:03 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- Pro-Gadhafi forces say they have taken control of the entire western Libyan city of Misrata after days of fighting there , but rebels say they still control the center of the city . 
The Libyan government has escorted journalists , including CNN 's Nic Robertson , to Misrata , but not to the city 's center . 
In the video below , Robertson describes seeing signs of heavy fighting in Misrata , including `` mile after mile of damage '' and `` tanks hiding under trees at the side of the road . '' 
-LRB- 6:43 p.m. Monday ET , 12:43 a.m. Tuesday in Libya -RRB- Since the coalition military operation began more than a week ago , the United States ' `` unique capabilities '' have been referred to time and time again by U.S. officials , from President Barack Obama to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton . 
CNN 's Jennifer Rizzo takes a look at those capabilities - military tools that other coalition and NATO countries do not , or do not have as much of , including surveillance and communication jamming capabilities . 
-LRB- 5:31 p.m. Monday ET , 11:31 p.m. in Libya -RRB- The U.S. military already has reduced its day-to-day presence in the coalition military operation above and around Libya , according to a defense official . 
`` Some of the ships have peeled off , but are still in the region , '' said the official , who declined to be identified because of the sensitivity of the mission . 
At least two of the ships involved in the initial phase of establishing the no-fly zone over Libya - which began March 19 - are no longer involved in day-to-day operations , the official said . 
NATO is beginning to take command and control of the no-fly zone . 
However , it could take until Thursday or Friday for the organization to take over the entire mission mandated by a March 17 U.N. Security Council resolution . 
That resolution authorized the no-fly zone 's creation and the protection of civilians . 
-LRB- 4:37 p.m. Monday ET , 10:27 p.m. in Libya -RRB- U.S. Navy Vice Adm. Bill Gortney said at the Pentagon Monday that the United States is not working in direct support of opposition forces in Libya . 
`` We 're not coordinating with the opposition , '' he said , adding that any gain it makes is `` tenuous . '' 
Gortney 's comments come after Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov complained Monday that airstrikes by an international coalition including the United States seemed to expand beyond the scope of a U.N. resolution . 
That resolution , approved on March 17 , created a no-fly zone above Libya and mandates the protection of civilians . 
`` There are reports - which go undenied - that the air forces of the coalition conduct airstrikes on -LRB- Libyan leader Moammar -RRB- Gadhafi 's troops and support the military actions of rebels . 
There is an obvious controversy there , '' Lavrov told reporters in Moscow . 
`` We believe that the interference into what is , essentially , an internal civil war is not sanctioned by the U.N. Security Council resolution . '' 
Libyan government officials also have argued that coalition forces target only troops loyal to Gadhafi . 
-LRB- 4:31 p.m. Monday ET , 10:31 p.m. in Libya -RRB- U.S. Navy Vice Adm. Bill Gortney said at the Pentagon Monday that there have been no confirmed reports of civilian casualties in Libya as a result of coalition activity . 
On Monday , Libyan state television displayed images of injured people in a hospital and destroyed buildings as it reported that civilians were wounded when bombs struck the central Libyan city of Sabha . 
CNN was unable to independently verify that report . 
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates on Sunday said America had `` intelligence reporting about Gadhafi taking the bodies of the people he 's killed and putting them at the sites where we 've attacked . '' 
-LRB- 4:10 p.m. Monday ET , 10:10 p.m. in Libya -RRB- Hours ahead of U.S. President Barack Obama 's nationally televised addressed on the situation in Libya , Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell said that `` if the American people are uncertain as to our military objectives in Libya , it 's with good cause . '' 
`` What national security interest of the United States justified the risk of American life ? '' 
McConnell , R-Kentucky , asked . 
`` What is the role of our country in Libya 's ongoing civil war ? '' 
Obama 's speech follows calls from across the political spectrum for him to clarify America 's role in the U.N.-authorized military mission in Libya . 
-LRB- 3:14 p.m. Monday ET , 9:14 p.m. in Libya -RRB- U.S. intelligence sees signs that some of those who are `` relatively close to the Libyan leader are questioning whether he has staying power , '' a U.S. official says , according to CNN 's Pam Benson . 
American intelligence has seen indications that the `` morale of Gadhafi forces is on the decline '' as rebels have made significant gains over the past week , the official said . 
-LRB- 1:23 p.m. Monday ET , 7:23 p.m. in Libya -RRB- Libyan opposition fighters Monday entered territory loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , but soon had to flee amid a barage of gunfire , rebels told CNN . 
As they moved into Umm el Ghindel - near Sirte , Gadhafi 's birthplace - they began searching some homes and found that Gadhafi 's forces had armed residents in the area , rebels said . 
As they were talking to residents , asking them to join the opposition , gunfire broke out . 
Rebels told CNN they refused to fire back and began a hasty retreat . 
A stream of vehicles could be seen fleeing the area . 
-LRB- 1:21 p.m. Monday ET , 7:21 p.m. in Egypt -RRB- Egypt 's military rulers reduced a nationwide curfew so that it applies from 2 a.m. to 5 a.m. as of Monday , said Maj. Mohamed Askar , a spokesman for the Egyptian military . 
-LRB- 12:36 p.m. Monday ET , 7:36 p.m. in Yemen -RRB- At least 121 people were killed and 45 injured in an explosion at an ammunition factory in southern Yemen on Monday , medical sources said . 
The death toll was expected to rise , said the sources , who asked that they not be identified because they are not authorized to speak to the news media . 
The blast comes after months of demonstrations against Yemen 's President Ali Abdullah Saleh , and a weekend of violence between government forces and the local al Qaeda group . 
-LRB- 11:34 a.m. Monday ET , 5:34 p.m. in Syria -RRB- Two Reuters journalists missing in Syria since Saturday have been released by Syrian authorities , the news agency reported Monday . 
A Syrian official said the journalists were detained and questioned because they did not have a permit to work in Syria and had filmed `` in an area where filming is not permitted . '' 
The two traveled to Syria on Thursday to cover the unrest in the country , according to Reuters . 
Until their release Monday , television producer Ayat Basma and cameraman Ezzat Baltaji were last heard from on Saturday , when they sent a message to a colleague saying they were about to leave Syria for Lebanon , the news agency said . 
-LRB- 11:13 a.m. Monday ET , 5:13 p.m. in Syria -RRB- An `` extraordinary number '' of security forces flooded the Syrian city of Daraa on Monday , patrolling streets and guarding government buildings in an apparent attempt to stave off further protests , a political activist in the city told CNN . 
The city is extremely tense and `` people are sitting at home scared watching the updates on TV , '' said Aman Aswad . 
He said thousands of troops were deployed in the city , guarding government buildings , major streets and the city gates . 
At least 37 people have died in violent protests since last week in Daraa , according to the U.N. Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights . 
But Syria 's state-run news agency denied reports that security forces had fired on protesters Monday . 
The reports are `` completely false , '' the agency reported on its website , citing an official government source . 
-LRB- 10:21 a.m. Monday ET , 4:21 p.m. in Libya -RRB- NATO officials said the alliance is expected to be in complete command of the no-fly zone over Libya by the end of the day Monday . 
The mission of protecting civilians is expected to be under full NATO control by the end of the week , they said . 
-LRB- 9:49 a.m. Monday ET , 3:49 p.m. in Libya -RRB- NATO 's secretary general ruled out arming Libyan rebels Monday , as the alliance continued to take over command and control of the entire Libyan mission . 
The first NATO sorties to implement the no-fly zone over Libya flew on Sunday , NATO officials said . 
NATO expects to have complete command and control of all aspects of the Libyan mission by week 's end , allowing the United States to step out of its lead role and more into a supporting one , as requested by the Obama administration . 
In an interview with CNN at NATO headquarters , Anders Fogh Rasmussen said , `` The U.N. mandate authorizes the enforcement of an arms embargo , '' and that NATO has decided to participate . 
`` We are not in Libya to arm people , but to protect people , '' he said . 
-LRB- 9:19 a.m. Monday ET , 3:19 p.m. in Egypt -RRB- Voters in Egypt will elect members of parliament in September and cast ballots for president sometime after that , a member of the ruling military council said Monday . 
Gen. Mamdou Shahen said the elections would not be held under Egypt 's emergency law , though he did not specify when the law would be lifted . 
-LRB- 9:03 a.m. Monday ET , 3:03 p.m. in Libya -RRB- Libyan opposition fighters continued their march west Monday with a key target in their sights : Sirte , Moammar Gadhafi 's birthplace . 
Rebel forces claimed to have gained control Ras Lanuf on Sunday . 
The opposition also appeared to have taken control of the key oil town of al-Brega . 
Victories in those cities marked a comeback for the ragtag group of amateur soldiers who are unified by one mission : toppling Gadhafi 's nearly 42-year rule . 
On Monday , opposition troops and Gadhafi 's security forces battled over the town of Nawfaliyah . 
Opposition forces told CNN they had gained control of the city . 
-LRB- 8:11 a.m. Monday ET , 3:11 p.m. in Yemen -RRB- At least 40 people were killed and 90 wounded in an explosion at an ammunition factory in Yemen on Monday , medical and security officials said . 
The dead and and wounded were mainly locals who were ransacking the factory after it was taken over by militants on Sunday , security officials said . 
The explosion took place in Abyan Province in southern Yemen , they said . 
sorry i did n't say good night to banasy was already gone So , lemme get this straight : the Gadhafis dont like the u.s. but theyll come here to get schooling ?? Schooling ? 
Must be hangin around my gramma too much , shes all knowed up too . 
She learned me real good . 
OBAMA IS A BLACK BUSH WELL BARRY I WATCHED YOU READING THE TELEPROMPTER AND YOU ALMOST CONVINCED ME THAT YOU ARE A SANE PERSON ... . 
YOU MURDEROUS THUG YOU OIL GRABBING PIECE OF SHIT , YOU PATHETIC BREZINSKY PUPPET . 
Thank you , OBAMA IS A BLACK BUSH . 
I feel the same way about the creep ! 
March 31 , 2011 at 1:05 am | Report abuse | `` He will be sent at a time of intense disputeThe final hour will not come until the river Euphrates -LRB- which flows through Syria and Iraq and finally opens in the Gulf -RRB- will disclose a mountain of gold over which people will fight and die . 
It should be noted that this is a sign , which will precede Imaam Mahdi only according to some Ulama . 
Abu Huraira -LRB- R.A. -RRB- reported that the Messenger of Allah said , `` The hour shall not occur until the Euphrates will disclose a mountain of gold over which people will fight . 
Ninety - nine out of which hundred shall be killed and every one of them will say ' Perchance I shall be the one to succeed . '' 
-LRB- Muslim -RRB- In another narration we have been told that whoever is present at the time when the Euphrates discloses a mountain of gold should not take the gold . 
s and differences among people and earthquakes . '' 
-LRB- Ahmad -RRB- Hey , finger-boy , we would get the idea with only one set ... clever as it may be , I 'm tired of scrolling through forty f-u 's . 
Ca n't you limit it ? 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
