Syrian woman and men chant slogans against Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad after arriving in Wadi Khaled in northern Lebanon , near the Lebanese-Syrian border May 16 , 2011 . 
By Khaled Yacoub Oweis and Suleiman al-Khalidi AMMAN | Mon May 16 , 2011 7:18 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian villagers pulled 13 bodies from a mass grave near the southern city of Deraa on Monday , residents said , and thousands joined a night-time march in a Damascus suburb demanding the overthrow of the government . 
Deraa residents say hundreds of people have been missing since tanks and soldiers moved in last month to crush the cradle of opposition to President Bashar al-Assad 's 11-year rule . 
They said villagers digging in farmland in the outskirts of the city uncovered the decomposed bodies of Abdullah Abdul Aziz Aba Zaid , 62 , and four of his children . 
The villagers also found the bodies of a woman , a child and six men , all unidentified , residents said . 
It was not clear when they died , but Deraa residents say dozens of civilians were killed during the military assault on the city 's old quarter . 
Syrian and international rights groups say Syrian forces have killed at least 700 civilians across the country since the first protests broke out in Deraa on March 18 . 
The report on the mass grave could not be confirmed independently . 
Thousands of demonstrators marched through the Damascus suburb of Saqba on Monday night at the funeral of Ahmad Ataya , who died of wounds inflicted when security forces fired at a pro-democracy rally in the capital last month . 
A witness said the demonstrators marched at night to avoid the tough security measures that are in force during the day . 
It was the biggest protest in the Damascus outskirts since a security crackdown three weeks ago . 
Authorities have blamed most of the violence during the wave of protests on armed groups backed by Islamists and outside powers , who they say have killed more than 120 members of the security forces . 
Witnesses in Deraa said tanks were still positioned at main city junctions and in the outskirts , but authorities had shortened the curfew by three hours , allowing people out on the streets until 5.00 pm -LRB- 1400 GMT -RRB- . 
The official Syrian news agency said Assad met a delegation from Deraa and they discussed the `` positive atmosphere there as a result of cooperation between the residents and the army . '' 
Further north , at least 15 tanks deployed around Arida , near the border town of Tel Kelakh which troops entered on Saturday after protests erupted against Assad , and their arrival prompted dozens of families to flee into neighboring Lebanon . 
An activists ' protest group said at least seven civilians were killed in Tel Kelakh on Sunday when troops shelled the town and sniper fire killed one civilian on Monday , raising the death toll in the army 's assault since Saturday to 12 . 
The Syrian state news agency said five soldiers were killed in confrontations with armed groups in Tel Kalakh . 
One resident reported intermittent shelling of Tel Kelakh and bursts of machinegun fire on Monday , but the army appeared not to have advanced beyond the outskirts . 
`` Tel Kelakh is a ghost town . 
There are no doctors . 
Snipers are on the roof of the main hospital . 
Phones , water and electricity are cut , '' Mohammad al-Dandashi told Reuters from the town by satellite phone . 
A few families from Hilat , another border village , streamed into Lebanon on Monday as did two wounded civilians from Tel Kelakh who were seeking medical care , family members said . 
For the past two months Syrian soldiers and police have been trying to quell demonstrations across the country calling for Assad 's overthrow . 
They have tended to crack down on a flashpoint area for several days , using tank and rifle fire and mass arrests to subdue it , and then move on to another area . 
Troops backed by armor have now deployed in or around towns and villages across the southern Hauran plain , the central province of Homs and areas near the coast . 
Security forces have also tightened their grip on Damascus and its suburbs . 
The Lebanese army said it had sent reinforcements to the border , set up checkpoints and started intensive patrols to prevent `` infiltration activities on both sides . '' 
International media organizations are largely banned from Syria , making it difficult to verify accounts of events there . 
Assad , who trained as an ophthalmologist , has used a mixture of repression and promises of reform to stem the protests , which were inspired by uprisings across the Arab world . 
The United States and the European Union have imposed targeted sanctions on Syrian officials and condemned the violence used to suppress dissent . 
Authorities said Assad intended to launch national dialogue talks , an offer rejected by opposition leaders and the main activists ' protest group , who say security forces must first stop shooting protesters and political prisoners must be freed . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The question is how long will Obama administration will give Assad , I think until we have a civil war and it 's getting close because there is so much people can take . 
Syrian people thought Turkey will not allowed the killing to happen but I think we all were wrong after all , every one looking for its own interest . 
Syrians will remember Russia & China position real well and once the regime is gone they will be gone with it ... . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
