Coast Guard Capt. Hung Nguyen , right , and retired U.S. district judge Wayne Andersen confer during a hearing by the Coast Guard and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement . 
-LRB- Photos By Gerald Herbert -RRB- Kyle Schonekas , attorney for Deepwater Horizon oil rig captain Curt Kuchta , objects during the hearing to what he argued was a lack of impartiality by Nguyen and asked that he recuse himself . 
METAIRIE , LA. - The BP oil spill cleanup is winding down , but the lawyers are just warming up . 
The gusher of litigation might not be capped for years . 
At a Holiday Inn near the freeway here , a conference room was packed Tuesday with some big lumber from the legal profession . 
The lawyers represented oil giant BP , Transocean , Halliburton , Cameron , Anadarko , Weatherford , Dril-Quip , M-I Swaco , Sperry Sun and some of the survivors of the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
This is the latest set of hearings by the U.S. Coast Guard and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement , which have been investigating the April 20 blowout that killed 11 people . 
The marine board will write a report and make recommendations for improved safety and regulations . 
For the lawyers , this is all material for the trials and lawsuits yet to come . 
More than 300 lawsuits reportedly have been filed against BP , but that 's only one part of the legal story . 
The companies involved with the Deepwater Horizon disaster are likely to sue one another , though so far they 've mostly battled via news releases and stinging quotes from the corporate communications departments . 
Meanwhile , the Justice Department is conducting a criminal investigation . 
`` There are the injury-death cases ; there 's the stockholder cases ; there 's the environmental cases ; there 's the economic loss cases ; and all the government cases , '' said lawyer Ronnie Penton , who has multiple clients who have filed suit against BP and who specializes in injury-death litigation . 
`` It could go on for 10 years , '' said Kyle Schonekas , attorney for the sunken rig 's captain , Curt Kuchta of Transocean . 
Schonekas provided the day 's highlight-reel performance . 
The co-chairman of the investigative panel , Coast Guard Capt. Hung Nguyen , had been asking many witnesses about Kuchta 's actions immediately after the explosion , focusing on whether Kuchta was fully in command of the situation . 
Finally , Schonekas leapt to his feet and loudly declared , `` This is nothing more than an effort , continually by Captain Nguyen , to character assassinate my client . '' 
He then made a motion to have Nguyen recuse himself because of his `` bias . '' 
Nguyen did not respond . 
The board member running the proceeding , retired federal judge Wayne Andersen , quickly denied the motion . 
There were other squalls in the windowless Magnolia Room on this unseasonably cool day in New Orleans . 
At one point in the morning , Nguyen chided Transocean , the rig 's owner , for what he said was a persistent unwillingness to produce witnesses and documents . 
Nguyen directed a Coast Guard aide to place five enlarged documents on an easel at the front of the room . 
Nguyen said the documents indicated that senior Transocean executives knew that some company rigs had questionable safety records . 
`` To me , Transocean has not been responsive to the requests of this board , '' Nguyen said . 
Transocean attorneys took turns popping up from their seats and firing back . 
