Wednesday , October 6 , 2010 ; 9:06 PM A commission set up by President Obama to scrutinize the Gulf of Mexico oil spill has released preliminary reports that say the administration created the impression that it was `` either not fully competent '' or `` not fully candid with the American people about the scope of the problem . '' 
The National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling released four `` working papers '' Wednesday that said the administration 's response was marked by confusion about the spill rate , slowing the federal effort immediately after the oil exploration well blew out April 20 . 
The commission staff 's preliminary papers also said that Obama 's Office of Management and Budget later delayed a report by government scientists that would have included a `` worst-case '' estimate of the rate of the spill , weeks before the government revised its own official estimates upward . 
The reports delivered a harsh assessment of the administration 's later contention that most of the spill was `` gone . '' 
They point to comments by Carol M. Browner , Obama 's climate and energy czar , who in a television interview mischaracterized a report as saying that three-quarters of the spill had disappeared . 
The White House responded Wednesday by saying that confusion about numbers had not hindered its response to the spill . 
The federal effort `` was full force and immediate , and the response focused on state and local plans and evolved when needed , '' National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration head Jane Lubchenco and OMB Acting Director Jeffrey Zients said in a statement . 
Moreover , an OMB spokesman said that the agency was not trying to hide the gravity of the spill and that NOAA 's report , which was focused on the spill 's shore impact , was sent for revisions for reasons having nothing to do with the flow rate . 
`` The issue was the modeling , the science and the assumptions they were using to come up with their analysis . 
Not public relations or presentation , '' said Kenneth Baer , OMB 's spokesman . 
`` We offered NOAA suggestions of ways to improve their analysis , and they happily accepted it . '' 
The White House added that senior government officials were publicly clear about how bad the spill might get : `` In early May , -LRB- Interior Secretary Ken Salazar -RRB- and Admiral Thad Allen told the American people that the worst-case scenario could be more than 100,000 barrels a day . 
In addition , BP reported in 2009 that a blowout of the Deepwater Horizon -LRB- MC 252 -RRB- could yield 162,000 barrels of oil a day . '' 
But transcripts show that Salazar and Allen , who oversaw the government 's disaster response , were referring to a more catastrophic type of blowout that never occurred , while BP 's 2009 figures were hypothetical and not based on observations after the spill began . 
The commission 's analysis raises questions about two key promises of the Obama administration - that its response to the spill would reflect its commitments to rigorous science and to government transparency . 
`` Federal government responders may be correct in stating that low flow-rate estimates did not negatively affect their operations , '' said one of the commission 's working papers . 
`` Even if responders are correct , however , loss of the public 's trust during a disaster is not an incidental public relations problem . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
