President Gerald Ford and his wife , Betty , hug each other in the Oval Office of the White House in this December 6 , 1974 handout photograph obtained on July 8 , 2011 . 
Credit : Reuters\/David Hume Kennerly\/Courtesy Gerald R. Ford Library\/Handout LOS ANGELES | Sat Jul 9 , 2011 8:00 am BST LOS ANGELES -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Betty Ford , the wife of the late President Gerald Ford , who overcame alcohol and prescription drug addictions and helped found a rehabilitation clinic that bears her name , died on Friday at the age of 93 . 
`` I was deeply saddened this afternoon when I heard of Betty Ford 's death , '' another former first lady , Nancy Reagan , said in a statement confirming Ford 's death . 
Ford once was dubbed the `` fighting first lady '' by Time magazine because of her outspoken political views , which often differed from those of her husband 's Republican Party . 
She strongly supported women 's rights while her husband was president from 1974 to 1977 , working the phones in a vain attempt to get states to pass the Equal Rights Amendment , which sought to give women and men equality under law . 
Ford 's candor was surprising for the time . 
She took a tolerant stance on abortion and admitted without shame that some of her children had tried marijuana . 
Nor was she alarmed by the prospect of her daughter having premarital sex . 
Ford also was an early campaigner against breast cancer . 
She underwent a mastectomy in 1974 , less than two months after her husband succeeded the disgraced Richard Nixon as president . 
Her frank discussions about her disease helped raise awareness about breast cancer and she eventually took the same approach towards her alcoholism , which she battled even as first lady . 
Ford 's problems with chemical dependency may have begun in 1964 , when doctors prescribed her painkillers for a pinched nerve . 
She developed an addiction to prescription drugs and also became dependent on alcohol during the 1960s . 
The Betty Ford Centre in California came into being in 1982 after Ford was treated for her addictions at the U.S. Naval Hospital at Long Beach , and saw the need for treatment that emphasized the special needs of women . 
`` She has been an inspiration to so many through her efforts to educate women about breast cancer and her wonderful work at the Betty Ford Centre , '' Nancy Reagan , the wife of the late President Ronald Reagan , said in the statement . 
`` She was Jerry Ford 's strength through some very difficult days in our country 's history and I admired her courage in facing and sharing her personal struggles with all of us . '' 
PRAISE FROM OBAMA , GEORGE W. BUSH President Barack Obama praised Ford 's courage and compassion . 
`` As our nation 's first lady , she was a powerful advocate for women 's health and women 's rights , '' he said in a statement . 
`` After leaving the White House , Mrs. Ford helped reduce the social stigma surrounding addiction and inspired thousands to seek much-needed treatment . '' 
Former President George W. Bush described her as a valued friend who `` made countless contributions to our country . '' 
Ford remained an active chairman of the center 's board of directors for decades and also worked to help handicapped children , the arts and the fights against AIDS and arthritis . 
For most of her adult life , Ford was best known as the wife of Rep. Gerald Ford , a Michigan Republican , and the mother of four children . 
The couple had planned to retire from Congress in 1973 when Nixon , already under fire in the Watergate scandal , chose Ford to serve as vice president after the resignation of Spiro Agnew . 
Ford became president after Nixon resigned on August 9 , 1974 , but he was defeated when he ran for the presidency in 1976 by Democrat Jimmy Carter . 
Betty delivered her husband 's concession speech because he had lost his voice on the campaign trail . 
Born April 8 , 1918 , in Chicago , Elizabeth Bloomer was raised in Grand Rapids , Michigan . 
She wanted to be a dancer and studied under Martha Graham and modelled in New York before returning to Grand Rapids and marrying a furniture salesman . 
They divorced after five years and she married Ford in 1948 . 
In her later years , Betty Ford slipped from the public eye but returned when her husband of 58 years died in 2006 . 
Her stately demeanor in time of grief brought her to the attention of a whole new generation that possibly knew her name only from the famous clinic . 
-LRB- Reporting by Bob Tourtellotte and Deborah Zabarenko ; Editing by Christopher Wilson and Bill Trott -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
