BP faces 7-year offshore drilling ban BP has already accepted its guilt in a separate accident in Texas in 2005 that killed 15 A US Congressional committee has agreed measures that would ban BP from new offshore drilling for seven years . 
The House committee on natural resources voted in favor of precluding companies with poor safety records from offshore oil exploration permits . 
The proposed law does not name BP , but would apply to any company that has experienced 10 or more deaths in the last seven years . 
The April explosion of BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig killed 11 workers . 
According to the draft legislation , the deaths must have taken place at drilling , production facilities , or refineries , and must have broken US health and environment laws . 
North America and the Gulf of Mexico are one of the cornerstones of -LRB- BP 's -RRB- strategy going forwards '' End Quote Evgeny Solovyov Oil equities analyst , SG Securities The Deepwater Horizon disaster is still being investigated . 
BP has already accepted its guilt in a separate accident in Texas in 2005 that killed 15 people . 
Although the proposal does not affect BP 's existing US oil wells , if it became law it would be a major blow to the UK oil company , according to Evgenvy Solovyov , oil equity analyst at SG Securities . 
`` North America and the Gulf of Mexico are one of the cornerstones of their strategy going forwards , '' said Mr Solovyov . 
He estimates that over 10 % of BP 's current output comes from the Gulf of Mexico Were it not for the political fallout from the oil spill , that share would have been expected to grow over the coming years . 
However , Mr Solovyov cautions that it is far from guaranteed that the committee 's draft bill will ever pass into law . 
It would need to gain approval both houses of Congress before it could be signed by President Obama . 
Mr Solovyov said that if the US still wants to continue expanding oil output , and reduce energy dependence on the Middle East , then there are not many other players who could step into BP 's shoes . 
US oil production increased last year at its fastest rate in 40 years , thanks in large part to BP 's work in the Gulf of Mexico , where it is the biggest deep sea driller . 
Chevron and Shell are also active players , but Exxon Mobil has surprisingly little presence in the Gulf . 
`` Smaller companies will not want to participate now , '' notes Mr Solovyov . 
`` It 's too risky for them , if -LRB- a similar disaster -RRB- could bring down a company of BP 's size . '' 
Another reason to doubt the political viability of the committee 's bill is the possible knock-on effects for other oil companies . 
The proposed rules would also exclude from offshore drilling any company that has been fined over $ 10m -LRB- # 6.5 m -RRB- by US authorities for environmental breaches in the last seven years . 
This wording would also affect BP , after an oil spill at Prudhoe Bay in 2006 . 
However , since the Deepwater Horizon spill began , it has emerged that there may be many old wells in the Gulf of Mexico that were not properly plugged and have been leaking for years . 
If other major exploration companies are found to be responsible for these wells , they could also fall foul of this clause of the draft bill . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
