Gulf spill : BP prepares for key oil well test Adm Thad Allen : `` When BP is ready , we will start to increase the pressure in the capping stack '' Oil firm BP is preparing to test the strength of its leaking well in the Gulf of Mexico , in its latest bid to stop the flow . 
BP began shutting valves linked to the new cap , but a `` small leak '' in a pipe has delayed the tests . 
The firm said it would take a `` short while '' to fix . 
The tests will find out if the well can handle the pressure of the flow . 
BP hopes the cap will eventually stem the flow entirely - three months after the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded . 
The crucial testing phase of the cap was due to begin on Tuesday , but anxious politicians asked experts to review BP 's plans amid fears that the procedure could make things much worse if it went wrong . 
`` I was gung-ho for this test and I remain gung-ho for this test , '' said Adm Thad Allen , the US incident commander , on Wednesday . 
But he warned that nobody wanted to make an `` irreversible mistake '' . 
After 24 hours of deliberation , officials gave BP the go-ahead , and the firm began shutting off the valves that were allowing some of the oil to flow from the well on to the surface , where it was being collected by container ships . 
Undersea robots then began to close the three openings in the cap that let oil pass through . 
Live video footage from BP 's cameras showed the first two valves had closed successfully , but engineers discovered a leak in a line attached to the third valve . 
`` It will take them a short while to fix this particular problem and then we 'll get the well test itself under way , '' said a BP spokesman . 
The middle ram valve regulating the oil flow on top of the cap is closed The kill valve is closed off The choke is closed ; this takes a couple of hours and once it starts the pressure test can be said to have begun Once the well is shut in , BP and government experts will assess progress every six hours But if low pressure is detected they will open the well up instantly Other precautions include extra monitoring , such as by remote vehicles on the seabed Once the leak is fixed , engineers will begin to test whether oil will leak out of other areas if all the valves are closed . 
The experts will monitor seismic , acoustic and temperature changes in the well and the surrounding area , as well as the pressure of the oil in the well . 
High pressure will mean the oil has been contained inside the wellhead ; low pressure could indicate that oil is leaking elsewhere in the well . 
If the pressure proved to be low , BP officials said that the valves would not be kept shut . 
If the well is not strong enough to hold back the flow , BP hopes it will be able to channel the oil to container ships on the surface . 
The White House said in a statement that the tests would provide `` valuable data '' about the condition of the well , and also a better understanding of how the well could be closed down during hurricanes . 
If BP is truly dealing in good faith and has nothing to hide , it should co-operate with such an investigation '' End Quote Chuck Schumer US senator Meanwhile , BP continues to face political pressure in the US . 
A Congressional committee has agreed measures that would ban the firm from new offshore drilling for seven years . 
And in a separate move , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has said she will look into a request by four senators to investigate allegations that BP lobbied for the release of Lockerbie bomber Abdelbaset al-Megrahi while attempting to finalize an oil deal with Libya . 
The 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 killed 270 people - most of them were American . 
Megrahi , who has terminal prostate cancer , was freed by Scottish Justice Secretary Kenny MacAskill on compassionate grounds in August 2009 after serving eight years . 
In a statement on Thursday , BP admitted it had expressed concern to the UK government about the slow progress of a prisoner transfer agreement between the two countries . 
But the firm said it had taken no part in discussions on the decision to free Megrahi . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL In June , BP placed a cap , known as an LMRP cap , over the top of the Deepwater Horizon well so oil could be collected at the surface . 
However , this continued to leak oil and has now been replaced with a better fitting device . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL When engineers removed the LMRP cap on 10 July , oil began to freely flow from the top of the blowout preventer once more . 
However , the Q4000 containment system continued to take some oil to the surface . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Engineers then bolted on a new capping stack onto the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- . 
This allowed them to conduct a series of tests to see if the flow of oil could be stopped using the newly installed equipment . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL During the test the three ram capping stack has been closed and all sub-sea containment systems collecting the oil temporarily suspended , effectively blocking the flow of oil from the well . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Once the tests have been successfully completed , BP will resume collecting oil . 
The Helix Producer ship was recently connected to the BOP to provide another collection route in addition to the Q4000 rig . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
