Vital BP oil well test back on course after setback Adm Thad Allen : `` When BP is ready , we will start to increase the pressure in the capping stack '' BP has fixed a problem with the cap on the leaking Gulf of Mexico oil well , which delayed a crucial test . 
Work on starting the test , which was due to begin on Tuesday , has resumed . 
The oil giant needs to shut all the valves on the new cap in order to test the well 's integrity . 
If the test is successful the flow of oil could be halted until relief wells can stop the leak permanently . 
The government 's incident commander Thad Allen said `` hopefully '' the test would begin later on Thursday . 
The test will take 48 hours , he said , and even if it was successful , the well would be reopened and oil captured by ships on the surface would restart while a seismic test was done . 
`` We can go back then and put the system under pressure again . 
Once we are convinced we can certainly consider shutting in the well that is always possible and we would certainly look to do that . '' 
The middle ram valve regulating the oil flow on top of the cap is closed The kill valve is closed off The choke is closed ; this takes a couple of hours and once it starts the pressure test can be said to have begun Once the well is shut in , BP and government experts will assess progress every six hours But if low pressure is detected they will open the well up instantly Other precautions include extra monitoring , such as by remote vehicles on the seabed But he emphasised that the option of shutting in the well was a `` side benefit '' of the new capping stack . 
The priority had always been to increase the amount of oil being captured and piped to the surface . 
The latest setback to the pressure test was a leak on a line on the choke valve of the new cap . 
The test had already been delayed while additional safety monitoring measures were put in place . 
BP took another choke valve to the sea floor and attached it to the cap . 
During the test , the three valves on the new cap will be shut . 
At the moment , just two - the large valve on top and the choke - are closed . 
Oil , mixed with dispersant , is billowing out of the kill valve . 
Once the test is under way , and the flow of oil stopped , the pressure within the cap will be tested . 
If it remains high , it is safe to keep the flow of oil halted . 
If the pressure drops , the well must be reopened immediately , as it could be an indication that there are other leaks beneath the surface . 
The test was delayed by fears from the authorities about the test making things worse by causing a rupture inside the well . 
It is going ahead after BP and government experts agreed on increased monitoring and a review of progress every six hours . 
Meanwhile , BP continues to face political pressure in the US . 
A Congressional committee has agreed measures that would ban the firm from new offshore drilling for seven years . 
And in a separate move , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has said she will look into a request by four senators to investigate allegations that BP lobbied for the release of Lockerbie bomber Abdelbaset al-Megrahi while attempting to finalize an oil deal with Libya . 
The 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 killed 270 people - most of them were American . 
Megrahi , who has terminal prostate cancer , was freed by Scottish Justice Secretary Kenny MacAskill on compassionate grounds in August 2009 after serving eight years . 
In a statement on Thursday , BP admitted it had expressed concern to the UK government about the slow progress of a prisoner transfer agreement between the two countries . 
But the firm said it had taken no part in discussions on the decision to free Megrahi . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL In June , BP placed a cap , known as an LMRP cap , over the top of the Deepwater Horizon well so oil could be collected at the surface . 
However , this continued to leak oil and has now been replaced with a better fitting device . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL When engineers removed the LMRP cap on 10 July , oil began to freely flow from the top of the blowout preventer once more . 
However , the Q4000 containment system continued to take some oil to the surface . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Engineers then bolted on a new capping stack onto the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- . 
This allowed them to conduct a series of tests to see if the flow of oil could be stopped using the newly installed equipment . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL During the test the three ram capping stack has been closed and all sub-sea containment systems collecting the oil temporarily suspended , effectively blocking the flow of oil from the well . 
NEW CAP FOR LEAKING OIL WELL Once the tests have been successfully completed , BP will resume collecting oil . 
The Helix Producer ship was recently connected to the BOP to provide another collection route in addition to the Q4000 rig . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
