PASCAGOULA , MISS. -- Johnny Ray Harris hunted for oil in the gulf near his home for 45 days straight , radioing in coordinates to cleanup crews when he spotted large , inky patches floating in the choppy waters . 
`` I would call it in , but no one ever came . 
Not once , '' Harris said , sitting on his 73-foot-long shrimp boat beside a box filled with unused rubber boots , gloves and coveralls . 
`` What a waste . '' 
Harris is a part of BP 's Vessels of Opportunity program that promised to turn out-of-work fishermen into a powerful task force , skimming and scooping up oil before it reached the shores of Alabama , Mississippi , Louisiana and Florida . 
At its peak , the program dispatched 3,200 boats at an average cost of $ 2,000 a day . 
In recent weeks , with a successful capping operation containing the spewing well , the oil company has scaled back to about 1,400 vessels . 
Fishermen involved in the program and the company that runs it both say the effort -- costing $ 450 million so far -- has been fraught with problems . 
Much of the money doled out by BP probably went to opportunists rather than to commercial fishermen and charter boat operators whose livelihoods were disrupted by the spill . 
Harris and dozens of other fishermen said in interviews with The Washington Post that the amateur effort , which included laying and maintaining boom , failed to prevent oil from reaching the beaches , marshes and islands near their homes . 
BP officials acknowledged that payments as high as $ 100,000 might have gone to recreational boat owners and others who enrolled multiple boats in the program and quickly seized an opportunity to cash in . 
But the officials said that it took time to identify problems and make needed reforms . 
`` When a response of this size gets pulled together that quickly , things fall through the cracks , '' BP spokesman George Gigicos said . 
Boat sales spiked in states around the gulf . 
And even though fishing was banned in as much as 40 percent of the water , officials saw a double-digit rise in demand for fishing licenses in three gulf states in April through July over last year 's totals , according to data analysis done for The Post by wildlife officials in the four affected states . 
In Alabama , license sales shot up 66 percent ; in Mississippi , they rose 30 percent ; and in Louisiana , they went up 13 percent . 
In late June , more than two months into the program , BP began asking participants for proof that their licenses had been issued before the oil spill , company officials said . 
The company also started a rotation system in mid-July that officials said they hope will pull in fishermen who have been passed by . 
`` I 've been waiting by the phone for three months . 
I 've heard nothing . 
I 'm still not in , '' said Jerry Walker , who fishes for kingfish and red snapper in Louisiana . 
`` I 've been a fisherman for 40 years . 
I make 100 percent of my living from fishing . 
These guys out on the water , I 've never seen any of them before in my life . '' 
Gigicos said : `` It did take some time to weed out the recreational vessels and the out-of town-vessels . 
It was n't perfect at first . '' 
He added , `` But for a while , our motto was ` All hands on deck . ' 
We needed everyone we could get out there . '' 
Fishermen and harbor chiefs describe the program 's early days as chaotic and unproductive . 
Coast Guard planes flew overhead and spotted oil , but their crews were unable to communicate with the rag-tag bands floating beneath them . 
Repeatedly , boat owners in the program said in interviews that they thought they were part of a `` show . '' 
`` The entire task force was on different radio frequencies , '' said Michael White , harbor chief in Long Beach , Miss. `` I had to surf through 15 channels to find someone . 
From a distance , it looked good to have all those boats out there , but it was a mess . '' 
At the height of the program , participants thought their boats would be equipped to skim oil from the surface of the gulf waters . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , who is coordinating the oil spill response , said in a June 11 news briefing that BP and the Coast Guard wanted to get `` the skimming equipment in the hands of the vessels of opportunity out there . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
