CAIRO | Mon Mar 7 , 2011 6:56 pm EST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - One of Muammar Gaddafi 's sons , Saadi , said on Monday his father had not yet thrown his army into full battle against rebels , saving it to shield Libya against foreign attack , and civil war could erupt if he did . 
In an interview with Al Arabiya television , Saadi Gaddafi also said the Libyan leader could not resign as demanded by the rebels because that could also lead to civil war . 
Saadi blamed some of the unrest on one of his brothers , Saif al-Islam , who he said had sought economic reforms but failed to address the problems of ordinary Libyans . 
`` The tribes are all armed , there are forces from the Libyan army and the eastern region is armed . 
The situation is not like Tunisia or Egypt , '' said Saadi , who was briefly a professional footballer in Italy before turning to business . 
Protests in Tunisia and Egypt have toppled the presidents of both countries since the start of the year . 
`` The situation is very dangerous , '' he said . 
The leader must play a very , very big role in calming Libya and convincing people to sit together . 
`` If something happened to the leader , who would be in control ? 
A civil war would start . '' 
He said the Libyan army had so far only intervened to protect `` sensitive sites '' and a wider war would result if his father ordered them into an all-out fight . 
`` The leader has given special instructions to the army not to intervene , save for the protection of sensitive sites , and to be ready to repel foreign intervention . '' 
The military was just waiting for Gaddafi 's orders , Saadi said . 
`` So far it has not moved . 
When it does , a civil war may erupt , '' he said in the full broadcast of the interview , which Al Arabiya had excerpted earlier in the day . 
The news channel said that Saadi Gaddafi warned that Libya would turn into a new Somalia and that tribes would fight against each other . 
He said Tripoli was holding a dialogue through the tribes to answer the demands of the people , without making clear which demands he was referring to . 
`` But there are armed groups that pursue the path of killing and violence , which I think leaves only the choice of confronting them , '' he added . 
Saadi 's criticism of his brother Saif al-Islam hinted at strains within the Gaddafi family as the unrest continued . 
`` The leader told them -LRB- Saif al-Islam and the ministers -RRB- on a daily basis that you are facilitating matters and the budget , but there are things they did not do . '' 
Those shortcomings included failing to address issues like prices of basic commodities that concerned Libyans , Saadi said . 
The reforming efforts of Saif al-Islam were stymied by opposition from inside the ruling elite and , some analysts had said , family members . 
Educated at a British university , Saif al-Islam has acted a spokesman for his father during the unrest . 
Saadi had a brief career in Italy 's Serie A soccer league between 2003 and 2007 , though he had little time on the field . 
Saadi , who qualified as an engineer and also holds military rank , later turned to business . 
He told Reuters in an interview last year he was behind a project to set up a free trade zone on the Mediterranean coast west of Tripoli . 
When violence engulfed Libya 's eastern city of Benghazi in mid-February , Saadi spoke on local radio to say he had been appointed commandant of the city . 
Soon after , residents took control of Benghazi and forced out Gaddafi 's forces . 
-LRB- Reporting by Ali Abdellati and Sohail Karam , writing by Edmund Blair and Tom Heneghan -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
