Gold near record , silver at 31-year peak on Libya SINGAPORE | Mon Mar 7 , 2011 8:20 am IST SINGAPORE -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Gold rose to near a record high and silver jumped to its highest in more than three decades on Monday on inflation worries triggered by rising oil prices as widening clashes in Libya deepened fears the country was on the brink of a civil war . 
Troops loyal to Muammar Gaddafi launched counter-offensives against rebel-held towns on Sunday , increasing fears that Libya is heading for a civil war rather than the swift revolutions seen in Tunisia and Egypt , sending U.S. crude to its strongest in more than two years . 
Spot gold added $ 2.50 an ounce to $ 1,434.45 an ounce by 0209 GMT , within sight of a record high struck last week of $ 1,440.10 -- the level which has become a key resistance . 
`` If we do see tension escalating further , then we could witness a new high in gold . 
Besides Libya , I think investors will also be looking at other countries within the Middle East . 
The example will be Saudi Arabia , '' said Ong Yi Ling , investment analyst at Phillip Futures in Singapore . 
Saudi Arabia 's council of senior clerics issued a statement on Sunday forbidding public protests , which the rulers of the U.S. ally and key oil exporter fear could spread following demonstrations by minority Shi'ites . 
The kingdom has escaped major protests like those which toppled leaders in Egypt and Tunisia , but the wave of unrest has reached its neighbors Yemen , Bahrain , Jordan and Oman . 
`` With gold prices moving up , silver will be poised for leverage gains . 
I think a little bit of economic optimism will be boosting silver . 
In a short-term , I would say that silver may outperform gold , '' said Ong . 
Silver was steady after rising as high as $ 36.14 an ounce , partly driven by data showing a rebound in U.S. jobs and some physical buying by China . 
The closely watched non-farm payrolls report on Friday showed an increase of 192,000 jobs as private employers hired 222,000 workers , the most since April . 
That took the jobless rate down to a nearly two-year low of 8.9 percent . 
U.S. gold futures for April rose $ 5.7 an ounce to $ 1,434.3 an ounce . 
Gold should push higher from its near-record levels due to its appeal as a safe haven , while iron ore should regain its upward momentum on the back of red-hot industrial demand from Asia , forecasters told the world 's largest mining conference on Sunday . 
In Japan , the Japanese retail price for gold rose to a 28-year high above 4,000 yen -LRB- $ 48.60 -RRB- per gram on Monday as the dollar gold market neared its lifetime peak . 
The physical market was muted , but dealers expected demand from top consumer India to pick up during the wedding season . 
`` We are seeing a two-way business here , but it 's hard to single out any particular country . 
The same goes to silver . 
There 's good silver buying from China , '' said a physical dealer in Singapore . 
The high-demand wedding season is underway in India , but jewellers are likely waiting to see if prices decline , Ong said . 
Jewellery is the most common gift during religious events and weddings in India . 
`` I would think with prices so high , then the physical side would n't be so strong . 
They will be waiting for prices , perhaps , to come down to about $ 1,400 level before they buy on dips , '' said Ong of Phillip Futures . 
In other markets , the dollar struggled against a basket of major currencies early in Asia on Monday after failing to get a boost from the non-farm data , while the euro stayed supported on expectations of an interest rate hike next month . 
The Nikkei slipped 1.2 percent on Monday , handing back most of last week 's gains , as fears of more turmoil in the Middle East and higher oil prices overshadowed solid U.S. payroll data . 
-LRB- Reporting by Lewa Pardomuan ; Editing by Ed Lane -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
