TRIPOLI | Mon Mar 7 , 2011 4:49 am IST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Troops loyal to Muammar Gaddafi launched counter-offensives against rebel-held towns on Sunday , increasing fears that Libya is heading for a civil war rather than the swift revolutions seen in Tunisia and Egypt . 
The Gaddafi government proclaimed sweeping overnight victories over what it called terrorist bands . 
But after what residents said was a day of fierce fighting with artillery , rockets and mortar bombs , rebel forces announced they had fought off Gaddafi 's forces in the towns of Zawiyah , to the immediate west of Tripoli , and Misrata to the east . 
`` Today Misrata witnessed the toughest battle since the beginning of the revolution . 
Horrible attacks , '' one resident , who did not want to give his name , told Reuters by phone . 
`` They came from three sides and managed to enter the town from the west and south but when they reached the center of Misrata the rebels pushed them back , '' he said . 
Misrata , with a population of 300,000 , is the largest town controlled by rebels outside the rebel-held east of the country . 
If rebel soldiers were able to continue their fitful advance westwards , Misrata could be a stepping stone to reaching the capital , Gaddafi 's principal stronghold . 
Rebel council spokesman Hafiz Ghoga told a Benghazi news conference : `` We would like to put the people of this great nation at ease ... because the regime is spreading rumors . 
`` Both Zawiyah and Misrata are secured , liberated cities . '' 
Gaddafi 's troops , backed by tanks , artillery , warplanes and helicopters attacked positions near the oil port of Ras Lanuf , 660 km -LRB- 410 miles -RRB- east of the capital . 
Rebels were forced to retreat from Bin Jawad which is on the road to Sirte , the hometown of Gaddafi who has ruled the OPEC oil and gas producer for 41 years . 
`` Gaddafi 's cut us to pieces . 
He 's firing on us with tanks and missiles . 
I do n't know what we 're going to do now , '' Momen Mohammed told Reuters . 
One fighter returning wounded to Ras Lanuf from Bin Jawad was asked what he had seen . 
`` Death , '' he replied , too distraught to say any more . 
Rebels said they planned another attack on Bin Jawad , which is only 160 km -LRB- 100 miles -RRB- from Sirte , on Monday morning . 
Rebel commanders told Reuters Gaddafi 's forces were reinforcing Sirte where they had more than 20,000 fighters . 
They said the city houses the Saadi -LRB- a son of Gaddafi -RRB- battalion which includes four brigades , as well as armed tribe members . 
Loyalists had poured into the streets of Tripoli at dawn on Sunday firing into the air and holding portraits of Gaddafi . 
`` These are celebrations because government forces have taken control of all areas to Benghazi and are in the process of taking control of Benghazi , '' spokesman Mussa Ibrahim said , referring to Libya 's second city , situated in the far east . 
But the celebrations appeared to be premature as Benghazi remained firmly under rebel control while insurgents stood their ground at Zawiyah and Misrata . 
Rebels surrounded by troops near the center of Zawiyah , 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli , faced another attack after repelling two assaults by tanks and infantry the day before . 
`` This morning , there was a new attack , bigger than yesterday . 
There were one and a half hours of fighting ... Two people were killed from our side and many more injured , '' spokesman Youssef Shagan said by telephone . 
Elite brigades under Gaddafi 's son Khamis also launched an assault on Misrata , 200 km -LRB- 125 miles -RRB- east of the capital . 
`` The brigades tried to reach the center of the town but revolutionaries managed to repel them . 
They retreated to the airbase , '' said a resident who declined to be named . 
`` The revolutionaries captured 20 soldiers and seized a tank . 
The town is now fully in the control of the youths , '' he said . 
At least 18 people , including a baby , were killed in the fighting in Misrata on Sunday , a doctor told Reuters by phone . 
`` We have 18 martyrs but the figure is not final . 
We also have many people wounded , I can not even count them , '' said the doctor , who works at Misrata main hospital , adding that the dead included rebels and civilians . 
Doctors at Ras Lanuf hospital said two dead and 22 wounded had arrived from the fighting . 
A French journalist was shot in the leg , a doctor said , and four rebels were seriously wounded and unlikely to survive . 
Britain 's Foreign Secretary William Hague said on Sunday that what he called a British diplomatic team that had been captured in the eastern city of Benghazi had now left Libya . 
The Sunday Times earlier reported a British Special Air Service -LRB- SAS -RRB- unit had been captured during a secret diplomatic mission to make contact with opposition leaders backfired . 
`` They -LRB- the rebel army -RRB- did capture some British special forces . 
They could not ascertain if they were friends or foes . 
For our safety we are holding them and we expect this situation to be resolved soon , '' a rebel source in Benghazi said earlier . 
Western leaders have denounced what they call Gaddafi 's brutal response to the uprising , and the International Criminal Court said he and his inner circle face investigation for alleged targeting of civilians by his security forces . 
German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said in a newspaper on Sunday that the United Nations security council should launch fresh sanctions against Gaddafi . 
`` Selective sanctions are necessary against those who are responsible for crimes against the Libyan people , '' he told the Welt am Sonntag newspaper . 
`` The flow of money must be cut off . '' 
The International Energy Agency said the revolt had blocked about 60 percent of Libya 's 1.6 million bpd oil output . 
The drop , due largely to the flight of thousands of foreign oil workers , will batter the economy and have already jacked up crude prices abroad . 
