ROME | Mon Mar 7 , 2011 6:19 am EST ROME -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Italy , which did more than any other country to legitimize Libya and its mercurial leader , is going through a foreign policy nightmare as civil strife in its former colony threatens its energy supplies , international image and the stability of some of its blue chip companies . 
`` The stakes for our country are very high , '' said Roberto Aliboni , vice-president of Italy 's Institute for International Affairs , who argued in a recent report that Italy should take a clear stand against Gaddafi and invest in the opposition . 
But Rome is moving cautiously , realizing it has the most to lose among European nations as events unfold in the North African nation just 300 miles from Italy 's southernmost island . 
Six months ago Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and other officials fawned over Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , treating him like royalty on his third visit to Italy in two years . 
Now , a 2008 `` friendship treaty '' that prohibited Italian bases from being used in any military action against Libya has been officially `` suspended '' while Italy seems to be grabbing at straws over what policy to take with Libya . 
The numbers tell the story . 
Italy imports about 80 percent of its energy needs . 
About 32 percent of Libya 's oil output goes to Italy -- making up about 25 percent of Italy 's imports -- and about 12 percent of Italy 's gas comes from Libya . 
Under the friendship treaty , Italy promised to pay Libya $ 5 billion in compensation over 25 years for colonial misdeeds . 
Libya has been spending petrodollars on stakes in Italian companies while Italian firms have won infrastructure and energy contracts in the country it ruled as a colony from 1911 to 1943 . 
The web of commercial interests includes banking , textiles , cars , construction , railways , aerospace -- and soccer clubs . 
Rome was de facto guarantor of Tripoli 's good behavior when Libya was warily welcomed back into the international community after renouncing terrorism and weapons of mass destruction . 
While leaders such as British Prime Minister Tony Blair and U.S. Secretary of State Hilary Clinton dutifully went to Tripoli and appeared uneasy with Gaddafi , Italy pulled out all the stops and Berlusconi embraced him as `` my great friend . '' 
Gian Antonio Stella , a commentator for the Corriere della Sera newspaper , argued that Italy has to feel more responsible for a positive outcome to the Libyan crisis because Rome `` revered and adulated '' Gaddafi until only a short while ago . 
When the Libyan unrest broke out Berlusconi seemed almost in denial , perhaps sensing that his one-on-one style of diplomatic relations had fallen flat , as Gaddafi returned to his old habit of insulting the former colonial power . 
`` In Gaddafi 's case this -LRB- Berlusconi 's personal style produced results that were grotesque and undignified , '' wrote political commentator and former ambassador Sergio Romano . 
`` We had to put up with the capriciousness of the colonel , his delays -LRB- in 2009 he failed to show up to address parliament -RRB- his insults , his uniforms , his tents in our parks , '' Romano said . 
Rome 's behavior can have far-reaching effects for Italy . 
`` Political imprudence by the government can risk unleashing resentment from whatever Libya emerges from the current crisis , '' said Aliboni of the Institute for International Affairs . 
`` National interests would be gravely put at risk . '' 
It is no surprise that Italy is no cheerleader for sanctions against Libya or of calls for the freezing of its assets or the imposition of a no-fly zone . 
Rome has made clear that it is not considering unilaterally freezing Libyan holdings in Italian companies at present . 
Libya owns stakes in blue-chip Italian companies including bank UniCredit and defense company Finmeccanica , and the fate of its holdings have been under scrutiny since the European Union imposed sanctions on Libya . 
The EU agreed last week to freeze the assets of Gaddafi and a list of senior Libyan officials after Libyan security forces used violence to crack down on protesters . 
But since that list does not mention the country 's sovereign wealth fund , the Libyan Investment Authority -LRB- LIA -RRB- , or the Libyan central bank -- entities that hold stakes in Italian companies -- Italy does not plan to freeze the holdings , a source familiar with the matter told Reuters . 
The question is where do the assets of Gaddafi and his family end and where do Libya 's assets begin . 
`` The problem is that in an authoritarian regime today , just like in the absolute monarchies of the medieval times , it is hard to distinguish between the personal goods of the sovereign and those of the state , '' said commentator Stefano Lepri in La Stampa newspaper . 
Other European countries have been more aggressive in their pursuit of assets linked to Gaddafi and his top aides . 
British publisher Pearson Plc last week said the LIA 's 3.2 percent stake in the company had been frozen because of the sanctions , while Austria has widened an asset freeze list to include a top official at the LIA . 
Also making Italy 's position with Libya difficult is the prospect of a wave of illegal immigration , worse than the one that hit it in the early 1990s after the collapse of communism in Albania . 
`` The contrast between the moral imperative -LRB- to support democracy -RRB- and the political dividend is particularly stark because of the fear of the consequences the fall of Gaddafi 's regime could have on migration , '' said Emanuela Paoletti of the International Migration Institute at Oxford University . 
In 2009 , Rome and Tripoli signed a deal allowing Italy 's coastguard to return boatloads of illegal immigrants to Libya Before then , Libya was a main staging post for illegal immigration from Africa and Gaddafi has made it clear that he could let the genie out of the bottle again if he wanted . 
He told France 's Journal du Dimanche on Sunday that if he fell `` you will have immigration , thousands of people from Libya will invade Europe . 
There will be no one to stop them any more . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Now if the politicians would just listen . 
But they do not have to and they know it . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
