ALGIERS | Mon Mar 7 , 2011 2:49 pm EST ALGIERS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Libyan army is attempting to drive out loose formations of rebels opposed to Muammar Gaddafi that have seized towns along the country 's Mediterranean coast . 
Though facing a vastly superior armory of tanks , artillery and aircraft , the rebels are largely standing their ground , controlling vast swathes of the east . 
Following are some scenarios for how the conflict could develop , and the clues that could indicate which one of them is most likely to become a reality : This is now looking like the most probable scenario , at least for the time being . 
Stalemate would in effect produce a divided country and raise complex questions for the outside world in its trade and political relations with the oil producer . 
`` Neither side in the Libyan conflict currently appears strong enough to defeat the other in the short term , '' said think tank IHS Global Insight . 
`` This prospect of military stalemate has raised the prospect of a protracted civil war . '' 
-- The ground-based fighting so far has been in a stretch of desert along the Mediterranean coast . 
The front line can move back and forth in this area without giving either side a significant military advantage , because there are no major population centers or bases in the area . 
The stretch is bookended by two important locations : Ajdabiyah in the east , gateway to the rebels ' eastern strongholds , and in the west Gaddafi 's hometown of Sirte . 
If the fighting stays between these two locations , it amounts to stalemate . 
-- Foot-dragging among major Western powers about military intervention . 
Foreign military help could tip the balance in favor of the rebels . 
Many Libya-watchers see this as the most likely outcome in the long-term , based on the calculation that Gaddafi 's forces have spilled too much blood in the last few weeks to retain legitimacy . 
The question is , how quickly could such a victory come ? 
-- Can the rebels organize an effective military hierarchy ? 
So far , the forces have shown more zeal than military skill . 
The rebels ' National Libyan Council named Omar Hariri , one of the officers who took part in Gaddafi 's 1969 coup , as head of the military . 
But it is not clear how much authority he would have . 
Evidence on the ground that fighters are wearing standard uniforms , have received training , are operating as units , and have radios to pass orders down the chain of command , would be the clearest signs that they are getting organized . 
-- Will the rebels in Misrata hold out ? 
This city is the biggest population center still defying Gaddafi 's control outside the eastern regions . 
Troops from the 32nd Brigade , commanded by Gaddafi 's son Khamis and reputed to be the best forces in Libya , have so far failed to capture it . 
This is telling about the quality of Gaddafi 's forces . 
If they can not take an isolated city defended by armed civilians , they must have serious shortcomings . 
-- Outside military intervention . 
If Western powers remain wary of intervening openly , then more discreet assistance -- sending in weapons or military advisers -- could also tip the scales toward the rebels . 
-- Can the rebels take Sirte ? 
If they can , they will score the psychological victory of seizing Gaddafi 's hometown , and also control a major air base . '' 
-LRB- Sirte -RRB- controls the coast approach to Tripoli from the east and to the key nearby cities of Misrata and Zawiyah , which are the doorway to the Tripoli region , '' said Saad Djebbar , an Algerian lawyer and expert on Libya . 
This is the least likely scenario , mainly because the rebels control a huge chunk of territory and seem very well entrenched there . 
`` Gaddafi has lost the east , '' said Djebbar , who advised Tripoli when two Libyans were tried for the 1988 Lockerbie bombing . 
But Gaddafi is a proven survivor who has held on to power for more than four decades , so it is impossible to count him out . 
He has around him a coterie of political and military supporters who have much to lose if the regime collapses . 
The conflict could conceivably be decided in Tripoli , rather than the small towns on the coast , if senior military commanders or Gaddafi supporters decided the conflict could not be won . 
-- The eastern rebellion collapses under the weight of its own internal divisions and military weakness . 
This may be the only real opportunity for Gaddafi to make a comeback . 
`` In the east , the opposition are holding but they need to be careful that they do n't collapse completely , '' said David Hartwell , Middle East analyst with IHS Global Insight . 
-- Could the rebels hold together and hold the country together ? 
All opposition in Libya has been stifled over forty years of Gaddafi rule and there are no organized civic groups to provide a ready basis for government . 
One of Muammar Gaddafi 's sons , Saadi , said Libya would descend into civil war if his father stepped down . 
He said Libya would turn into a new Somalia and that the country 's tribes would fight against each other . 
The focus of events could switch from the smaller towns of the Mediterranean coast . 
