CAIRO , March 7 | Mon Mar 7 , 2011 11:42 pm GMT CAIRO , March 7 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Two Arab newspapers and al Jazeera television said on Monday Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi was looking for an agreement allowing him to step down , but there was no official confirmation of the reports . 
Al Jazeera said Gaddafi had proposed to Libyan rebels to hold a meeting of parliament to pave the way for him to step down with certain guarantees . 
It said Gaddafi made the proposal to the interim council , which speaks for mostly eastern areas controlled by his opponents . 
It quoted sources in the council as saying Gaddafi wanted guarantees of personal safety for him and his family and a pledge that they not be put on trial . 
Al Jazeera said sources from the council told its correspondent in Benghazi that the offer was rejected because it would have amounted to an `` honorable '' exit for Gaddafi and would offend his victims . 
The London-based daily Asharq al-Awsat and the daily al-Bayan , based in the United Arab Emirates , also cited unnamed sources as saying Gaddafi was looking for an agreement . 
A source close to the council told Reuters he had heard that `` one formula being proposed by the other side would see Gaddafi hand power to the head of parliament and leave the country with a certain guaranteed sum of money . '' 
`` I was told that this issue of money is a serious obstacle from the national council 's point of view , '' he said , adding that his information came from a single source close to the council . 
Essam Gheriani , a media officer for the council , said : `` No such offer has been been put to the council as far as I am aware . '' 
Jadallah Azous Al-Talhi , a leading member of the ruling establishment and a prime minister in the 1980s , appealed to rebel leaders for dialogue on Monday , in the clearest sign yet Gaddafi may be ready to compromise with opponents challenging his four-decade rule . 
The fact that state television screened Talhi 's appeal indicated that it was officially endorsed . 
But the council said there was no room for broad dialogue with Gaddafi and any talks must be on the basis that he quits . 
Asked about Talhi 's address , rebel official Ahmed Jabreel told Reuters : `` Talhi is a close acquaintance of mine and he is widely respected in Libya as a man who stood up to Gaddafi . 
`` But we have made it clear all along that any negotiations must be on the basis that Gaddafi will step down . 
There can be no other compromise . '' 
Asharq al-Awsat , citing `` informed Libyan sources '' in Benghazi , said Gaddafi sent a negotiator to the rebel council with an offer to step down provided he had guarantees for his personal safety and that of his family as well as his money . 
Al Bayan quoted a source close to Gaddafi 's inner circle as saying the Libyan leader had begun looking for a safe haven outside Libya . 
`` He has begun making contacts with African and Arab states in search for a safe haven that will allow him to leave Libya in a way that suits his position and would not infringe on his dignity , '' it quoted the source as saying . 
The source said that `` great divisions '' within the Libyan army had caused Gaddafi to lose control of large parts of the country to rebels , according to an advance copy of the article . 
One of Gaddafi 's sons , Saadi , said Libya would descend into civil war if his father stepped down , Al Arabiya television reported on Monday . 
`` The situation is very dangerous . 
From the perspective of a civil war , the leader must play a very , very big role in calming Libya and convincing people to sit together , '' Saadi Gaddafi said in an interview with the Arabic satellite channel . 
`` If something happened to the leader , who would be in control ? 
A civil war would start , '' he added . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Pfeiffer in Benghazi , Edmund Blair in Cairo and Sami Aboudi in Dubai ; writing by Myra MacDonald ; editing by Diana Abdallah -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
