A million Libyans need aid as UK , France seek no-fly zone RAS LANUF , Libya | Mon Mar 7 , 2011 6:52 pm EST RAS LANUF , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Britain and France said they were seeking U.N. authorization for a no-fly zone over Libya , as Muammar Gaddafi 's warplanes counter-attacked against rebels and aid officials said a million people were in need . 
Al Jazeera television said rebels had rejected an offer by Gaddafi to hold a meeting of parliament to work out a deal under which he would step down . 
With civilians surrounded by forces loyal to Gaddafi in two western towns , Misrata and Zawiyah , fears grew of a rising humanitarian crisis if the fighting continued . 
U.N. aid coordinator Valerie Amos said more than a million people fleeing or inside the country needed humanitarian aid . 
`` Humanitarian organizations need urgent access now , '' she said . 
`` People are injured and dying and need help immediately . '' 
The U.N. appealed for $ 160 million to fund an operation over the next three months to get shelter , food and medicines ready . 
`` We are working closely with partners on a contingency basis on elements of a resolution on a no-fly zone , making clear the need for regional support , a clear trigger for such a resolution and an appropriate legal basis , '' British Foreign Secretary William Hague said on Monday . 
A French source said France was `` working with our partners in New York on a no-fly zone resolution . '' 
Gulf states called for a no-fly zone and an urgent Arab League meeting . 
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates , in Afghanistan where foreign forces have struggled for a decade , warned action should be taken only with international backing . 
The White House said all options were on the table , including arming rebels . 
Russia , a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council with veto powers , said it opposed foreign military intervention . 
NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen stressed the need for U.N. authorization . 
`` I ca n't imagine the international community and the United Nations would stand idly by if Gaddafi and his regime continue to attack their own people , '' he said . 
`` We have asked our military to conduct all necessary planning so that we stand ready at short notice , '' he added . 
NATO has launched 24-hour surveillance of Libya with AWACS reconnaissance aircraft , the U.S. ambassador to NATO said . 
Ivo Daalder added NATO representatives were discussing other possible moves ahead of a meeting of NATO ministers on Thursday . 
Western leaders , however , are anxious to avoid another drawn-out military commitment after the Iraq and Afghan wars . 
President Barack Obama said he wanted to `` send a very clear message to the Libyan people that we will stand with them in the face of unwarranted violence and the continuing suppression of democratic ideals . '' 
In the rebel-held city of Misrata , the wounded were being treated on hospital floors because of a catastrophic shortage of medical facilities in the besieged city , a resident said . 
Misrata is the biggest city in the west not under the control of Gaddafi , and its stand against a militia commanded by his own son has turned it into a symbol of defiance . 
Zawiyah , just 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- from Tripoli , remained in rebel hands despite a push by government forces into the town , according to a Sky television report . 
It showed wounded fighters and civilians in Zawiya 's hospital , including a 10-year-old boy reportedly shot on his doorstep by government troops . 
In the east , warplanes launched air strikes on the rebel-held oil terminal town of Ras Lanuf 600 km -LRB- 400 miles -RRB- east of the capital Tripoli , witnesses said . 
One ripped through a car carrying a family . 
Shipping sources said the fighting had closed the oil ports of Ras Lanuf and Brega . 
Brent crude prices rose above $ 118 a barrel on Monday before falling back to $ 115 and U.S. prices pushed to their highest level since September 2008 . 
The fighting has been erratic , with small groups engaging each other , guerrilla-style , in hit and run raids . 
Air attacks have been fitful and bombing often inaccurate . 
The resilience of Gaddafi 's troops and their ability to counter-attack has raised the prospect of prolonged bloodshed . 
The United Nations and the European Union are dispatching fact-finding missions to the north African nation , where reports by residents of attacks on civilians by security forces have triggered a war crimes probe and provoked global outrage . 
The rebels have called for U.N.-backed air strikes against what they say are African soldiers-for-hire used by Gaddafi to crush the uprising against his four-decade rule . 
The Libyan government says it is fighting against al Qaeda terrorists and maintains its security forces have targeted only armed individuals attacking state institutions and depots . 
Government forces ' advance on Ras Lanuf forced residents to flee and rebels to hide weapons in the desert . 
One man complained of the rebels ' inexperience , as a fighter fired an automatic weapon ineffectually at a warplane . 
`` Look at the way they 're firing at the plane , '' he said . 
`` They have no experience , no leadership and no strategy . '' 
Al Jazeera quoted sources from the rebel interim council as saying it rejected Gaddafi 's proposal to quit because it would have been an `` honorable '' exit for him . 
The channel said Gaddafi had wanted guarantees of safety for him and his family and a pledge they not be put on trial . 
Jadallah Azous Al-Talhi , a former prime minister , earlier appeared on state television to urge rebels to `` give a chance to national dialogue to resolve this crisis . '' 
Ahmed Jabreel , an aide to rebel leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil , said : `` Any negotiations must be on the basis that Gaddafi will step down . 
There can be no other compromise . '' 
Two Arabic newspapers said the Libyan leader had begun looking for a safe haven outside Libya . 
One of Gaddafi 's sons , Saadi , said Libya would descend into civil war if his father stepped down , Al Arabiya television reported , adding that Libya would turn into a new Somalia and that the country 's tribes would fight each other . 
In an interview with France 24 television , Gaddafi said Libya was an important partner for the West in containing al Qaeda and illegal migrants trying to reach Europe . 
`` There are millions of blacks who could come to the Mediterranean to cross to France and Italy , and Libya plays a role in security in the Mediterranean , '' he said . 
So far tens of thousands of migrant workers have fled but few Libyans . 
`` If we get a massive outflow of Libyans , this would create a refugee situation , so we appeal to all countries to keep their doors open and be ready to provide assistance as humanitarian law requires , '' United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres said . 
A British team reported to include special forces left Benghazi on Sunday after rebels captured and then released them . 
Libyan Foreign Minister Musa Kusa said 300 al Qaeda fighters formerly held in Guantanamo Bay were supporting rebel forces . 
`` It 's clear there is a conspiracy to divide Libya , '' he said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Rebels do n't have any chance to wage war against army forces in desert . 
Those offensives-f from Misrata on Tripoli or Sirte are daydreaming Fear of civil war ? 
Im pretty sure this is what 's occurring already NOW is the time to take out those runways -- B-2 's can do it with Zero loss of life on either side -- It will get this mess over MUCH sooner -- with significant lives saved on BOTH sides -- it is a no brainer . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
