GULF OF MEXICO -- A BP-chartered vessel lowered a 100-ton concrete-and-steel vault onto a ruptured well in the Gulf of Mexico on Friday , an important step in a delicate and unprecedented attempt to stop most of the gushing crude fouling the sea . 
Underwater robots guided the 40-foot-tall box into place . 
Now that the contraption is on the seafloor , workers will need at least 12 hours to let it settle and make sure it 's stable before the robots can hook up a pipe and hose that will funnel the oil up to a tanker . 
`` It appears to be going exactly as we hoped , '' BP spokesman Bill Salvin told The Associated Press on Friday afternoon , shortly after the four-story device hit the seafloor . 
`` Still lots of challenges ahead , but this is very good progress . '' 
By Sunday , the box the size of a house could be capturing up to 85 percent of the oil . 
So far about 3 million gallons have leaked in an environmental crisis that has been unfolding since a deepwater drilling platform exploded April 20 , sending toxic oil toward a shoreline of marshes , shipping channels , fishing grounds and beaches . 
Eleven workers were killed in the accident . 
The lowering of the containment device was a slow-moving drama playing out 50 miles from Louisiana 's coast , requiring great precision and attention to detail . 
It took about two weeks to build the 40-foot box , and the effort to lower it by crane and cable to the seafloor began late Thursday night . 
After it hit bottom Friday afternoon , the crane gradually eased off to allow it to settle . 
`` We are essentially taking a four-story building and lowering it 5,000 feet and setting it on the head of a pin , '' Salvin said . 
The task became increasingly urgent as toxic oil crept deeper into the bays and marshes of the Mississippi Delta . 
A sheen of oil began arriving on land last week , and crews have been putting out floating barriers , spraying chemical dispersants and setting fire to the slick to try to keep it from coming ashore . 
But now the thicker , stickier goo -- arrayed in vivid , brick-colored ribbons -- is drawing ever closer to Louisiana 's coastal communities . 
There are still untold risks and unknowns with the containment box : The approach has never been tried at such depths , where the water pressure is enough to crush a submarine , and any wrong move could damage the leaking pipe and make the problem worse . 
The seafloor is pitch black and the water murky , though lights on the robots illuminate the area where they are working . 
If the box works , another one will be dropped onto a second , smaller leak at the bottom of the Gulf . 
At the same time , crews are drilling sideways into the well in hopes of plugging it up with mud and concrete , and they are working on other ways to cap it . 
The well has been spewing about 200,000 gallons a day in the nation 's biggest oil spill since the nearly 11 million gallons lost in the Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska in 1989 . 
The cause of the blast has not been determined , but investigators have been focusing on the so-called blowout preventer . 
Federal regulators told The Associated Press that they are going to examine whether these last-resort cutoff valves on offshore oil wells are reliable . 
At Hopedale , a fishing community in St. Bernard Parish , La. , that has been a staging area for efforts to protect inlets and bayous , Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal stepped out of a helicopter and held aloft a tennis ball-size hunk of tarry oil he said a fisherman had retrieved near the mouth of the Mississippi River . 
Oil was reported moving west of the Mississippi toward fishing and resort villages on the Louisiana coast . 
After a flyover , Jindal described the orange and brown goo surrounding Louisiana 's Chandeleur Islands as resembling `` a ring around your bathtub . '' 
Several members of Congress flew over the spill and then visited Hopedale on Friday as well . 
U.S. Rep. Ed Markey , D-Mass . 
, chairman of the House Energy and Environment Subcommittee , said hearings on the explosion will start next week . 
`` Lives were lost , livelihoods ruined , '' Markey said . 
`` The lessons that will be learned will become laws . '' 
BP plans to sell the petroleum it recovers after separating out the large amounts of natural gas and seawater -- something that industry experts said should not present much of a problem . 
`` That 's something they do for every oil well , '' said Don Van Nieuwenhuise , director of petroleum geoscience programs at the University of Houston . 
`` They 'll refine it and crack it and everything , and by the time it gets in your gas tank , you 'll never even know it was in the water . '' 
The oil 's planned destination , BP 's Texas City , Texas , refinery , has its own checkered history . 
An explosion there in 2005 killed 15 people and injured 170 . 
Regulators last October hit BP with a record $ 87 million fine for safety violations . 
May 6 : The oil containment box is lowered into the Gulf at the site of the Deepwater Horizon rig collapse . 
May 5 : A ship enters the Gulf of Mexico carrying the oil containment vessel to the rig collapse site . 
