TRIPOLI | Thu May 5 , 2011 12:42 am BST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - An aid ship defied deadly shell fire to rescue African and Asian migrant workers from the besieged port of Misrata Wednesday , but was forced to leave behind hundreds of Libyans desperate to flee the fighting . 
Aid workers had earlier scrambled to embark the migrants , along with journalists and the wounded , on the ship bound for rebel-held Benghazi as the Misrata port came under bombardment from forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi . 
`` The bombing has caused so many casualties among Libyans and people of other nationalities waiting for evacuation , '' Gemal Salem , a rebel spokesman , told Reuters . 
`` So far we have five killed and ambulances are rushing to the scene . '' 
The Red Star One , sent by the International Organisation for Migration , picked up 800 people caught up in the civil war who had been waiting for days to escape Misrata 's worsening humanitarian crisis . 
It had hoped to take 1,000 people . 
`` Hundreds of Libyan civilians had also tried to board the ship in desperation to get out of Misrata . 
But with a limited capacity , the ramp of the boat had to be pulled up so that the ship could pull away from the dock in safety , '' the IOM said . 
The shelling was also hitting Misrata 's Qasr Ahmad district , a mixed residential and industrial area which houses the iron and steel works in a city that has become one of the bloodiest battlefields in the two-month conflict . 
Another rebel spokesman , Abdelsalem , said the five killed were African migrant workers . 
He said fighting was continuing in the southern neighborhood of al-Ghiran , where rebels say pro-Gaddafi forces have been trying to advance on the city center , and in Zawiyat al-Mahjoub to the west . 
The port is a lifeline for Misrata , where food and medical supplies are low and snipers shoot from rooftops . 
Other rescue ships are offshore but there was no news of their movements . 
About 12,000 people have so far been rescued by 12 ships . 
Minesweepers from the NATO coalition , whose aircraft have been bombing Libyan government military targets under a United Nations resolution , had been searching the approaches to the harbor since Monday for a drifting Gaddafi forces ' mine . 
The United States Wednesday condemned the continued shelling of Misrata and called on Gaddafi 's forces to permit the IOM to resume evacuating wounded people from the port . 
The civil war over Gaddafi 's 41-year rule has split the oil-producing desert state into a government-held western area round the capital Tripoli and an eastern region held by ill-disciplined but dedicated rebel forces . 
The insurgents had hoped for a swift overthrow of Gaddafi . 
But his better-trained and better-equipped forces halted the westward rebel advance from their stronghold of Benghazi and a standoff in the fighting has prevailed since then . 
The United States , Britain and France , leading a NATO air campaign , say they will not stop until Gaddafi is toppled . 
International Criminal Court prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo said he would request three arrest warrants for his investigation into the killing of pro-democracy demonstrators . 
`` Crimes against humanity have been and continue to be committed in Libya , attacking unarmed civilians including killings and persecutions in many cities across Libya . '' 
At a U.N. Security Council meeting , Russia criticised the NATO campaign , saying it was using disproportionate force , and South Africa said the international court should also scrutinise the Western alliance for potential war crimes . 
NATO officers met Wednesday in Brussels to review their operation 's progress , rejecting assessments of stalemate on the battlefield despite their warplanes ' intervention , as nations prepared for a meeting in Rome Thursday over rebel finances . 
NATO chief Anders Fogh Rasmussen called the meeting a `` reaffirmation of the strong commitment to our operation , '' adding that he sensed no fatigue among the allies , while Gaddafi 's forces were weaker than when the NATO campaign began . 
Gaddafi , who seized power in a 1969 coup , has not been seen in public since a NATO missile attack Saturday on a house in Tripoli , which Libyan officials said killed his youngest son and three grandchildren . 
Officials said he was in good health . '' 
-LRB- The -RRB- best intelligence we have is that he -LRB- Gaddafi -RRB- is still alive , '' CIA Director Leon Panetta told NBC News . 
Libyan state television said Wednesday that NATO forces bombed Al-Hayrah , west of the capital , causing casualties . 
`` The colonialist , crusader alliance has just bombed Al-Hayrah a short while ago , causing human casualties and damage to infrastructure , '' the broadcaster said . 
Libya 's army also fired volleys of rockets at the rebel-held town of Zintan in the Western Mountains , pressing on with a campaign that has forced thousands to flee the country . 
Rebels said more than 40 Grad rockets hit Zintan late Tuesday . 
The U.N. refugee agency UNHCR said an exodus from the Western Mountains region had resumed , with Libyan families fleeing into southern Tunisia . 
`` This past weekend , more than 8,000 people , most of them ethnic Berbers , arrived in Dehiba in southern Tunisia . 
Most are women and children , '' UNHCR spokesman Adrian Edwards told a news briefing in Geneva . 
Tens of thousands have already fled . 
While a few rebel pockets such as Zintan and Misrata resist Gaddafi 's forces in western Libya , in the largely rebel-held east the most pressing need is for cash . 
Rebels say they expect up to three billion dollars in credit soon from Western governments to feed and supply their territories in the east . 
With Libya 's economy in turmoil , funds to pay for food , medicine and the state salaries on which most people depend are running low . 
Securing financing for rebels and facilitating contacts with defectors will be the focus of Libya talks in Rome Thursday , French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said . 
Juppe told France 24 television the meeting of the so-called `` Contact Group '' on Libya , including Western and Middle Eastern countries , the United Nations , the African Union and the Arab League , would discuss setting up a financing mechanism . 
`` It 's not easy . 
There are Libyan assets that are frozen and for legal reasons unfreezing them is difficult , '' Juppe said . 
Juppe said another aim of the Rome meeting would be to build contacts with defectors from Gaddafi 's government and officials who want to leave it . 
`` There are a lot of officials from Tripoli who want to talk . 
We are going to try to coordinate , '' he said . 
The revolt in Libya is the bloodiest yet against long-entrenched rulers across the Middle East and North Africa . 
The Arab Spring has seen the overthrow of the veteran presidents of Tunisia and Egypt -- Libya 's western and eastern neighbors . 
