Commanders weigh their options as ` Juba ' notches up more kills Friday 5 August 2005 00.01 BST They have never seen Juba . 
They hear him , but by then it 's too late : a shot rings out and another US soldier slumps dead or wounded . 
There is never a follow-up shot , never a chance for US forces to identify the origin , to make the hunter the hunted . 
He fires once and vanishes . 
Juba is the nickname given by American forces to an insurgent sniper operating in southern Baghdad . 
They do not know his appearance , nationality or real name , but they know and fear his skill . 
`` He 's good , '' said Specialist Travis Burress , 22 , a sniper with the 1-64 battalion based in Camp Rustamiyah . 
`` Every time we dismount I 'm sure everyone has got him in the back of their minds . 
He 's a serious threat to us . '' 
Gun attacks occasionally pepper the battalion 's foot and mounted patrols , but the single crack of what is thought to be a Tobuk sniper rifle inspires particular dread . 
Since February , the killing of at least two members of the battalion and the wounding of six more have been attributed to Juba . 
Some think it is also he that has picked off up to a dozen other soldiers . 
In a war marked by sectarian bombings and civilian casualties , Juba is unusual in targeting only coalition troops , a difficult quarry protected by armored vehicles , body armor and helmets . 
He waits for soldiers to dismount , or stand up in a Humvee turret , and aims for gaps in their body armor , the lower spine , ribs or above the chest . 
He has killed from 200 metres away . 
`` It was the perfect shot , '' the battalion commander , Lt Col Kevin Farrell , said of one incident . 
`` Blew out the spine . 
`` We have different techniques to try to lure him out , but he is very well trained and very patient . 
He does n't fire a second shot . '' 
Some in the battalion want marksmen to occupy rooftops overlooking supply routes , Juba 's hunting ground , to try to put him in the cross-hairs . 
`` It would be a pretty shitty assignment because he 's good , '' said Spc Burress . 
`` I think it 's a sniper 's job to get a sniper , and it 'd probably take all of us to get him . '' 
American snipers operate in teams of at least two people , a shooter and a spotter , the latter requiring more experience since he must use complicated formulae to calculate factors such as wind strength and drag coefficients . 
Some worry that Juba is on his way to becoming a resistance hero , acclaimed by those Iraqis who distinguish between `` good '' insurgents , who target only Americans , and `` bad '' insurgents who harm civilians . 
The insurgent grapevine celebrates an incident last June when a four-strong marine scout sniper team was killed in Ramadi , all with shots to the head . 
Unlike their opponents , US snipers in Baghdad seldom get to shoot . 
Typically they hide on rooftops and use thermal imaging and night vision equipment to monitor areas . 
If there is suspicious activity , they summon aircraft or ground patrols . 
`` We are professionals . 
There is a line between a maniac with a gun and a sniper , '' said Mike , 31 , a corporal with a reconnaissance sniper platoon who did not want to his surname to be used . 
He spoke during a 24-hour mission on a roof during which his team ate junk food and urinated into a bottle . 
During daylight they lay on the ground , immobile , to avoid being seen . 
`` It 's not a glamorous life , '' he said . 
There was no sign of Juba , who tended to operate further east , but the team spotted mortar flashes and fed the coordinates to base . 
Mike said he had shot 14 people in Somalia , three in Afghanistan and one in Iraq . 
`` It 's not like you expect it to be , an emotional high . 
You just think about the wind , the range , then it 's over with . '' 
Sniper fire is only of the threats for an American military that has suffered heavy losses this week . 
Yesterday another soldier was killed in Ramadi , west of Baghdad , adding to the 21 who died in attacks on Monday and Wednesday . 
Roadside bombs account for most of the lives lost , and the size and design of the explosions has led investigators to conclude that the insurgents are learning bombmaking methods from other terrorist organizations . 
Yesterday 's New York Times reported that the techniques used by Hezbollah in Lebanon were increasingly being seen in roadside bombs in Iraq . 
An unnamed senior American commander quoted by the paper said bombs using shaped charges closely matched the bombs that Hezbollah used against Israel . 
`` Our assessment is that they are probably going off to ` school ' to learn how to make bombs that can destroy armored vehicles , '' he said . 
