There are many things we just do not know concerning the sinking of the Deepwater Horizon 45 miles off the coast of Louisiana . 
We do not know just how much oil has really been gushing into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Some estimates of the flow of oil exploding from the sea floor put the volume equal to the Exxon Valdez spill -- every four days . 
We do not know where that oil will eventually go . 
Some scientists believe that the prevailing winds will force the oil deeply into the coasts of Louisiana , Alabama , and Mississippi , while currents will carry the oil west to Texas and east to Florida . 
Some projections have the oil being carried up the East Coast , to Canada , and then to Europe . 
Huge plumes of undersea oil , some of it frozen for now , may move into any sea and onto any beach in the world . 
We do not know how much of the oil will make landfall , where it will make landfall , or what the oil will do to the fish and wildlife of the Gulf Coast when it does make landfall . 
We do not know how to completely eliminate the oil from our beaches , rivers , and precious wetlands . 
It is sobering to realize that oil still remains from the Exxon Valdez spill , a spill that occurred over 20 years ago . 
We do not know whether the hundreds of thousands of gallons of chemical dispersants being used to break up the oil will prove far worse than the oil itself . 
These dispersants , which are highly toxic in their own right , can cause the oil to sink and settle on the delicate coral reefs of the Gulf . 
Indeed , we do not know whether any of the few remaining coral reefs of the Gulf will even survive this poisoning . 
We do not know if the shrimp , the oysters , or the fish will ever come back . 
We do not know whether the dolphins and the turtles will survive this ordeal , or if they will simply leave or die . 
We do not know if the complex system of living things will be able to tolerate this catastrophe , or if the Gulf will be a dead sea , poisoned by oil and chemicals -- and greed . 
We do not know what effects this oil spill will have on the economy of the South or the nation 's economy for that matter . 
We do not know what impact it will have at the gas pump . 
We do not know how many jobs will be lost . 
We do not know how many communities will be wiped out . 
We do not know how many irreplaceable , invaluable , and distinctly American heritages along the Gulf Coast will be lost . 
We do not even know when the oil will stop . 
The `` Top Hat , '' the `` Junk Shot , '' and the `` Top Kill , '' all are just theories that BP would like to try or have unsuccessfully tried . 
A relief well is the most certain solution , but even this approach will take months and is very difficult to accomplish on land . 
At a mile below the surface , the uncertainty grows exponentially . 
However , we do know a few things : - We know that BP will act consistent with its own interests . 
It always has , and always will . 
Make no mistake ; this foreign oil company will first and foremost protect itself . 
If this means creating an information campaign designed to make people think that it will be fully accountable when the reality could not be further from the truth , then so be it . 
- If it means approaching fisherman at their lowest point and trying to get them to sign away their only chance at real , meaningful compensation later for a few thousand dollars now , then BP will do this too . 
- If it means spending more on lawyers than it does on clean up to avoid paying what it owes , then BP will do it . 
- We know that the government will not be able to solve this problem . 
- We know that the government chose to neglect close supervision of BP 's action even knowing BP 's long and remarkable history of serious safety violations and significant criminal conduct . 
- We know three years before the spill , the government inexplicably agreed with BP that any spills would likely be `` sublethal . '' 
- We know that after the spill , the government can not even get the key government employee responsible for overseeing BP to appear before Congress . 
- We know that the government can not get BP to stop using the chemicals being pumped into the ocean at a horrific rate . 
We know the government will not be able to help us in this situation . 
So , what can be done ? 
Who can help us ? 
At this point , our only hope is that the American people will take this matter into their own hands , use the laws and the civil process that exist to right these types of wrongs , and hold BP and the other companies involved accountable . 
We know there is no other option . 
Whether this will be enough is the final unknown , but it 's all we can do -- and must do -- instead of idly watching our sea die . 
W. Mark Lanier is founder of The Lanier Law Firm , where he serves as the firm 's lead litigation counsel . 
Mark Lanier currently represents several hundred clients affected by the BP Oil Spill . 
Fox Forum is on Twitter . 
