BP 's Deepwater Horizon costs hit $ 1.25 bn cents Efforts to stop leak , clean-up costs and compensation costing tens of millions a day cents BP shares rise 2.7 % this morning on hopes for success and dividend pledge cents Chief executive vows to spend ` what it takes ' to fix spill Monday 7 June 2010 08.57 BST Protesters yesterday outside a BP station in Florida . 
The company , and its chief executive Tony Hayward , have been much criticised over its response to the spill . 
Photograph : Dave Martin\/AP The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico has now cost BP $ 1.25 bn -LRB- # 870m -RRB- , as its much-criticised chief executive vows to spend `` what it takes '' to fix the Deepwater Horizon disaster that has caused growing anger across America . 
The energy company continues to spend tens of millions of dollars a day trying to stop the leak , mopping up oil on the surface , and compensating some of the people affected by the spill . 
It has also been instructed by the US coastguard to pay the $ 360m cost of building six sand booms off Louisiana to divert oil from the coastline , taking its committed spending over the $ 1.6 bn mark . 
BP continues to insist that it can fix America 's worst ever environmental disaster . 
Tony Hayward , BP 's embattled chief executive , tweeted on Twitter this morning that `` Our top priority is the Gulf . 
I will not be diverted away from that . 
We will spend what it takes to make it right . '' 
Hayward , who was dubbed `` the most hated and most clueless man in America '' last week , is handing responsibility for running the clean-up operation to its American director , Bob Dudley . 
This may assuage some of the fury vented at the British company , which faces calls for its US assets to be seized . 
Official estimates put the leak anywhere between 12,000 and 25,000 barrels of oil a day , and it is not clear how successful the containment cap will be . 
BP has said it collected around 10,000 barrels on Sunday and hopes to eventually capture most of the leak , but the US coastguard is being much more cautious . 
`` I 'm hoping we catch as much oil as we can , but I 'm withholding any comment until production is at a full rate , '' said Thad Allen , the US coastguard admiral . 
Oil from the stricken wellhead has now reached the beaches of Alabama and Florida , widening the environmental damage caused by the spill , despite 2.2 m ft -LRB- 6.7 km -RRB- of containment boom being deployed . 
There are also 2,600 boats involved in the response effort . 
BP said it has paid compensation totalling $ 48m to 18,000 individuals out of a total of 37,000 compensation claims . 
President Barack Obama , who has also been criticised for his approach to the catastrophe , said yesterday it was `` brutally unfair '' that ordinary fishermen and shopkeepers were seeing their businesses damaged by the spill . 
`` If laws were broken , those responsible will be brought to justice , '' Obama said yesterday . 
`` We will make sure they pay every single dime owed to the people along the Gulf coast . '' 
The City continues to be reassured by BP 's efforts , and its refusal so far to cut its dividend . 
The company 's shares were the biggest riser on the FTSE 100 this morning , up as much as 11p or 2.7 % at 444p . 
Later today a congressional committee will gather in Louisiana to hold a session into the local impact of the disaster . 
The Committee on Energy and Commerce will hear from Natalie Roshto and Courtney Kemp , whose husbands were killed when the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on 20 April , along with representatives from businesses and the Institute of Marine Mammal Services . 
