Labor losing battle to convince public Tuesday 19 July 2005 00.53 BST Two-thirds of Britons believe there is a link between Tony Blair 's decision to invade Iraq and the London bombings despite government claims to the contrary , according to a Guardian\/ICM poll published today . 
The poll makes it clear that voters believe further attacks in Britain by suicide bombers are also inevitable , with 75 % of those responding saying there will be more attacks . 
The research suggests the government is losing the battle to persuade people that terrorist attacks on the UK have not been made more likely by the invasion of Iraq . 
According to the poll , 33 % of Britons think the prime minister bears `` a lot '' of responsibility for the London bombings and a further 31 % `` a little '' . 
Only 28 % of voters agree with the government that Iraq and the London bombings are not connected . 
The poll follows repeated efforts by the government to stress that al-Qaida attacks , including September 11 , took place before , as well after , the invasion of Iraq . 
Yesterday a government spokesman said the prime minister had told the cabinet that people who used Iraq to justify the London bombings had `` a perverse view of Islam '' . 
The foreign secretary , Jack Straw , dismissed a thinktank report which argued that there was a link between the invasion of Iraq and the bombings . 
The report by Chatham House , formerly the Royal Institute of International Affairs , said : `` There is no doubt that the situation over Iraq has imposed particular difficulties for the UK , and for the wider coalition against terrorism . '' 
Mr Straw said in Brussels yesterday : `` I 'm astonished Chatham House is now saying that we should not have stood shoulder to shoulder with our long-standing allies . '' 
`` The terrorists have struck across the world , in countries allied with the US , backing the war in Iraq and in countries which had nothing whatever to do with the war in Iraq . '' 
But the Guardian\/ICM poll shows the public believe that Britain 's frontline role has made the country a more obvious target . 
And it shows that while Britons have reacted relatively calmly to the attacks earlier this month - with 83 % saying they were no less likely to travel into central London and 75 % saying they were just as likely to use the tube - the public does want the government to respond with new legislation . 
A clear majority - 71 % - want the government to exclude or deport from the UK foreign Muslims who incite hatred with only 22 % believing such people should be allowed to live in the UK . 
That may give some comfort to ministers as they seek to persuade opposition parties to support new laws making it an offence to incite terrorism . 
But the poll also shows that despite the attacks , there is increasingly limited public support for ID cards . 
Only 53 % of those questioned said they believed ID cards should be brought in to help in the fight against terrorism - a fall on previous findings before and after the bombings . 
Reflecting the relative cross-party unity that has dominated politics since the attacks , the poll also finds that Labor 's poll lead remains almost unchanged on last month 's Guardian\/ICM findings . 
Despite public unease about the prime minister 's decision to support the invasion of Iraq , Labor has the support of 39 % of voters -LRB- up one point on last month -RRB- , the Conservatives 31 % -LRB- no change -RRB- and the Liberal Democrats 23 % -LRB- no change -RRB- . 
ICM interviewed a random sample of 1,005 adults aged 18 + by telephone between July 15 and 17 . 
Interviews were conducted across the country and the results have been weighted to the profile of all adults . 
ICM is a member of the British Polling Council and abides by its rules . 
