Obama names oil-spill panel heads President Obama said the commision would look at how the oil industry operates They are ex-Democratic Senator Bob Graham and former Republican environment chief William Reilly . 
The president said he wanted to make sure such a disaster never happened again . 
The panel has six months to compile its report . 
President Obama 's administration has been forced to defend its record in dealing with the spill . 
The oil leak began more than a month ago , when a rig leased by BP exploded , killing 11 people and spewing millions of gallons of oil into the ocean . 
The spill has reached Louisiana and is threatening Florida and Cuba . 
So far , BP has borne the brunt of public outrage over the spill , but analysts say there is now also a growing sense of anger towards the government . 
In his weekly radio and internet address , Mr Obama stressed that no government employee or elected official would serve on the seven-member panel . 
The remaining five members have not yet been named . 
Mr Reilly led the Environmental Protection Agency under President George Bush Sr , while Mr Graham served in the senate from 1987-2005 . 
`` The purpose of this commission is to consider both the root causes of the disaster and offer options on what safety and environmental precautions we need to take to prevent a similar disaster from happening again , '' the president said . 
He said that the government was doing all it could to help struggling fishermen and other businesses and communities affected by the spill . 
But he said the panel would also investigate whether more could have been done to prevent the disaster . 
`` Even as we continue to hold BP accountable , we also need to hold Washington accountable . '' 
Mr Obama also dismissed calls to halt his program of expanding offshore oil drilling in the wake of the spill . 
`` The Gulf of Mexico can play an important part in securing our energy future , '' he said , before adding : `` We can only pursue offshore oil drilling if we have assurances that a disaster like the BP oil spill will not happen again . '' 
Oil from the Gulf of Mexico leak has reached the Louisiana wetlands The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
