Here 's an excerpt of the Pew poll results : `` Two weeks after U.S. and NATO forces began military operations in Libya , the public 's reaction to the situation remains mixed . 
Half -LRB- 50 % -RRB- say the United States and its allies made the right decision in conducting airstrikes in Libya , while 37 % say it was the wrong decision - a balance of opinion virtually unchanged from a week ago . 
`` However , despite President Obama 's speech to the nation explaining the justifications for military engagement last Monday , an increasing percentage say that the military action lacks a clear goal - 57 % today , up from 50 % a week ago . 
And by an overwhelming 66 % - to-25 % margin , most say they would oppose the U.S. and its allies sending arms and military supplies to the anti-government groups in Libya . '' 
Interestingly , in our unscientific Global Public Square online poll , 86 % of you supported arming the rebels -LRB- roughly 61,000 votes -RRB- while 12 % of you opposed doing so -LRB- 9,000 votes -RRB- . 
Here is our informal poll : What does this say about our Global Public Square audience ? 
`` The United States was n't alone in helping the Mujahideen against the Soviet invasion '' , said Brzezinski lately . 
We see what the Taliban does in Pakistan and Afghanistan today . 
The Americans had learned their lesson , once bitten , twice cautious . 
April 6 , 2011 at 10:30 am | Reply Mojehdeen ward and miss understood Libyan are Not the Mojehdeen , you must understand what this ward mean first , when you go to school , when you works pay your tax means Mojahdeen , Libyan on Ground how fights right now call them mojahdeen becuse they fight Gaddfee how is killing their Families , kidds , and burns their cities . 
you trying to scar people of this ward , when all of us know that Libyan people how fight for their freedom , stop Gaddffee killing and protecting their family . 
I think if we lf we lost this world becuse of Gaddfee paying money to the amircan jew in amircas . 
April 10 , 2011 at 10:31 am | Reply I support arming the rebels because it is the right thing to do , our POTUS provoked the rebels with his saying over and over that Gadhafi must go . 
The NATO forces are abandoning the effort to save civilian lives , and our A10 warthog and C130 planes are removed just when they are needed the most . 
We owe it to the young Arabs to support their effort for freedom and a life beyond the criminal Gadafi . 
April 6 , 2011 at 12:29 pm | Reply i was so disheartened to hear that the libyan rebels have a large contingent of al-queda members that tried to smuggle weapons that were seized into al-queda camps . 
i guess the u. s , france , england and the un are all supporters of al-queda . 
April 6 , 2011 at 7:16 pm | Reply THAT KIND OF INFORMATION THAT REBELES SENDING ARMS TO ALQAIDA IN SOMALI OR WHER EVER , IS A WAY OF QADDFI AND HIS GANG TO FIGHT BACK AND SEEK SYMPATHY . 
HE PAID SOME ONE OR A GROUP TO SPREAD THIS TYPE OF NEWS WHICH IS ONE OF HIS LIES AS USUAL . 
DONT BE NAEIVE TO BELEIVE THAT , REBELS NEED ALL THE ARMS THEY CAN GET TO FIGHT THE DICATATOR AND CRIMINAL QADDAFI . 
April 6 , 2011 at 8:53 pm | sorry to informe u but the usa canada an other world leaders supported al queida back in the 70s an 80s nothing new u know who it is dos the name osama bin laudin ring a bell April 7 , 2011 at 4:48 pm | Admiral James Stavridis , NATO supreme commander for Europe , said of Libya 's rebel force : `` We have seen flickers in the intelligence of potential al Qaeda , Hezbollah . '' 
Former CIA officer Bruce Riedel took things a step further , telling the Hindustan Times : `` There is no question that al Qaeda 's Libyan franchise , Libyan Islamic Fighting Group , is a part of the opposition . 
It has always been Qaddafi 's biggest enemy and its stronghold is Benghazi . 
What is unclear is how much of the opposition is al Qaeda\/Libyan Islamic Fighting Group -- 2 percent or 80 percent . '' 
What I cant understand is that people blindly support anyone who utters the word `` democracy '' but do n't understand that we should be very careful who we are dealing with ... These `` Rebels '' were also dishing out summary justice to people they `` suspected '' to be mercenary 's on account of their skin color ... April 7 , 2011 at 10:31 pm | absolutly right . 
David go away from cnn , fox or msnbc check out what is happening elswhere . 
as i posted earlier two facillitators of sales of nerve and chem shells to hamas and hizzbollah were killed in sudan this week . 
shells are still bweing tracked . 
sale was sponsored by iran . 
our national news outlets day late and a dollor short on telling us what is happening . 
they have there own agenda . 
syria mess completly downplayed on these news outlets . 
must know who you are championing in these fights . 
egypts new rulers inviting hamas and hizzbollah to cairo , another protest movement championed but not really understood . 
April 9 , 2011 at 12:22 pm | Mojehdeen ward and miss understood there is n't Al-qida among us , we use the ward Mojahdeen as arbic ward of freedom fighters , I know all of my home town boys in Misorta and No Alquida among us . 
we are libyans how fights for freedom and safty of our children April 10 , 2011 at 10:34 am | Mojehdeen ward and miss understood Guys Chris and dived on this page their real names is Ali alquidfee and mohomed alqudaffs , they just got a newToyota land cruiser and they promise them with Top life styal , all what they have to do just show up on CNN Fox and talk today . . 
in the other means another Gadffe mercenariness April 10 , 2011 at 10:58 am | Mojehdeen ward and miss understood David , I hate to tell Gadffe juswt run out of money and he wo n't have money to pay you , whats the point you talking on Gadffee 's behalf when he soon will be dead man . 
how much you got paid ??? I hope the FBI track you and revel your stories April 10 , 2011 at 11:03 am | No Al-quda in Libya us , we are freedom fighters that will free libya from Goddffee , fear god , kidds getting killed , Family been raped , homes been destroyed , it is not how much Gaddffee pays what last , Values what will ever be April 10 , 2011 at 11:08 am | mojehadeen ward and missunderstood do n't know who you are but you sure as hell do n't know me . 
I am an american citizen in the usa . 
Know for a fact all that i have posted is true . 
i am not these names you say i am . 
since you obviously have internet access you should check out what i have said in other sites . 
By the way let us all not forget that it was you libyan people who welcomed and gave the lockerbie bomber a heros welcome . 
couple of hundred american deaths , real brave . 
so please do n't give me this sob story . 
everyone runs to usa when in trouble but in reality you can ; t stand us . 
should have stood up and told gaddaffi then he was wrong . 
should have told his ex generals and ministers to go to hell when they joined you saving there own hides . 
April 10 , 2011 at 1:16 pm | Mr Huskinson , I do not think that Americans owe it to the young Arabs to support their effort for freedom and a life beyond the criminal Gadaffi by supplying them with guns and bombs ! 
The Libyans themselves owe it to themselves . 
If you can tell me , will the Americans always be there to sort out for the Libyans whatever goes wrong in the future as it is surely to be ? 
And who designated America the global policeman ? 
America never learns from its past mistakes -- arming the mujaheddin in Afghanistan to fight out the Russians will leave to haunt you for ever . 
It is these same guns\/arms that the terrorists -LRB- Bin Laden and co. -RRB- are using to kill and maim American servicemen & women on duty who are sent there to sure death . 
These deaths and injuries are destroying the lives of Americans . 
There are now hundreds if not thousands or widows and orphans courtesy of chauvinistic tendencies of some American leaders ! 
I can tell you , when the dust finally settles down and the fighting is over -LRB- whether Gadaffi is defeated or killed -RRB- , America and the West will still remain ENEMY NUMBER ONE OF EXTREMIST ARABS !! Arm the Libyans now , but remember , these arms will be used against you in future . 
Let the Libyans sort out their problem themselves . 
Some of the so called freedom fighters of today whom you want to support , were working with Gadaffi just yesterday ! 
The world can only justifiably give out moral and humanitarian support to Libyans , BUT NOT ARMS ! 
April 7 , 2011 at 6:35 am | Reply It is precisely this kind of interference by the west that earns them the hatred of the arabs and others . 
No matter who you support you are taking sides and in the end the west will be seen as killing arabs which will be used by the extremists against the west ... April 7 , 2011 at 10:44 pm | mohamed elhess . . 
a student at WSU Thanks for your positive comment . 
I have not called my family and friends for a month and I do not nothing about them , We need to get rid of this dictator . 
April 8 , 2011 at 6:15 pm | Reply If we want to arm the rebels then first find at least ten pro-US\/West libyans and appoint them leaders of the provisional govt ; just to make sure that when that looney Gadaffi leaves , we have some body in charge who is not Al-Queda April 9 , 2011 at 12:19 pm | Reply General Ham deeply , personally and sincerely feels bad that air-power was insufficient to break the siege of Misrata . 
There are three weapon systems that are state-of-the-art -LRB- so much so they could turn things around in Misrata -RRB- . 
None of them is American . 
They can be smuggled in . 
Their inherent nature does n't lend itself to re-deployment anywhere against any US force anywhere they 'll be either used-up or cheaper variants are already readily available world-wide . 
Also , the general public should be aware that munitions and ordnance have a limited shelf-life . 
Weapons being faced by ISAF are not 1980 's vintage American military hardware that still works . 
The allies face new Russian , Chinese and third-country-variant made armament . 
They systems I strongly recommend now for the Mistrata defenders are : Non-lethal but essential kit includes personal armor with shoulder and neck protection to NIJ IV , Ballistic aramid facemasks and ballistic aramid helmets to NIJ IIIa . 
Ballistic shields may useful for MOUT and ballistic blankets may help protect clinics and hospital . 
Finally , there are 3G NGVs . 
April 9 , 2011 at 5:44 pm | Reply Arm the libyan people and kill Gadffee even though we mange to have some weapon , but we always can use something better than what we have . 
April 10 , 2011 at 11:32 am | We owe ? 
we don ' t owe jack to anyone . 
It was irresponsible of those rebels to start a war , risking lives and ki , lling , , , yes ! 
killing innocent people trapped between their ambitions and those of the government , without proper logistics . 
War is not a game , and we of all people shouldn ' t give other countries and their citzens that the war route is better than the ballot box . 
cutting handicaped , elderly and the help for those in need in our country to `` help '' rebels in other countries is stupid . 
Paying our debt and taking care of our own is n't . 
April 10 , 2011 at 3:36 am | Reply America and Europ is giving ambitious politicians and adventurists around the world the idea that war takes you straight to power with the support of US and UN . 
THat is a fake and deliberately destructive Idea . 
I am an opposition to the present government , but would never take up arms to defend my ideas or wishes . 
I would rather work to reform the system . 
It 's hard work , even more so where democracy is not a regular thing . 
Oppositions in new countries or non democratic countries what ever that is , are impatient . 
They want to change things yesterday . 
Those who voted for Obama , Blacks who marched with Martin Luter King , ... Slaves , nerver saw the Justice and equal opportunity they wanted . 
They are still not fighting America . 
Why do we encourage such behavior in other countries ? 
Remember here we call those people terrorists . 
April 10 , 2011 at 3:43 am | We know who Gadhafi is , but we do n't know who the opposition is supporting , however , the two sides mirror one another . 
So I 'm not entirely sure why we 're creating and\/or supporting another Afghanistan . 
Supporting and protecting protesters is necessary and essential , but supporting and arming rebels , which in itself is undemocratic , will hurt Libyan civilians who truly want peace and democracy . 
This can only end badly for the Libyan people , and more of the same April 10 , 2011 at 11:25 am | Reply I totally agree with you . 
I do n't know how they conducted their poll which stated that the majority of Americans oppose supplying arms to the opposition . 
When asked to vote in the CNN poll , I voted for supplying them and 85 % of the respondents agreed with my vote . 
I do n't think the American public wants Daffy Duck oppressing and killing his own That 's funny , your polls indicated the exact opposite here showing the vast majority in favor thereof . 
I 'm against it because it 's simply the wrong thing to do . 
We most soarly need a laissez-faire foreign policy which we do n't have right now . 
People who are in favor of it are mostly ignorant in the first place as they know practically nothing about the Middle East . 
April 6 , 2011 at 1:06 pm | Reply I to worry were these weapons will end up , even if only in the hands of the `` good guys '' April 6 , 2011 at 2:25 pm | Reply When the US and the West were selling weapons to Gaddhafi , did anyone ask the people of the US and the West ? 
Today those same weapons are being used to kill a people who are sick and tired of tyranny , therefore the question answers itself readily , Yes , Yes and Yes , the rebels of Libya need to be armed and helped right now and not a moment later . 
Added to that the air cover so crucial needs to regain its full momentum , at the end of the day the aim is still to save countless lives . 
All I need to remind the US is this point : A couple of weeks when a US plane was downed in rebel-held territory , did anyone pay attention to what the people called you Americans ? 
They called you Brothers , for once , the US is seen as the good guys , please , for once , let not Oil be thicker than blood , a people want freedom . 
They are capable of doing the ground work , just give them air cover and weapons , and freedom will happen in Libya . 
April 6 , 2011 at 4:32 pm | Reply You have to understand the nature of the human being . 
They called you `` brothers '' . 
... for how long will they ? 
April 9 , 2011 at 4:45 pm | Reply I liked the clarity you used to express your correct viewpoint , in my opinion . 
Supply them with arms to give them a chance to throw off this pathetic dictator . 
The delays and political maneuvering while people were being slaughtered really upset me . 
So much pain and destruction could have been avoided if the powers that be would have MOVED instead of twiddling their thumbs . 
Talk , talk , talk while lives are snuffed out be Daffy duck . 
April 12 , 2011 at 5:13 pm | Reply We have already proved our ignorance in out initial military intervention , arming the rebels will be another step which will arm terrorists who will eventually target the US . 
Unfortunately , the current government does not have anyone with enough knowledge foreign culture to negotiate the matter . 
We are approaching this conflict without insight and understanding of the consequences of our actions . 
We needs to carefully withdraw from military intervention and negotiate an end to this conflict . 
If an armed rebelion occured in the US , I doubt that our government would step asside and let the rebels take over . 
With this being the case , should we expect the same in other countries ? 
April 6 , 2011 at 6:02 pm | Reply I agree we ca n't blindly go in there and be stupid , but assisting with things like training , communications , securing sea access for Misurata -LRB- to allow aid to get in -RRB- and channels for the rebels to sell oil and such might be a good idea . 
Rebels can buy weapons themselves so I do n't even know this is being discussed . 
I find the idea rather stupid . 
The only reason for the US in particular to give away weapons is if we 're going to give away high-tech US military hardware that is difficult to find elsewhere . 
Even if its not the high tech stuff its just a bad idea politically and in every other way . 
Let Egypt and other countries worry about sale of arms to the Rebels and the US can help facilitate this transfer but it should n't be directly giving them away . 
With that being said , I am growing less and less concerned about US\/European image in the world because everyone needs to see that the interests of countries ' leaders and the interests of the people are NOT the same . 
This is just as true in the US as in the middle east . 
I do n't advocate violence against the government or anything -LRB- unless the military started shooting peaceful protesters like it did in Libya , Egypt , Tunisia , Yemen , Bahrain , etc -RRB- but I do think our government needs to get its act together because it is currently not representing its regular citizens ... especially when it comes to the economy . 
A country that uses government contracts as a way to funnel billions of dollars to campaign supporters ; lets executives triple their salaries while sending jobs overseas and cutting benefits and gutting R&D and customer service and other pillars of their own company ; and allows Wall Street to grow rich off irresponsible practices that crash the economy is NOT FAIR . 
This is NOT the responsibility of regular citizens to pay for this in lost jobs , wages and government services and a government that does this is no more legitimate than the governments were in Egypt and Tunisia . 
So I therefore do not care about the US image and hope citizens follow the example of Egypt and Tunisia and realize that such positive change can happen in the US too with the departure of our elite . 
April 6 , 2011 at 8:22 pm | Reply and it starts with campaign finance reform and a push to ratify a constitutional amendment to subvert Citizens United v. FEC April 6 , 2011 at 11:12 pm | James2 ... I agree totally on campaign finance reform , but unfortunately I no longer have any hope for even something as simple as that without our entire government stepping down and regular people WHO DID N'T RECEIVE CAMPAIGN FUNDS taking control . 
I personally find the belief that votes actually matter and that they listen to us and that someday the government is going to get someone who represents us incredibly naive and wishful thinking . 
These people in power do n't represent us , are never going to represent us , and if confronted like Egypt and Tunisia are going to use everything short of live ammunition to protect the economic interests they represent . 
The entire system runs off corruption and pushing for a constitutional reform through legitimate channels is a total waste of time with these people . 
Hate to say it , but protest to the level of Egypt and Tunisia is the ONLY way our country can get back to level footing . 
April 8 , 2011 at 11:50 pm | Mojehdeen ward and miss understood how you calling terrors you Jack as @ , we just normal Libyan citizen how fights of their safety and freedom for their future , Gaddfee is the terrorist the history has approved . 
you just another person that Gadffee paid to talk today . 
you must know how are the rebel before you talk Coward April 10 , 2011 at 10:38 am | Reply I feel that we could risk arming them with small arms , but anything more would be repeating history . 
As much as some people want to see the libyan rebels tote our guns and boot Gadhafi out of office , we could be playing with a double edged sword , because what if someone is put into office WORSE than Gadhafi . 
And for some obscure reason they decided to ... oh try to secure more oil reserves in the middle east , and we would have to do something about that , but they 'd just be using . . 
our weapons ... against us ... so in all reality i think that arming the rebels would just be more of our tax money going into , a rather dangerous toliet . 
Gadhafi is practically begging us to stop the bombing . 
I think that that small skirmish we got into i decisively over . 
April 6 , 2011 at 10:35 pm | Reply Honestly , I would be surprised if Green Berets were n't already there covertly training some of the rebels . 
Arming and training peoples who seek freedom from an oppressive regime is the very reason why the Green Berets were formed . 
April 7 , 2011 at 4:21 am | Reply HMMM ... I wonder if another Country can come in and arm the Tea Party ?? Think they would like to get rid of the President and all of Washington . 
not a good idea to get mixed up with another Countries civil wars . 
Arming them is just pathetic . 
Have we not learned our lessons about arming other countries yet ??? Just is n't a good idea . 
Not only that this whole thing was unconstitutional anyways . 
Libya was n't a threat to us . 
Why are we there again ?? April 7 , 2011 at 4:28 pm | Reply Arm the libyan people and kill Gadffee my friend nothing is free , Libyan are having the full intent to pay ever thing as soon as they get their country from Gaddffee , do n't be so concerns about money when it comes to saving another human been that fight for freedom or your values , Gaddffee has been a running terrors for the past 32 years , they just found that 's he is the one how responsible for killing 300 English troop in Ireland last week ... call your sentor please cat now , libyan citizen are not terrors gaddfee is April 10 , 2011 at 11:28 am | Reply oh now the americans must save them but yesterday we were nothing but scum and they were burning our flags calling us the devil evil but now when they need help we are the best nation on earth do not give guns so in the future they can turn on us with them like we did with bin ladan April 7 , 2011 at 4:56 pm | Reply here is the free speech : AGAIN , MENTIONED FROM THE VERY BEGINNING LET 'S SIT DOWN AND NEGOTIATING PLEASE TO UN AND NATO NO MORE ARMS , GET BOTH SIDES TO TALK YES TO TALK NO WARS - NOT WORTH IT . . 
IT IS THE SUFFERINGS OF THE WOUNDED PEOPLE WHO MUST BE SHOWN ON THE PRESS TO REMIND US THAT WARS IS NOT GLAMOUR , IS NOT THE BEST SOLUTION REALLY -LRB- REPEATED THROUGH OUT HISTORY -RRB- TO HELP DEMOCRACY IS GREAT ONLY WITH BLOODLESS JUST BECAUSE IN THE PAST WE HAD WARS DOESNOT MEAN NOW AT 21ST CENTURY WE NEED WARS SO LETS WORK HARD TO GET THE DIALOGUES FOR BOTH SIDES NOT ARMS -- PLEASE , PLEASE FOR THE SAKE OF PEACE ... . 
April 7 , 2011 at 6:35 pm | Reply Sure , provide all the weapons they need , not from the U.S. , though , give them all the AK 's , RPG-7 's etc , etc. . 
NO HIGH TECH STUFF . 
April 8 , 2011 at 12:04 am | Reply Gov ' t knew this guy was responsible for bombing that plane ... and they continued to work with and support him . 
Makes me sick that only know we oppose him because of a political agenda . 
The RIGHT leaders would have smoked him back then ! 
But since they did n't do their job back then , how about fixing our country 's current issues first and foremost ? 
How about resolving the budget before committing more men and women to a mission we ca n't cost justify and had no interest in pursuing a month ago . 
We spent how many millions rounds out ? 
Do we know Iran and her friends wo n't just come in and take over ? 
I understand Obama was educated at Harvard , and they graduated him . 
What do they teach at Harvard ?? April 8 , 2011 at 1:23 am | Reply I greatly admire Sir Richard Branson , who has said `` wars are unnecessary '' . 
Good luck selling that to the guy who 's wife is being raped and murdered in front of him by government troops . 
The world is what it is , despite our progress in leading nations . 
If the `` Arab awakening '' is real , I fully expect all those folks to have one anothers ' back , regardless of country . 
Where is the Arab league in supporting this momentum with all their oil money , weapons , and technology they 've received from us ? 
April 8 , 2011 at 1:33 am | Reply Folks may not agree with my comments , and they are entitled to their opinion . 
But I have to say I am really tired of my Great Country always being the international police force for these 3rd world countries . 
I do understand their difficulties and issues , but these are warring clans that date back to biblical times , and there is nothing we can really do to assist . 
Take advantage of the situation and make a profit . 
It sounds horribly brutal , but the simple matter of the fact , is these folks are not going to quit shooting at eachother regardless of what the USA wants . 
So I say fund them with weapons , and let them duke it out , and may the better party win . 
Our own Country 's history started in much the same manner , and it puzzles me as to what the `` Civilized World '' really expects these developing countries to really do except have a Civil War , and settle their differences . 
Are their civilians who are going to be injured or even killed ? 
Yes , most certainly ! 
However , there is not one war on this planet that has ever occured where the civilian populations were NOT effected by the wars . 
They 're effect in one of two ways . 
If the country is not invaded , -LRB- World War II -RRB- , the meat for the grinder is supplied from the population via draft to supply the Military Forces with the necessary personnel to get the Missions completed . 
The second way is the destruction and collateral damage from War itself . 
So the harm in supplying the weapons for war ? 
I just do n't see the issue . 
US Troops , need to be pulled out of these situations , and returned to our protectorates and to our home shores . 
If these warring clans want the iron of war then I say supply it , improve our own internal economy , and put Americans back to work . 
Yeah , yeahm I know we would be profiting by the horrible circumstances within those territories . 
But at least we would not be over there trying to dictate peace terms , and let them fight it out . 
April 8 , 2011 at 4:55 am | Reply Mojehdeen ward and miss understood get bent jack as @ , how much Gaddfee pays people like you to talk April 10 , 2011 at 10:40 am | Reply NATO should n't mix in Libyan conflict . 
Arming them is choosing a side in that conflict . 
Belgium also mixed in the conflict , they should n't be longer part of that NATO mission . 
It are Dutch F16 's they are using . 
Matter of changing pilots . 
April 8 , 2011 at 5:27 am | Reply The main issue is not arming -- as given the past when the West have handed over weapons to Muslims they have been in the same day to years after been simply used to shoot the West in the back . 
The West obviously is quite sick of this combined with the usual taunts of imperialism even in the process of handing over weapons to these ungrateful dangerous wretches who think Freedom is Freedom to subjugate others without mercy . 
One only has to look at the waste of lives in the so called Egyptian revolution which has delivered what ? 
Draconian penalties against demonstrations Democracy Freedom what a joke . 
Increased freedom for women where is it ? 
It is now up to the Muslim States to put their bodies were there mouths have been for a hundred years -- time for them to do their own dirty work and stop blaming the West for beings the architects of their own self-inflicted demise economically and socially . 
If they think NATO can dig them out of a hole without some semblance of Military genius on the part of the Rebel Libyans to overcome the disconnect between air and ground forces they are living in fairy land which when you come to think of it . 
No arming by the West unless Western military have direct control over utilizing the weapons on the ground based on return to sender . 
Arab States time to step up . 
April 8 , 2011 at 5:33 am | Reply ARE YOU PEOPLE CRAZY ??? THESE SAME ` REBELS ' SOLD NERVE AND CHEMICAL SHELLS TO HAMAS AND HIZZBOLLAH THRU IRAN . 
TWO FACILLITATORS OF THAT DEAL WERE BLOWN UP BY A ROCKET IN SUDAN THIS WEEK . 
SUDAN IS NOW MAD AT , WHO ELSE , ISRAEL FOR KILLING THESE GUYS . 
ONE WAS A HAMAS AGENT . 
BESIDES MOST OF THE EXPERIENCED MILITARY MEN IN THE ` REBELS ' ARE NOTHING BUT EX GADDAFFI MEN TRYING TO SAVE THEIR ASSES . 
AS THEY WENT HAND IN HAND WITH HIM FOR 30 YEARS . 
SO NO !!!!!!!! WE SHOULD NOT GIVE THESE PEOPLE ARMS . 
THIS IS A CIVIL WAR STAY OUT . 
April 8 , 2011 at 5:55 pm | Reply Mojehdeen ward and miss understood he it is very clear either you have no Idea or just another person how just got paid to talk on Gadffe 's behalf . 
Rebels has been active more that 3 month , the person hwo is been funding terrorst is gadffee and that 's the one needs to be put to sleep Death April 10 , 2011 at 10:42 am | Reply you guys that are posting in CAPS , your posting disinformation for ghdaffi ; he and his sons are on record as saying they will rule the Libyan people or kill them all ; which he is having a good try at in Mirsurata and around Zintan , not to mention in the suburbs of Tripoli ; this is not a civil war , this is a war for survival , and if they are n't supplied with some heavier weapons or the air power to knock out ghadaffi 's heavy artillery , then they do n't stand a chance ; ghdaffi is getting resupplied from Algeria with weapons , and troops through Chad ; some idiot even allowed fuel tankers to offload in Tripoli , breaking the embargo ; I do agree in one area ; once this is over , leave the Libyans and the other 's who have won their democracies to sort it out themselves without meddling of the likes of the CIA and the Russian Secret Service ; send in humanitarian aid , and help the people with healing of the wounded ; whether the aid comes from other Arab states or us , -LRB- if us we are buying good will it is the RIGHT THING TO DO ! 
April 8 , 2011 at 8:31 pm | Reply if that is the case why did yhey sell the chem and nerve gas shells . 
we should stay far away . 
choice is between two evils . 
like all despots he will be killed by those closest to him . 
good outcome there too . 
hamas and hizzbollah invited to cairo by new leader . 
iran is newly courted also while new leadres crack down on protesters . 
while planning new wars . 
April 9 , 2011 at 10:12 am | Reply Mojehdeen ward and miss understood Chris , how much you Got paid , what 's you really name it Must be Moemer or safeislam is n't ?? April 10 , 2011 at 10:49 am | Arming Libya rebels now , I strongly disagree because it risky for more disruption of armed conflicts with more bloodshed . 
And that might cause the international coalition forces with NATO 's military operations `` Odyssey Dawn '' 's objectives compromise as well as UNSC resolutions 1970,1973 too . 
So in another hand , should disarm Gaddafi 's soldiers & militias to reduce fire power of Gaddafi 's soldiers & militias instead . 
But to reaffirm local law enforcement 's effects after stop combat phase is critical & nescesary to be the part of U.N. peace process . 
April 8 , 2011 at 9:37 pm | Reply My heart is bleeding when I see six million of CONGOLESE dead and no body say anything ! 
please , there is no need of civilian war . 
let people live in peace ... look at google -LRB- in Congo minerals '' COLTAN '' -RRB- and in Libya Oil . 
April 9 , 2011 at 4:01 am | Reply People prices at the pump are skyrocketing , food is skyrocketing , clothing is skyrocketing , it is time we take care of our own . 
It is time we start looking for alternative fuel , which we probably already have but it 's not of intrest to the big corporations that is controlling this country . 
It is costing us billions of dollars , yes us the taxpayers , not our goverment . 
So go ahead give arms to everyone , than a year or maybe ten years from now when you see a homeless person on the street and you do n't have a quarter to share because you have yourself or your own family to feed , ask yourself why ? 
I have to say to Kakaj , that you are absolutely right with your comment . 
April 9 , 2011 at 7:55 am | Reply Depravation was known . 
Body in bags ... . 
East and West can not be jusified . 
Who decides to send arms ? 
A law unto themselves ? 
April 9 , 2011 at 4:42 pm | Reply If we do n't arm the rebels , NATO boots will have to be put on the ground . 
Unless we put ` Mercenaries wanted adds ' in Europe , African , Mexican , Canadian newspapers . 
April 9 , 2011 at 9:24 pm | Reply Mojehdeen ward and miss understood Amirca has sold us again , Gaddfee paid them top dollar and say we never met with him at all , we have weapon on Ground and we will concord victor to our people and soon , and before you know it we are back as the 1960 when libya one of the most nicest country in world . 
ask people hwo knew libya before 1969 . . 
April 10 , 2011 at 10:54 am | Reply Malish , we have to arm the rebels in Libya if they are to succeed . 
Look at the geography of the country . 
Everytthing is centered along the highway between Ben Ghazi and Tripoli . 
Nato -LRB- including the U.S. -RRB- is not doing much to help the rebels thwart of the Qadaffi military might . 
Hundres , maybe thousands of lives can be saved if the rebels have the right weaponry to stand up to the regime 's military . 
Another blown opportunity for the West , Europe , and the libyan people who so desperately want their freedom . 
April 9 , 2011 at 9:31 pm | Reply Bad idea , we saw what happened in Afganistant arming the mujahadeen with shoulder fired rockets , sides we do n't know exactly who the rebels are . 
April 10 , 2011 at 9:09 am | Reply Mojehdeen ward and miss understood ok I know that Gaddfee is paying top dollar right now , soon he wo n't have that much of money to pay every one . 
LIBYAN People are not afgan , I think amircan and Libyans has the Same Goal Killing gaddfee the terrors , the sooner they help the less causualties of libyan citizen and less expenses , we could easly leave Gadffee stay in popwer you live with fact that you have a terrors living and hunting you , he already planing on Killing Mis clinton and Obama April 10 , 2011 at 10:47 am | Reply let us arm them now and also prepare to figh them in 15 years . 
AS we create Taliban , arm them trained them to fight the russian . 
we become the target After Kaddafi we will be the target . 
April 10 , 2011 at 10:37 am | Reply Mojehdeen ward and miss understood David your real name Is Ali Algadffee , do you really think Amircan that dump to buy what you saying , Get bent the weapon is on Ground and you and Gaddfee will be dead soon April 10 , 2011 at 10:51 am | Reply Your response to David is a perfect example of how things are unfolding in Libya . 
You do n't agree with something someone says and you wish death on that person . 
That way of thinking and those sentiments are not from a peaceful person . 
April 10 , 2011 at 12:50 pm | Reply Arm the libyan people and kill Gadffee everyday goes by more death to civilians , just yesterday 3 kids under age of 7 died in Libya , the killing was buy weapon that designed to shoot aircraft , Gaddfee forces has been doing the killing and the rebels doing the protections to their families , we expect more that just weapons , we need training and may be some leader ship on Ground since most of fighters never seen a weapon before . 
April 10 , 2011 at 11:20 am | Reply you EXPECT !!!!! i will say it again where were you and your posts of outrage on the internet when the LOCKERBIE BOMBER was sent back to libya ? 
I doubt you gave it any thought at all and now you EXPECT America to pull your chestnuts out of the fire ? 
I really think we have spent enough money and American lives on what become ungrateful nations and peoples . 
Whenever their is a disaster manmade or natural we come running only to be held in contempt later for whatever that particular country feels likeSo please do n't say things like you expect because that sounds really bad . 
April 10 , 2011 at 4:40 pm | Reply mojehdeen ward and misunderstood still waiting for you to say and disprove what i have stated . 
fact is you can not because it is all true . 
this is just another case of people being used by powers greater then them for ends that have nothing to do with democracy . 
ireiterate we should stay far away from this mess . 
humanitarian drops would be as far as we should go but history has proven aid shuch as that is extremely difficult to get to the people who need it . 
biggest question is where the hell is the arab league ??? they are the ones who got everyone in this mess . 
where are the arab league armies ? 
where are your fellow arabs ? 
only arab countries in this are miniscule militarily . 
Egypt is right next door but as i posted elsewhere here they have their own cow to cook and it aint about helping libyan ` rebels ' . 
April 10 , 2011 at 1:37 pm | Reply Yes , we are arming them today , to help them fighting us tomorrow . 
April 10 , 2011 at 3:13 pm | Reply Exactly !!! Thats what would happen and it 's inevitable . 
If we give them weapons , those weapons will be used against us in the near future ! 
April 19 , 2011 at 11:58 am | Reply Just gather up all the virgin goats in America and send them to Libya . 
Soon there will be no fighting or virgin goats since all the muslim 's will be on them . 
April 10 , 2011 at 11:20 pm | Reply Oh goody ! 
Send more weapons to Africa . 
They will be sold and resold to the highest bidder and end up in a pirate boat in Samolia or some other warlords chest of goodys . 
April 16 , 2011 at 2:08 am | Reply So say we arm the rebels . 
What happens with all those munitions and weapons after the war is over ? 
Do you think the rebels will just hand them over ? 
There will be no government to take them either . 
The rebels will keep them in their homes until they are desperate for money when they will sell these weapons on the black market . 
Guess who buys things on the black market ? 
Oh yeah the terrorists ! 
Do you really want the Taliban and Al-Qaida armed with the same weapons as the US military ? 
It 's inevitable that the weapons we give them will end up in the wrong hands . 
How can we even consider this ? 
Give them AK-47s and AK-74s . 
The rebels are not trained , so why bother giving them $ 3000 a piece M4s ? 
April 19 , 2011 at 11:57 am | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
