\* Sees 70 percent chance of dengue vaccine hitting market \* Sees vaccines as key to growth \* High-tech site expected to be up and running in 2013 NEUVILLE-SUR-SAONE , France , May 12 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - France 's Sanofi-Aventis -LRB- SASY . 
PA -RRB- is spending 350 million euros -LRB- $ 480 million -RRB- to build a site to produce a potential blockbuster dengue vaccine that is still in development . 
Sanofi has stressed the importance of vaccines for its growth as the high level of research and development makes it hard for generic drugmakers to launch cheaper copies . 
Vaccines take up 35 percent of Sanofi 's recently trimmed drug portfolio . 
`` What is the potential success rate -LRB- of the candidate vaccine reaching the market -RRB- ? 
We presume 70 percent chance that clinical trials will lead to a vaccine , '' chief executive Chris Viehbacher said at a news conference . 
`` It 's a major commitment for us . '' 
The new vaccine production center is the largest industrial investment ever made by Sanofi-Aventis , the world 's fourth biggest drugmaker and biggest maker of human vaccines through its Sanofi Pasteur vaccines division . 
The high-technology site should be up and running in 2013 to produce 100 million doses of the dengue vaccine which should become availabe in 2014 in the endemic regions such as Asia Pacific . 
Sanofi has said the preventative jab could generate sales of at least 1 billion euros a year as the tropical disease is spreading and putting two fifths of the world 's population at risk , according to the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- . 
The new plant will be located in Neuville-sur-Saone , near Sanofi Pasteur 's headquarters in Lyon , southeast of Paris . 
Sanofi Pasteur Chief Executive Wayne Pisano told Reuters in an interview last month that the company should be able to grow its sales by 8 to 12 percent a year in the medium term . 
Sales last year grew nearly 10 percent to 2.9 billion euros . 
-LRB- ID : nL7284492 -RRB- Sanofi has 12 manufacturing sites under construction or undergoing major renovation and they will come on line in 2009 . 
Among them is the recently approved U.S. factory in Pennsylvania , which is to produce the seasonal flu vaccine Fluzone . 
Viehbacher said the new flu site in the U.S. provided Sanofi the flexibility to also produce a vaccine against the new H1N1 flu strain if needed . 
So far the H1N1 virus has not shown signs of sustained person-to-person spread outside of North America and so has not yet tipped over into a pandemic , a top WHO official said on Monday . 
-LRB- ID : nLB737876 -RRB- WHO said its laboratories have confirmed 4,379 infections with the new strain . 
-LRB- ID : nLB679804 -RRB- -LRB- $ 1 = 0.7336 euro -RRB- -LRB- Reporting by Caroline Jacobs ; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
