CHICAGO | Tue May 12 , 2009 5:07 pm EDT CHICAGO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Quest Diagnostics Inc has developed the first commercially available test to identify U.S. patients infected with the new H1N1 flu virus , the medical testing provider said on Tuesday . 
Quest said its Focus Diagnostics infectious disease reference laboratory validated the test using specimens confirmed as positive for the new virus by public health authorities . 
The test does not need to be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration , the company said . 
The virus , commonly referred to as swine flu , is a subtype of Influenza virus Type A. The Focus Diagnostics test detects the presence of Influenza A virus RNA and specifically identifies the presence of the novel H1N1 virus , Quest said . 
The test can detect the presenHHce of a virus ' RNA from a patient 's nasal or nasopharyngeal specimen . 
Quest said Focus Diagnostics will perform the new test at its reference laboratory in Cypress , California . 
`` The public health laboratories do n't have the capacity to do all the testing that is being requested . 
Now , clinicians and hospitals have another way to potentially identify this novel virus from patients by sending tests to us , '' said Dr. Jay Lieberman , medical director of Focus Diagnostics . 
`` We are very confident that the test will accurately identify this novel H1N1 strain , '' Lieberman told Reuters . 
The tests , which list for $ 300 , can be ordered directly from Focus Diagnostics or through the Quest Diagnostics national laboratory network , Quest said . 
The Focus Diagnosics laboratory is expected to report back on the test results within 24 hours of receiving a specimen . 
Quest said it also would submit positive specimens and test results to the appropriate public health authorities , as required by local public health guidelines . 
-LRB- Reporting by Susan Kelly , editing by Leslie Gevirtz -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
