Helicopter crashes into crane on London tower , kills two . 
Full Article ANALYSIS - Egypt 's pig cull fans sectarian tension Egyptian workers struggle to move a household pig into a truck to send it to the main slaughterhouse in the Manshiyat Nasser area in Cairo , May 4 , 2009 . 
CAIRO | Tue May 12 , 2009 3:16 pm IST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Egypt 's decision to ignore U.N. advice and cull its pigs over flu fears has unintentionally fanned sectarian tensions in the mainly Muslim country . 
Pigs in Egypt are primarily reared by Christian garbage collectors who let their animals scavenge on organic household waste in fly-infested slums . 
They sell the meat , which Muslims consider unclean , largely to other Christians . 
`` The Christians are Egypt 's garbage men , and we are not liked , '' said Marzouk Badr Adli after taking part in a recent protest against the cull in Cairo 's Manshiet Nasser shantytown . 
`` We serve the people and they come and cut off our livelihood . '' 
Egypt , already hit hard by bird flu , ordered the slaughter of all its 300,000 to 400,000 pigs on April 29 as a precaution against the new H1N1 flu virus , commonly known as swine flu , in a move the United Nations said was `` a real mistake '' . 
Egypt fears another flu virus could spread quickly in a country where most of the roughly 77 million people live in the densely packed Nile Valley , many in crowded Cairo slums . 
But the swiftness of Egypt 's decision -- taken without a broad public debate -- has left some Christians feeling bitter , especially as the virus has not yet been detected in the most populous Arab country and has not spread from pigs to people . 
Such bitterness adds to a list of popular frustrations facing the government in Egypt , where a fifth of the people live in grinding poverty , workers grumble about inflation and a global crisis has reined in economic growth . 
Christians account for about 10 percent of Egypt 's population , spanning all social classes . 
Relations with Muslims are usually harmonious although disputes over land , religious buildings or women occasionally erupt into violence . 
It has not helped that truckloads of security forces now stand guard at the entrance to garbage collector slums to help workers enforce the cull order , or that compensation has been low at just 100 Egyptian pounds -LRB- $ 17.79 -RRB- per adult pig . 
`` We are starting to get concerned at the strong sectarian tone that is beginning to dominate the public discourse , '' said Hossam Bahgat of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights . 
`` A discourse that implicates Christians with impurity on the one hand and disease on the other could have alarming consequences , '' he added . 
A government minister has described Egypt 's pigs as a time bomb , an Islamist parliamentarian appeared at a session in a protective mask , and the Coptic pope has stepped in to assure Muslims that most of his people do n't eat pork . 
The meat is mainly consumed , he says , by foreign tourists and expatriates . 
`` This is not happening in a vacuum . 
It is happening in a context of a polarised society and a high degree of sectarian tension , '' Bahgat said of the cull and response . 
But the decision to cull , while it does disproportionately affect Christians , was not taken for sectarian motives , most analysts agree . 
Rather , it was a chance for Egypt to rid urban areas of pigs -- something the government has long wanted . 
Pigs mingle in Cairo with birds , people and livestock in garbage collector slums , slurping up slop from trash brought in from across the city . 
Egypt has said swine in these areas pose a general health risk because of the unsanitary conditions . 
Furthermore , some officials have long expressed concerns that garbage collector areas could create an environment conducive for the more deadly H5N1 bird flu virus , now endemic in Egyptian poultry , to mutate or jump species . 
`` I do n't think that everything originated just to deal a blow to the Christians under the sectarian umbrella , '' said Youssef Sidhom , editor of a secular Coptic weekly , adding that the government was perhaps overly willing to respond to an H1N1 flu panic in parliament , fed at least partly by Islamists . 
`` It was irrational and it was foolish and it was rushed , '' he said of the decision . 
`` I ca n't understand the rush ... So , yes , the government has acted in an insensitive manner . '' 
Egypt , citing concerns over bird flu , had earlier sought to relocate pigs to a desert satellite city , but had not found the political will to do so before the swine flu crisis hit , even as it saw a surge in bird flu cases this year . 
Egypt 's main state newspaper initially said the state could pay 1,000 pounds per pig as compensation . 
But the government ultimately decided to hand the carcasses back to owners for consumption along with the much smaller amount of cash . 
Christian garbage collectors have since clashed with police in at least one garbage collector area . 
Meanwhile , some Muslims have expressed fear that an influx of pork from culled pigs could end up in their ground lamb or beef . 
Analysts note , however , that the tensions were not purely sectarian in nature . 
The cull had also ignited class resentments as it dealt a huge economic blow to an already marginalised community , with little apparent sympathy from the state . 
`` Everything becomes politicised into sectarian stuff in Egypt , '' said Laila Iskandar , a consultant who has worked with the garbage collectors . 
`` This is just one more of those things . '' 
-LRB- $ 1 = 5.6196 Egyptian pounds -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
