Most H1N1 patients do not need drugs to recover : WHO GENEVA | Tue May 12 , 2009 1:47 pm EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Most H1N1 flu patients do not require antiviral therapy to recover , but it remains important to develop a pandemic vaccine as there is a risk of future drug resistance , a World Health Organization expert said on Tuesday . 
Nikki Shindo , a medical officer with the WHO 's global flu program , said the U.N. agency would soon publish new guidance about how to treat patients with the virus that has caused mainly mild symptoms outside of Mexico . 
Given most patients can recover with rest and hydration , Shindo said there did not appear to be a need to treat all people infected with the strain with Tamiflu , Relenza , and similar antiviral drugs . 
Saving such stockpiles for pregnant women and patients with underlying health conditions such as cardiovascular disease or diabetes may prove most prudent , she told a news conference . 
`` We will recommend to consider the use of antivirals for high risk groups , '' Shindo said , while allowing that because little is known about the new strain , it was possible antiviral drug use could be reducing its impact in Europe and elsewhere . 
`` It could be the reason why we are seeing less severe cases in Europe , '' she said in response to a journalist 's question . 
But comparisons between regions were difficult due to a lack of control studies . 
Shindo told reporters that about 10 percent of people known to have been infected with the strain known popularly as `` swine flu '' in Mexico and the United States required to be admitted to hospital -- far more than seen in regular seasonal flu . 
`` That I think has rightly urged the development and delivery of pandemic influenza vaccine , '' she told a news conference . 
`` We are also facing the risk of having resistant viruses , '' she said , noting that antiviral drugs like Tamiflu and Relenza have varying effectiveness against flu viruses as they mutate . 
`` Given that we will have winter in southern American countries and also other parts of the southern hemisphere , there will be a risk of having viruses that will be highly resistant to antivirals , '' Shindo said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Laura MacInnis and Stephanie Nebehay -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
