HONG KONG | Tue May 12 , 2009 8:56 am EDT HONG KONG -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A leading virologist has described the new H1N1 influenza virus as `` very unstable , '' meaning it could mix and swap genetic material when exposed to other viruses . 
The new virus , which has infected 5,251 people in 30 countries and killed 61 , has displayed great efficiency in spreading among people , said Guan Yi , a microbiologist with the University of Hong Kong . 
`` This virus has been around only a few months , it is very unstable ... and we know that its presence is dramatically increasing in human population , so the chance of it meeting with H5N1 is actually increased , '' Guan said in an interview on Tuesday . 
`` Both H1N1 and H5N1 are unstable so the chances of them exchanging genetic material are higher , whereas a stable -LRB- seasonal flu -RRB- virus is less likely to take on genetic material . '' 
While H1N1 appears to be mild so far with many infected people recovering even without treatment , the H5N1 has a mortality rate of between 60 to 70 percent . 
Experts are fearful about the emergence of a hybrid which combines the killing power of the H5N1 with the efficient transmissibility of H1N1 . 
H5N1 is believed to be endemic in countries like China , Indonesia , Vietnam and Egypt . 
Guan , an expert on both the H5N1 and SARS , has analyzed the genetic sequences of the new virus , which is a triple reassortant containing genetic material from swine , human and bird . 
He said there was a huge information gap due to a lack of regular surveillance on animal disease . 
Each one of the eight gene segments in the new virus has been seen in pigs in the past 10 years , but experts have no clue when this new H1N1 virus strain first appeared and in which animal species it had been incubating , Guan said . 
`` We know when each gene segment appeared , but we do n't know when this strain first appeared , there is an information gap of about five to 10 years , from 1999 to 2009 . 
If there was regular surveillance , we would know when this virus came about , '' he said . 
`` We do n't know if this reassortment happened in pigs or human ... It 's likely to have come from pigs because all the segments have been found in pigs , but we ca n't be 100 percent sure . '' 
Guan backed stringent moves taken by some governments to keep the virus at bay , such as quarantining . 
`` They are useful because we are now fighting for time to develop vaccines and antivirals , which will then minimize its impact on people -LRB- over the longer term -RRB- , '' he said . 
`` Already it appears to more virulent than seasonal flu because it is killing younger people and it appears to have higher mortality than seasonal flu , so it does n't make sense to treat this like seasonal flu . '' 
Seasonal flu kills about 250,000 to 500,000 people annually with a fatality rate of less than 0.1 percent . 
A study published in Science on Monday estimated that the new H1N1 flu virus has a case fatality ratio of 0.4 percent based on confirmed and suspected deaths . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
