PM forced into pledge after outrage at killing of Italian officer Italy 's prime minister , Silvio Berlusconi , yesterday announced that he would begin withdrawing his country 's troops from Iraq in September under pressure from public opinion . 
`` I 've spoken to -LRB- Tony -RRB- Blair about this , '' he told a TV interviewer . 
`` We 've got to construct a precise exit strategy . 
Public opinion expects it , and we shall be talking about it soon . '' 
British defense sources last night repeated the British government 's stated policy that its troops will stay in Iraq `` as long as is necessary and as long as the Iraqis want us '' . 
Mr Berlusconi 's comments about a precise exit strategy were `` an aspiration '' or `` political guesswork '' , they added . 
Mr Berlusconi , who is among President Bush 's closest allies , has been under huge domestic pressure over Italy 's staunch support for US policy in Iraq . 
Early next month , he faces a test of electoral strength and in recent weeks he has felt the full force of Italians ' misgivings . 
On March 4 , a senior intelligence officer , Nicola Calipari , was killed by US troops in Baghdad after rescuing an Italian hostage . 
His death united right and left in appalled condemnation , with thousands of Italians turning out to pay their respects to the dead agent during a lying in state . 
Mr Berlusconi dropped his bombshell last night hours af ter Italy 's lower house of parliament , in which the prime minister 's supporters have an outright majority , approved funding for its contingent in Iraq until the end of June . 
Italian officials had already indicated troops would be withdrawn as soon as it was clear that Iraq could handle its own security . 
But Mr Berlusconi went much further than before in defining the outlines of a timetable . 
He said : `` A progressive reduction of the presence of our soldiers will start from September . '' 
He added that the phase-out would take place `` in agreement with our allies '' . 
He was careful not to let himself be pinned down to a finishing date , saying that would `` depend on the ability of the Iraqi government in equipping itself with adequate security and public order forces '' . 
With 3,000 troops , Italy is one of the biggest contributors to the US-led coalition . 
Its forces did not take part in the invasion of Iraq , but were sent in afterwards as part of what Mr Berlusconi and his ministers have always insisted was a peace mission . 
Yesterday saw Italy 's death toll reach 21 when it was announced that a soldier had accidentally shot and killed himself during target practice . 
In London , the government announced yesterday it was proposing an international conference on Iraq later this year to encourage the United Nations and other major organizations to kickstart the stalled reconstruction program . 
A similar idea for a postwar conference was put forward by France a year ago but was blocked by the US , because it was proposed by a country that had spearheaded international opposition to the war . 
But the British idea is gaining widespread support , including that of the US and France . 
The conference would bring together the countries contributing troops , those offering economic help , and the UN , the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund and other international bodies . 
British officials said that the Iraq conference is likely to be held abroad , probably in Brussels . 
The proposal comes as the Iraqi assembly , elected on Jan uary 30 , meets today for the first time . 
But the Shias and Kurds who make up the bulk of the 275-member parliament have so far failed to reach agreement on the formation of a coalition government . 
The assembly will meet behind the concrete blast-barriers and barbed wire that separates Baghdad 's Green Zone , home to the US and British embassies and the interim Iraqi government , from the rest of the Iraqi capital . 
