Wednesday 16 March 2005 03.26 GMT The Pentagon stood accused of sitting on a damaging report from its own auditors on a $ 108.4 m -LRB- # 56.6 m -RRB- overcharge by Halliburton for its services in Iraq yesterday . 
In a scathing letter to George Bush , Democratic congressmen Henry Waxman of California and John Dingell of Michigan said the Defense Contract Audit Agency 's audit was completes last October - before the election . 
They also note that 12 separate requests to the Pentagon to view the completed audits on the contractor 's $ 2.5 bn contract to supply fuel and other services in post-war Iraq had been ignored . 
`` We would like to know why this audit report - and audit reports on nine additional task orders - are being withheld from Congress , '' they wrote . 
`` We also want to know what steps you are taking to recover these funds from Halliburton . '' 
In a second public letter yesterday , Mr Waxman accused Bush administration officials of deliberately withholding information on overcharges by Halliburton from UN auditors - at its behest . 
Some $ 1.6 bn of the $ 2.5 bn Halliburton contract was funded from Iraqi oil revenues overseen by the UN . 
`` The evidence suggests that the US used Iraqi oil proceeds to overpay Halliburton and then sought to hide the evidence of these overcharges from the international auditors , '' the letter says . 
The audit , released by the congressmen on Monday , offers the most definitive glimpse so far of overbilling by Halliburton , once run by the vice president , Dick Cheney . 
In the most startling transaction , it charged the Pentagon $ 27.5 m to ship $ 82,100 worth of cooking and heating fuel to Iraq from Kuwait - 335 times the actual cost of the liquified petroleum gas , a charge the Pentagon auditors said was `` illogical '' . 
The firm and its subsidiary , Kellogg , Brown and Root -LRB- KBR -RRB- , face several investigations , including a fraud inquiry from the justice department . 
A preliminary Pentagon audit , focused on the immediate aftermath of the US-led invasion , found KBR overcharged the Pentagon by $ 61m for kerosene and other fuels . 
Critics of Halliburton are convinced this represents just a fraction of the overcharges . 
The audit released this week covers only one of 10 task orders undertaken under the $ 2.5 bn no-bid contract awarded immediately after the invasion of Iraq . 
However , the overcharges identified in the single task order already dwarf the $ 61m -LRB- # 32m -RRB- in previously discovered overcharges . 
Halliburton charged army corps of engineers $ 875m -LRB- # 457m -RRB- to supply fuel from May 2003 to March 2004 . 
Auditors questioned $ 108.4 m -LRB- # 56.6 m -RRB- of those costs . 
As the Congressmen note , the auditors criticised charges in nearly every area , saying the firm misled auditors and failed to supervise sub-contracts . 
`` Halliburton failed to demonstrate its prices for Kuwaiti fuel were ` fair and reasonable ' , '' the auditors say . 
They also note Halliburton refused repeatedly to provide information on costs of obtaining fuel from Turkey and Jordan , or reveal how it selected its contractors in Kuwait . 
A Halliburton spokeswoman , Wendy Hall , said it was forced into paying , and charging , high costs because of the security situation following the war . 
`` Transporting fuel into Iraq was a mission fraught with danger , which increased the prices that firms were willing to offer for trans portation , '' she told reporters . 
`` The report fails to take into account the fact KBR performed an urgent mission at the army 's request and the mission took place in a wartime environment . '' 
The lawyer for an army corps of engineers whistle-blower said that his client was set to be interviewed for a second time by Pentagon investigators on April 4 over her claims of contracting abuse involving KBR . 
