The author is a Reuters Breakingviews columnist . 
The opinions expressed are her own . 
LONDON -- Chaos in Libya could pose a threat to Mediterranean economies . 
The unrest in the oil-rich North African country , and the subsequent bloody reaction of its authoritarian regime , could soon present a serious strategic challenge for Western governments and corporate titans that recently embraced the long-pariah state . 
But it is Italy , the country 's former colonial ruler , which looks set to bear the brunt of the fallout if the situation descends into uncontrolled turmoil . 
Four decades of rule under unpredictable Muammar Gaddafi quite expectedly failed to deliver the Brotherly Leader and Guide of the Revolution 's vision of a `` state of the masses '' or `` people 's capitalism '' . 
In one of the most corrupt countries in the world , wealth from the economy , which accounts for 2 percent of global oil production , is hardly visible among the population of 6 million . 
Despite its massive failings , Libya , as other similar countries , has won praise from the International Monetary Fund . 
The country 's relationship with Western powers deepened after U.N. sanctions against were lifted in 2003 . 
The United States has increased its oil imports from the country , and unsavoury government dealings have helped the likes of British oil giant BP push on with a $ 900 million exploration contract in Libya . 
The country 's strongest external ties , however , remain with Italy . 
Libya is a prominent feature on the Italian corporate landscape , with stakes in carmaker Fiat , banking group UniCredit and even the Juventus football team . 
Italian oil giant Eni has a 14 billion euro investment program in the country , as well as supply contracts stretching to 2047 . 
Overall Libyan oil accounts for around 27 percent of Italy 's consumption . 
Threats from Gaddafi 's son that the country 's oil `` will be burned '' can not be taken lightly . 
Even if Libya does n't descend into all-out civil war , it can afford a prolonged period of disruption despite its economy 's absolute dependence on oil production . 
The country 's net foreign assets are estimated to total $ 150 billion -- or enough to cover 37 months of imports . 
Italy 's politicians are reluctant to condemn Tripoli , but after the country 's decision to open fire on anti-government protestors , companies will have to weigh the dubious attraction of counting Libya amongst their shareholders . 
Energy investments could also now be threatened if sanctions are re-imposed . 
Meanwhile the near 2 percent jump in oil prices seems to suggest markets are n't overly optimistic . 
Greedy oil cartel members will quickly capitalize on high prices to capture a windfall . 
Thus , I do n't think that oil supplies anywhere will be threatened . 
And as a bonus , those producers will be applauded for `` stepping up to the plate '' and being a stabilizing force on the world economy , in a time of need . 
It 's a perfect play . 
Oil supplies on the planet are not unlimited -- the reason oilman George Bush used his presidency to invade a big oil producer unrelated to 911 -- US Companies ran out of accessible supplies and needed a new source . 
Tensions in the Middle East between the poor and the autocratic elite and their well-paid supporters have been building for decades -- the results now painfully apparent . 
And there is the Inconvenient Truth of global warmin -- caused by carbon-based fuels . 
So now we have the Perfect Storm unfolding before our very eyes . 
Do n't count on oil supplies or prices ever stabilizing again . 
Instead you will be forced to transition -- evolve -- to energy sources and production with a Green Footprint . 
Despite its massive failings , Libya , as other similar countries , has won praise from the International Monetary Fund . 
It 's too bad that Ms Galani did n't flesh this one out a little more . 
I suspect that the IMF 's focus is mainly on debt levels for any given nation , and obviously one that lives within its means , as most oil nations will , gets a thumbs up from them . 
So people reading that statement will gain a prejudiced view of the IMF as if it is complicit in supporting corruption in Libya , while that could hardly be the case . 
The IMF is merely a banker of last resort , as far as I can see , unless the institution is more politicized than I have been led to believe . 
This seems a very fair and even analysis and I doubt if the IMF comment will change any opinions about the debt merchants the IMF protects as last resort . 
The article and comments seem to ignore the fact that six million residents of Libya must do something , besides pounding sand , to improve their lives and add assets to Libya or to Qdufus and sons . 
This article has some nice tid bits of economic info that the general public should be aware of ; especially those who do n't know that Tripoli has been a pirate haven for generations . 
Keep reporting Ms. Galani . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The company was founded in 1999 as Breakingviews.com and was acquired by Thomson Reuters in 2009 , becoming Reuters brand for financial commentary . 
Every day , we comment on the big financial stories as they break . 
Our expert analysis is provided by a global team of 30 correspondents based in New York , Washington , London , Hong Kong , Madrid , Dubai and Mumbai . 
For the full commentary and analysis service from breakingviews.com , including regular emails containing the latest views , contact sales@breakingviews.com . 
Breakingviews has published a selection of books for purchase and download . 
