NALUT , Libya | Wed Jul 27 , 2011 7:54 pm EDT NALUT , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebels fighting in Libya 's western mountains prepared on Thursday for a new offensive against Muammar Gaddafi 's troops , raising pressure on the Libyan leader a day after Britain granted diplomatic recognition to the opposition . 
With hopes fading of a negotiated settlement , both sides appear prepared for the five-month-old war to grind on into the Muslim holy month of Ramadan in August . 
The rebels said they were planning to attack the town of Ghezaia near the Tunisian border in the next 48 hours , and a Reuters correspondent saw dozens of heavily armed pickup trucks heading for the nearby rebel-held town of Nalut . 
`` We are reinforcing the position around Nalut and we will attack Ghezaia tomorrow or the next day for sure . 
We plan to take it , '' Omar Fakkan , a rebel commander , told Reuters . 
He said that forces from a number of rebel-held towns in the Nafusa Mountains were gathering in Nalut , ready for the attack . 
Rebel fighters have taken large swathes of Libya since the start of an uprising to end Gaddafi 's 41-year rule , and now control much of the Nafusa mountain range , the northeast of Libya and the western city of Misrata . 
Yet they remain poorly armed and are often disorganized . 
Despite four months of NATO strikes , they have failed to reach the capital Tripoli and appear unlikely to make a breakthrough soon . 
Gaddafi has scoffed at the efforts to end his rule and has weathered the now-stalled rebel advance and the NATO air raids on his forces and military infrastructure . 
A recent flurry of diplomatic activity has yielded little , with the rebels insisting Gaddafi step down as a first step and his government saying his role is non-negotiable . 
United Nations envoy Abdel Elah al-Khatib visited both sides this week with plans for a ceasefire and a power-sharing government that excludes Gaddafi , but to no avail . 
Asked about Khatib 's proposal , rebel leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil said : `` We were surprised the day before yesterday that we are taking 10 steps back ... and he says to share power with Muammar Gaddafi 's regime . 
This is laughable . '' 
Gaddafi also appeared defiant on Wednesday , urging rebels to lay down their arms or suffer an ugly death . 
`` We all lead this battle , until victory , until martyrdom , '' he said in an audio message aired at a pro-Gaddafi rally in Zaltan , 140 km -LRB- 90 miles -RRB- west of his stronghold Tripoli . 
Ramping up pressure on Gaddafi , Britain expelled his diplomats from London on Wednesday and invited the rebel National Transitional Council to replace them . 
Foreign Secretary William Hague announced that Britain now recognized the rebels as Libya 's legitimate government and unblocked 91 million pounds -LRB- $ 148.7 million -RRB- in frozen assets . 
The United States and about 30 other nations have also recognized the opposition , potentially freeing up billions of dollars in frozen funds . 
`` This decision reflects the National Transitional Council 's increasing legitimacy , competence and success in reaching out to Libyans across the country , '' Hague said in London . 
Gaddafi 's government said the British move was `` illegal and irresponsible '' and a `` stain on the forehead of Britain . '' 
`` We will go to the International Court of Justice and the national courts in Britain , and we will use their justice , '' said Libya 's deputy foreign minister , Khaled Kaim . 
However , the British move won praise from rebels fighting in the western mountains . 
`` We are encouraged by what Britain has done and there is no way Gaddafi can stay in Libya , '' said Fakkan . 
`` The fighting will get much worse now because he will have to fight to survive and the Libyans do not want him . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
This is a staged coup by NATO and I 'm sick of hearing MSM report it as anything else . 
they do nothing in Syria where there is practical genocide . 
but they take sides in a civil war in Libya . 
and violate almost every thing in the UN resolution that said they were only going to protect civilians ? 
the UK -LRB- BP -RRB- has oil money wrapped up in Libya , mostly the east France signs an oil deal with the rebels . 
or you sure all the `` rebels '' want democracy ? 
Gaddafi gave out 1million of ak47 to the people , do you think people hate him ? 
Why did n't they take over yet than ? 
Cause people are for him , Nato made incredible mess and was lying from the beginning . 
Shame on you West , for money you 'd kill anybody . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
