Director of National Intelligence Dennis C. Blair told Congress yesterday that instability in countries around the world caused by the current global economic crisis , rather than terrorism , is the primary near-term security threat to the United States . 
`` Roughly a quarter of the countries in the world have already experienced low-level instability such as government changes because of the current slowdown , '' Blair told the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence , delivering the first annual threat assessment in six years in which terrorism was not presented as the primary danger to this country . 
Making his first appearance before the panel as President Obama 's top intelligence adviser , Blair said the most immediate fallout from the worldwide economic decline for the United States will be `` allies and friends not being able to fully meet their defense and humanitarian obligations . '' 
He also saw the prospect of possible refugee flows from the Caribbean to the United States and a questioning of American economic and financial leadership in the world . 
But Blair also raised the specter of the `` high levels of violent extremism '' in the turmoil of the 1920s and 1930s along with `` regime-threatening instability '' if the economic crisis persists over a one-to-two-year period . 
In answer to a question about whether he was shifting assets to cover the financial downturn , Blair said that by leading off with the economic situation he `` was trying to act as your intelligence officer today , telling you what I thought the Senate ought to be caring about . '' 
He said he was not refocusing the intelligence community 's basic collection and analytic work from traditional concerns such as terrorism , Afghanistan , Pakistan , Iran , North Korea , Russia and China . 
In fact , during the nearly two-hour hearing , Blair took lawmakers on a virtual tour of every other major and minor security threat , from terrorism and cyber-attacks to the country 's evolving relations with Russia and China . 
Discussing terrorism , Blair emphasized the progress being made against al-Qaeda . 
`` We have seen notable progress in Muslim opinion turning against terrorist groups such as al-Qaeda '' as more religious leaders question terrorists ' use of brutal tactics against fellow Muslims . 
He said that `` al-Qaeda today is less capable and effective than it was a year ago '' based on the pressure the U.S. , Pakistan and others put on Osama bin Laden and his core leadership in Pakistan 's tribal areas and the decline of al-Qaeda in Iraq . 
He also reported that while no major country faces the risk of collapse at the hands of any terrorist groups , `` Pakistan and Afghanistan have to work hard to repulse a still serious threat '' to their governments . 
Despite these successes , Blair said al-Qaeda and its affiliates and allies `` remain dangerous and adaptive enemies , '' and the threat continues that they could inspire or orchestrate an attack on the United States or Europe . 
He told the committee there is still concern that al-Qaeda could inspire some homegrown terrorists inside the United States . 
He added that if al-Qaeda is forced out of the Pakistan tribal areas , it will have difficulty supporting the Taliban in Afghanistan . 
He said bin Laden could relocate . 
For example , he said , al-Qaeda elements in Yemen now pose a new threat to Saudi Arabia , whose own efforts have been successful in killing or capturing most al-Qaeda senior leaders in that country . 
Blair delivered a blunt assessment of Iran and its weapons programs , saying that it is possible that Tehran could develop a nuclear weapon as early as next year , if the country 's leaders choose to do so . 
But he also suggested that Iran could be kept off the nuclear path with the right combination of diplomacy and economic pressure . 
`` Iran is clearly developing all the components of a deliverable nuclear weapons program , '' he said , but `` whether they take it all the way to nuclear weapons depends a great deal on their internal decisions . '' 
Blair described Iraq as increasingly stable , with terrorist attacks on the wane and al-Qaeda losing followers and influence . 
But he warned that recent progress could be undermined by tribal disputes , corruption and foreign support for militia groups . 
Echoing recent statements by U.S. military commanders , he gave a grim portrayal of security in Afghanistan , where Taliban insurgents have shown new aggressiveness while the government continues to struggle with rampant corruption and an extensive drug trade . 
In neighboring Pakistan , an intensified campaign against terrorists has failed to subdue multiple insurgencies or quell growing radicalism in many parts of the country . 
