Syria crisis : UN report condemns crackdown on protests The UN report says 1,100 unarmed civilians have been killed in the crackdown Syrian troops trying to quash three months of protests are committing `` alleged breaches of the most fundamental rights '' , says a UN report . 
The use of live ammunition against mostly unarmed civilians has killed around 1,100 people , says the report . 
It also documents arrests on a massive scale . 
Investigators believe as many as 10,000 people have been detained . 
Investigators used evidence from rights groups and people who had fled Syria , but were denied entry to the country . 
President Bashar al-Assad is facing the gravest threat to his family 's 40-year ruling dynasty , as unrest that first erupted in the south of the country has now engulfed the north - near the border with Turkey - and is threatening to spread eastwards towards its border with Iraq . 
As anti-regime demonstrations continued in many parts of the country , the government on Wednesday mobilised its own demonstration of popular support as thousands of people turned out in a Damascus suburb to wave a giant Syrian flag 2.4 km -LRB- 1.4 miles -RRB- long . 
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay has repeatedly appealed to Syria to let in a humanitarian team make a proper assessment , but the Syrian authorities have refused . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut The people of Maarat al-Numan fear they may be next for the attention of the Syrian army 's troops and tanks , which have been gathering on the town 's outskirts for the past few days . 
According to residents and activists , many of the town 's 100,000-strong population have been fleeing in all directions . 
Officials say they 're planning a `` limited military operation '' to restore security there . 
Continued anti-regime demonstrations are reported in many areas , including at Deir al-Zour in the east , Latakia on the coast , Homs and Hama in central Syria , and some suburbs of Damascus . 
But in a big show of organised support for the regime , many thousands of people turned out to witness what 's being billed as the world 's biggest Syrian flag , running along a big stretch of main road on the western outskirts of the capital . 
They waved pictures of President Assad and chanted slogans praising him . 
State TV said the event was organised to show the Syrian people 's cohesion , and rejection of foreign interference . 
But despite being denied access by the Syrian government , the new UN report documents reliable evidence of widespread violations , says the BBC 's Imogen Foulkes in Geneva . 
`` The most egregious reports concern the use of live ammunition against unarmed civilians , including from snipers positioned on rooftops of public buildings and the deployment of tanks in areas densely populated by civilians , '' says the report . 
It cites `` the excessive use of force in quelling demonstrators , arbitrary detentions , summary executions , torture '' . 
The authorities appear to have denied civilians the right to food and medical care by laying siege to towns and preventing supply deliveries , it adds . 
The preliminary report was commissioned by the UN human rights council in April , adds our correspondent . 
A more definitive account will have to wait until the Syrian government allows UN investigators in to see the situation for themselves . 
Meanwhile , Syria has called on the people of Jisr al-Shughour to return , three days after an army attack restored government control there . 
More than 8,000 Syrians have fled from the north-western town into Turkey in the past week to escape military operations , which the government says are aimed at tackling `` terrorist organizations '' . 
Supporters of President Assad have unfurled a 2,000 ft flag in Damascus Officials said the city of around 100,000 people - which has been the focus of large anti-regime demonstrations - was returning to normal , but that army units were still pursuing `` militants '' through the hills around the town . 
Damascus says some 120 security personnel were killed by `` armed gangs '' in the town on 6 June , and on Wednesday state TV said a `` mass grave '' containing three bodies had been found . 
At the same time , troops and tanks are reported to be massing for an attack on Maarat al-Numan , 25 miles -LRB- 40km -RRB- south-east of Jisr al-Shughour . 
One eye-witness told BBC Arabic there were `` no more than 7,000 people '' left in the city , which has a population of some 90,000 . 
Syrian state media have reported attacks on government buildings and security headquarters in the town , which straddles the main highway between Syria 's two biggest cities , Damascus and Aleppo . 
Meanwhile , Jordan said it had reopened a border crossing 10km from the southern Syrian city of Deraa , where the current unrest started in March . 
Although it has not yet responded to the UN report , Syria has expressed `` surprise '' at Arab League Chief Amr Moussa 's position that the situation there was `` dangerous and worrying '' . 
Some 8,000 Syrians are now sheltering in refugee camps in Turkey Syrian rights groups put the overall death toll in Syria at 1,297 civilians and 340 security force members . 
Refugees arriving in Turkey describe the regime 's operation in the northern mountains as a `` scorched-earth '' campaign , and Syrian soldiers who deserted have said they were forced to commit atrocities . 
Syria has prevented foreign journalists , including those from the BBC , from entering the country , making it difficult to independently verify reports from there . 
European powers are campaigning for a draft UN Security Council resolution condemning the crackdown , but they face opposition from Russia and China , both of whom wield veto powers and object to UN action against President Assad . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
