The United States marks the 150th anniversary of the Civil War Americans still argue over many issues that led to war , scholars say Scholar : `` There are all of these weird parallels '' Southern historian : Confederate leaders are American heroes CNN -- He stood 5-foot-8 and weighed 145 pounds . 
His face was gaunt and sunburned . 
Ticks , fleas and lice covered his body . 
Before battle , his lips would quiver and his body went numb . 
When the shooting started , some of his comrades burst into maniacal laughter . 
Others bit the throat and ears of their enemy . 
And some were shattered by shells so powerful that tufts of their hair stuck to rocks and trees . 
Take a tour of a Civil War battlefield today , and it 's difficult to connect the terrifying experience of an average Civil War soldier -- described above from various historical accounts -- with the tranquil historic sites where we now snap pictures today . 
But you do n't have to tour a battlefield to understand the Civil War . 
Look at today 's headlines . 
As the nation commemorates the 150th anniversary of its deadliest war this week , some historians say we 're still fighting over some of the same issues that fueled the Civil War . 
`` There are all of these weird parallels , '' says Stephanie McCurry , author of `` Confederate Reckoning , '' a new book that examines why Southerners seceded and its effect on Southern women and slaves . 
`` When you hear charges today that the federal government is overreaching , and the idea that the Constitution recognized us as a league of sovereign states -- these were all part of the secessionist charges in 1860 , '' she says . 
They point to four parallels : The disappearance of the political center If you think the culture wars are heated now , check out mid-19th century America . 
The Civil War took place during a period of pervasive piety when both North and South demonized one another with self-righteous , biblical language , one historian says . 
One of the biggest debates during the Civil War was how far should governments go in dictating our lives . 
We still debate those politics . 
-- William Blair , Civil War historian The war erupted not long after the `` Second Great Awakening '' sparked a national religious revival . 
Reform movements spread across the country . 
Thousands of Americans repented of their sins at frontier campfire meetings and readied themselves for the Second Coming . 
They got war instead . 
Their moral certitude helped make it happen , says David Goldfield , author of `` America Aflame , '' a new book that examines evangelical Christianity 's impact on the war . 
Goldfield says evangelical Christianity `` poisoned the political process '' because the American system of government depends on compromise and moderation , and evangelical religion abhors both because `` how do you compromise with sin . '' 
`` By transforming political issues into moral causes , you raise the stakes of the conflict and you tend to demonize your opponents , '' Goldfield says . 
Contemporary political rhetoric is filled with similar rhetoric . 
Opponents are n't just wrong -- they 're sinners , Goldfield says . 
`` The erosion of the center in contemporary American politics is the most striking parallel between today and the time just before the Civil War , '' Goldfield says . 
In the lead-up to the war , political campaigns were filled with religious fervor . 
Political parties paraded their piety and labeled opponents infidels . 
`` Today 's government gridlock results , in part , from this religious mind set that many issues can be divided into good and evil and sin and salvation , '' he says . 
A Union artillery crew poses before battle . 
Each side underestimated the opposing army , historians say . 
How much power should the federal government have ? 
Nullification , states ' rights and secession . 
Those terms might sound like they 're lifted from a Civil War history book , but they 're actually making a comeback on the national stage today . 
Since the rise of the Tea Party and debate over the new health care law , more Republican lawmakers have brandished those terms . 
Republican lawmakers in at least 11 states invoked nullification to thwart the new health care law , according to a recent USA Today article . 
It was the kind of talk that led to the Civil War , historians say . 
`` One of the biggest debates during the Civil War was how far should governments go in dictating our lives . 
We still debate those politics , '' says William Blair , director of the George and Ann Richards Civil War Era Center at Pennsylvania State University . 
The Southern answer to that question ignited the war . 
When they seceded , their leaders said that they were protecting the inherent rights of sovereign states . 
They invoked the 13 Colonies ' fight for independence . 
We wanted to be left alone . 
What actually caused the war was Lincoln 's insistence that , no , we ca n't let these people go . 
-- H.W. Crocker III , Southern historian Civilians reenacting war as a hobby Budget threatened Civil War anniversary H.W. Crocker III , author of `` The Politically Incorrect Guide to the Civil War , '' says Southern secessionists were patriots reaffirming the Founding Fathers ' belief that the Colonies were free and independent states . 
`` If the Southern states pulled out of the union today after , say , the election of Barack Obama , or some other big political issue like abortion , how many of us would think the appropriate reaction from the federal government would be to blockade Southern ports and send armies into Virginia ? '' 
He says men such as Jefferson Davis , the leader of the Confederacy , are American heroes . 
`` Jefferson Davis was not trying to force anything on the people in the North , '' he says . 
`` We wanted to be left alone . 
What actually caused the war is Lincoln 's insistence that no , we ca n't let these people go . '' 
Slavery caused the war , says McCurry , author of `` Confederate Reckoning , '' and most historians . 
Southern slaveholders invoked the Revolution while trying to build an antidemocratic slave state `` dedicated to the proposition that all men are not created equal , '' McCurry says . 
They also did n't want to lose the tremendous wealth generated by slave labor , she says . 
`` They felt confident because they were the biggest producers of cotton in the Western world at the height of the Industrial Revolution . '' 
Unleashing the dogs of war During the run-up to the Iraq War , former Vice President Dick Cheney famously declared that American troops would be welcomed as `` liberators '' in Iraq . 
Cheney made the mistake that political leaders have been making for ages -- he did n't know the enemy , says Emory Thomas , author of `` The Dogs of War , '' which examines how ignorance on both sides led to the Civil War . 
`` Cheney thought it was going to be France in 1944 , but it ended up Georgia in 1864 , '' Thomas says . 
Civil War leaders made the same mistake , Thomas says . 
Northern leaders like Lincoln did n't really think ordinary Southerners who had no slaves would fight in defense of slavery . 
Southerners did n't think Northerners were willing to go to war to preserve the Union , he says . 
And few on both sides expected the war to be so bloody and long . 
`` America in 1861 did n't realize what the hell they were doing , '' he says . 
`` They just were n't willing to think of unpleasant possibilities . '' 
We risk the same mistakes when we commit to `` limited '' military campaigns in places such as Iraq and , most recently , Libya , Thomas says . 
When President Obama announced a limited air bombing campaign in Libya , Thomas thought about the political leaders before the Civil War . 
Each incrementally committed to various military provocations , thinking events would n't spiral out of control . 
`` Once you commit to war , you do n't have any control over how it ends , '' Thomas says . 
`` It 's amazing how that sounds like Libya now . 
We may blunder into success , but we do n't know who these guys -LRB- Libyan rebels -RRB- are . '' 
The battlefields are quiet and even tranquil today , but the average Civil War soldier faced horror and exhaustion . 
Barack Obama is n't the first black president , according to some Southern secessionists . 
That would be Abraham Lincoln . 
He was called a `` black Republican '' and the `` Great Dictator . '' 
There was a reason a large number of Americans despised Lincoln during the war . 
Think of the nation 's recent `` War on Terror . '' 
Some Americans thought Lincoln used the war to ignore the Constitution and expand the powers of the presidency . 
Lincoln suspended habeas corpus -LRB- it gives a person who is jailed the right to challenge their detention in court -RRB- during the war and used military courts to arrests thousands of civilians . 
How do we treat American citizens caught attempting to bomb U.S. cities ? 
How do we clamp down on American citizens who preach overthrowing the government ? 
What rights do Guantanamo Bay prisoners possess ? 
`` It 's not just what does a president do against an enemy , '' says Blair , the Civil War historian . 
`` It 's what do you do against your own citizens to determine loyalty . 
That 's a big debate today . '' 
Lincoln skillfully addressed that debate , says Brian McGinty , author of `` Lincoln & the Court . '' 
He says Lincoln confronted unprecedented problems : The South was in rebellion , the nation 's capital was in real danger from rebels in Virginia and their sympathizers in Maryland . 
At one point , a mob blocked passage of Northern troops through Maryland to defend Washington . 
`` His oath of office required him to ` preserve , protect and defend the Constitution ' and he believed that the best way to do that was to preserve the Union , '' McGinty says . 
`` What good would the Constitution be if the country itself was lost ? '' 
McGinty does n't think Lincoln became a dictator . 
He says he allowed the presidential election to take place in 1864 . 
He worked with Congress . 
He asked military officers to arrest disloyal persons sparingly , and he never tolerated abuse of prisoners . 
Lincoln said his actions would ultimately be subject to the review of the American people , not the courts , McGinty says . 
`` He called the people ` The Great Tribunal ' and said that they would have the final word on constitutional issues . 
In the end , The Great Tribunal approved of what he had done . 
So , for the most part , has history . '' 
The Great Tribunal , however , has yet to render a unanimous verdict on the Civil War . 
A century-and-a-half after the war ended , people still clash over the causes and meaning . 
Blair says they still clash because the war does n't fit many Americans ' image of themselves or their past . 
`` The American story of our past has been a hopeful , helpful narrative , '' he says . 
`` But it 's hard for us to understand that there was a time in this country when the Constitution protected slavery , and it was actually legal . 
`` How do you insert the story of slavery into that ? '' 
