Saturday 24 September 2005 15.16 BST Anti-war demonstrators gathered today for a march in central London on the eve of the Labor Party conference to demand that the government withdraw all British troops in Iraq . 
Scotland Yard estimated that as many as 10,000 people had joined by the time the protest had reached Hyde Park at 2.10 pm , although organisers put numbers at anything up to 100,000 . 
Earlier , hundreds of protesters converged on College Green outside the House of Lords amid heavy police security . 
Crash barriers lined the streets and surrounded Parliament Square where last year 's protest against the foxhunting bill had descended into violence . 
More campaigners continued to arrive as the protest prepared to start on its route through Whitehall and on to Hyde Park . 
People holding banners inscribed with slogans including `` Bush world no 1 terrorist '' , `` No war , no nukes '' and `` Blair 's taking liberties , troops home now '' swarmed on every piece of grass available . 
At 1.20 pm a group of protesters holding hands around a banner demanding : `` Troops home from Iraq , '' led the march past the war memorial and on to Trafalgar Square . 
At least 50 policemen and three police vans watched as they marched past the entrance to Downing Street . 
Some campaigners shouted towards No 10 : `` Down with Downing Street , '' and `` Stop the bombings . '' 
British soldier Lance-Corporal George Solomou , who refused his call-up to serve in Iraq , was also at the front of the march . 
He said : `` I am here to show my solidarity . 
The British people are increasingly realizing that they have been told more and more lies about the war . '' 
Janet Brown , a retired teacher from Manchester , said : `` The war is corrupt and it stinks . 
It has been a total lie from the beginning , we are constantly being lied to and Bush and Blair have to be answerable . 
`` They are just making a bad situation worse and there is no way that it is tolerable . '' 
Keir McKechnie , the secretary of Glasgow 's Stop The War Coalition had traveled down to London overnight . 
He said there were three coaches from Glasgow , another two from Edinburgh and one from Dundee . 
He said : `` We have come down here today because we want Tony Blair to know that the anti-war movement has not been kowtowed by his attempts to curb civil liberties . 
Every single troop has to be brought home safely and not in body bags which is what is happening in Basra . '' 
He added that ` there has been a watershed over the last week because millions of people now know that it really is a nightmare out there and that if Tony Blair continues to ally himself with Bush he is pulling himself further and further into a conflict that is unwinnable . '' 
Sacked Gate Gourmet workers also joined the protest . 
Holding banners declaring : `` Our fight is your fight , '' they repeatedly chanted : `` We want justice : troops out , workers in . '' 
In Washington tens of thousands are expected today for what is being billed as one of the biggest anti-war protests in the US since the Vietnam era . 
The figurehead of the United For Peace and Justice Mobilisation is Cindy Sheehan , the mother of a soldier killed in Iraq who set up camp outside George Bush 's ranch in Crawford , Texas , during his summer holiday . 
