Tuesday 11 January 2005 09.11 GMT I am bewildered by the world reaction to the tsunami tragedy . 
Why are newspapers , television and politicians making such a fuss ? 
Why has the British public forked out more than # 100m to help the survivors , and why is Tony Blair now promising `` hundreds of millions of pounds '' ? 
Why has Australia pledged # 435m and Germany # 360m ? 
And why has Mr Bush pledged # 187m ? 
Of course it 's wonderful to see the human race rallying to the aid of disaster victims , but it 's the inconsistency that has me foxed . 
Nobody is making this sort of fuss about all the people killed in Iraq , and yet it 's a human catastrophe of comparable dimensions . 
According to the only scientific estimate attempted , Iraqi deaths since the war began number more than 100,000 . 
The tsunami death toll is in the region of 150,000 . 
Yet in the case of Iraq , the media seems reluctant to impress on the public the scale of the carnage . 
I have n't seen many TV reporters standing in the ruins of Falluja , breathlessly describing how , in 30 years of reporting , they 've never seen a human tragedy on this scale . 
The Pope has n't appealed for everyone to remember the Iraqi dead in their prayers , and MTV has n't gone silent in their memory . 
Nor are Blair and Bush falling over each other to show they recognize the scale of the disaster in Iraq . 
On the contrary , they have been doing their best to conceal the numbers killed . 
When the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health estimated the figure of 100,000 killed in Iraq and published their findings in one of the world 's leading scientific journals , the Lancet , Downing Street questioned their methodology , saying `` the researchers used an extrapolation technique , which they considered inappropriate , rather than a detailed body count '' . 
Of course `` a detailed body count '' is the one thing the US military will not allow anyone to do . 
What is so odd is the way in which so much of the media has fallen into line , downplaying the only authoritative estimate of casualties in Iraq with the same unanimity with which they have impressed upon us the death toll of the tsunami . 
One of the authors of the forenamed report , Dr Gilbert Burnham , said : `` Our data have been back and forth between many reviewers at the Lancet and here in the school , so we have the scientific strength to say what we have said with great certainty . '' 
So , are deaths caused by bombs and gunfire less worthy of our pity than deaths caused by a giant wave ? 
Or are Iraqi lives less worth counting than Indonesian , Thai , Indian and Swedish ? 
Why are n't our TV companies and newspapers running fundraisers to help Iraqis whose lives have been wrecked by the invasion ? 
Why are n't they screaming with outrage at the man-made tsunami that we have created in the Middle East ? 
It truly is baffling . 
Terry Jones is a film director , actor and Python . 
His book Terry Jones 's War on the War on Terror is published this month by the Nation Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Follow all the top stories of the day on Twitter with the Guardian 's world news team john_hooper : #Benedict decided to resign after visit to Mexico & Cuba last March , says tonight 's edition of #pope 's daily L'Osservatore Romano #news 
