With BP 's know-how and U.S. authority , the Macondo well was plugged It was awkward from the start , this marriage of necessity between BP and the federal government . 
The government had ultimate authority ; BP had the technology to plug the Macondo well . 
Something known as the National Contingency Plan called for a `` unified command '' in which government officials would issue orders and make pronouncements but BP would do the most crucial work and be the `` responsible party . '' 
Who was in charge , really ? 
The well kept gushing ; everyone looked bad . 
Reporters asked top officials why the government did n't simply take over . 
But we 're in charge already , the officials said . 
The fact is , the two sides formed a team , weird as that might be at times . 
That is true today , still , with the Macondo well looking rather dead -- choked by a mile of cement -- but not yet terminated to everyone 's satisfaction . 
Government scientists and BP engineers have been devising a complex endgame . 
Before Macondo receives a conclusive dose of mud and cement at its base via a relief well , engineers want to take the old , damaged blowout preventer off the wellhead and replace it with a new blowout preventer . 
That will delay the `` bottom kill '' until after Labor Day , according to retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , the national incident commander . 
BP engineers and the government scientists come from different cultures . 
In general , the engineers want to plunge ahead , and the scientists want to go slower . 
`` We helped them see that there are dangers lurking here , and there and everywhere , '' Energy Secretary Steven Chu told The Washington Post . 
`` The Department of Energy is in charge of the nuclear arsenal ... This is no messing around . 
In our culture , you want to make sure that nothing can go wrong . '' 
The Obama administration has claimed credit for turning an uncontrolled calamity into something managed and mastered . 
The response to the disaster would have been different , White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said after the well had been plugged with cement , had the administration not `` pushed at every step of the way '' for BP to `` do things more comprehensively and faster . '' 
BP has stayed clear of that debate . 
`` I 've got a philosophy that when you 're in the middle of the response , you stay focused on the response . 
When the response is over , that 's a good time to analyze how the response went and decide what could have been done better , '' Kent Wells , BP senior vice president , said recently . 
But the broader truth seems to be that BP and the government have overcome their natural antagonism to create a functioning partnership . 
The two sides had testy moments , but again and again they found a path to agreement . 
When Allen was asked whether a recent pressure test was conceived by the government scientists or the BP engineers , he replied : `` It 's hard to say anymore , we 've been together so long . 
Some of these conversations start around the coffeepot . '' 
The government needed BP because the company had the tools to plug the hole . 
BP benefited from the outsider perspective of government scientists and needed officials of the Environmental Protection Agency to run interference on such contentious issues as the use of chemical dispersants , a subject on which BP was viewed as having zero credibility . 
Keeping everyone moving in the same direction has been Allen , perhaps the least-excitable person in American public life . 
Allen said in a recent interview that his goal was to `` produce unity of effort '' and added , `` You ca n't do that by polarizing , or creating conflict , or getting caught up in a personal agenda or getting too excited about things . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
