KENNER , LA. -- On April 16 , four days before the Deepwater Horizon exploded in a fireball , one of the two `` company men '' who oversaw drilling operations on the oil rig for BP boarded a helicopter and headed for shore . 
Ironically , he went to a training program on blowout preventers . 
Ronald Sepulvado , who had been working on the Deepwater Horizon for more than seven years , turned off his cellphone after he landed , stopped checking e-mail regularly and did not read an April 18 warning from contractor Halliburton that the well faced a potentially severe gas flow problem . 
The next news he received about the rig came in the wee hours of April 21 , when his son called him at a hotel and asked if he knew that the Deepwater Horizon was burning . 
Sepulvado gave that account Tuesday as the first of the BP well site leaders to testify before a government panel looking into the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Seated at the witness table in an airport hotel here , he recalled : -- Seeing an April 15 Halliburton report that said there was potential for a minor gas flow problem on the Deepwater rig . 
`` I just do n't read every line of that report because it 's about 20 to 30 pages long , '' Sepulvado said . 
He said he was not aware of any warning to the crew about a potential problem . 
-- Being present during an April audit that found that the rig 's blowout preventer was well past its required inspection date . 
He said he did n't know inspections were required every three to five years . 
-- Continuing to drill although the rig 's blowout preventer was having problems with certain valves and `` was leaking hydraulic fluid . '' 
Drilling at the Macondo well was not suspended because , Sepulvado said , `` we assumed that everything was okay . 
When the blowout preventer was put to the ultimate test April 20 , it failed catastrophically . 
Sepulvado said he has been a well site leader for 33 years . 
Today , he has a new assignment : helping to drill one of the relief wells to kill the Macondo . 
He spoke Tuesday at a hearing being conducted by a joint investigation board of the U.S. Coast Guard and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement -LRB- an agency formerly known as the Minerals Management Service -RRB- . 
The hearings have highlighted a history of delayed maintenance and mechanical problems aboard the Deepwater Horizon . 
While questioning Sepulvado , panel member Jason Mathews , of the agency , said a BP audit in September found a variety of problems , some of which had the potential to affect the rig 's emergency preparedness . 
He said `` a recommendation was made to the well team to suspend operations until many have been satisfactorily addressed . '' 
Two other BP company men -- who were alternating shifts as top BP representatives on the rig after Sepulvado left -- were scheduled to testify but withdrew . 
One was Robert Kaluza , who was less familiar with the Deepwater Horizon and who took over what was known as a troubled operation at a sensitive time . 
He invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination through his attorney . 
Donald Vidrine canceled for medical reasons , an explanation backed up with documents from his doctor , said Coast Guard Capt. Hung M. Nguyen , co-chairman of the investigating panel . 
BP and government officials moved closer Tuesday toward agreement on another technique for dealing with the well , which was capped last week . 
Kent Wells , BP 's senior vice president , said the company would like to implement a `` static kill '' of the well , which involves sending mud and later cement into the well through the cap . 
The final closing would still have to be performed by a relief well `` bottom kill , '' now scheduled to begin in late July or early August if the weather remains good . 
Wells said the company is eager to perform the static kill if the government approves it . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , the national incident commander , said he expected to have a final decision Wednesday . 
While the operation could speed the final closing of the well -- an important consideration during the gulf 's hurricane season -- it would also leave forever unanswered the question of how much oil has gushed out of the well . 
The amount of oil that escaped will play a role in determining the dollar amount the company will have to pay the government and others . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
