Post education reporter Daniel de Vise discusses the business behind the school . 
Send him an e-mail Here 's another economic ripple from the BP oil spill . 
The oil company has been `` offering signing bonuses and lucrative pay to prominent scientists from public universities around the Gulf Coast '' to muster a defense against inevitable litigation in the wake of the April 20 oil spill , according to a report in the Press-Register newspaper in Alabama . 
At one point , BP plc `` attempted to hire the entire marine sciences department '' at the University of South Alabama , the report states . 
The contract , obtained by the newspaper , would have barred the scientists from publishing their research , sharing it with other scholars or even talking about it . 
The department did not sign . 
`` We did n't like the perception of the university representing BP in any fashion , '' Bob Shipp , the department head , told the Press-Register . 
As previously reported in The Post and elsewhere , the spill has prompted a mountain of litigation . 
Eleven workers died in the initial explosion , and the toll on the Gulf Coast , its economy and environment almost defies calculation . 
Scientists interviewed by the newspaper told of being offered $ 250 an hour . 
The report stated that scientists from Louisiana State University , the University of Southern Mississippi and Texas A&M have accepted offers . 
Universities typically allow faculty to take on some amount of consulting work . 
According to the Press-Register , BP has reached out to a wide range of scientists who study invertebrates , plankton , marsh environments , oceanography and sharks . 
By Daniel de Vise | July 21 , 2010 ; 11:00 AM ET The calculation of the annual revenue is incorrect : $ 104K is 52 weeks at $ 2K , so it seems that the writer multiplied $ 250 an hour by 8 hours ... but forgot to multiply by 5 days in a week . 
Full employment -LRB- 5 days a week for the whole year -RRB- at the stated rate would mean $ 520,000 a year . 
On the other hand , academics will probably work only only 30-40 weeks a year , and only part-time . 
So the real number might be in the $ 200-300K range . 
This error makes me wonder if the rest of the article is accurate . 
While I would not put it past BP to try to arrange something like this , I think there would be more important or prestigious institutions than the University of South Alabama that BP would try to leverage in that manner ! 
Or is someone from that university desperately trying to make themselves look important ? 
`` Look , we 're such experts in this field that BP tried to bribe us to carry their torch ! '' 
I think this needs to be corroborated by more than hearsay ... and faulty calculations . 
