Wednesday , July 21 , 2010 ; 8:54 PM The search for doctored BP photos is on . 
And it 's a bit like finding Waldo in the famous game . 
The Gawker Web site said it received a tip about a BP photo taken from inside a helicopter , that shows a panorama of vessels working on the sea surface near the damaged well . 
The view through the windows makes it appear as though the helicopter is in the air . 
But the astute tipster noticed a small glimpse of a control tower in a corner of the photograph . 
A poor Photoshop job left some white space around the shoulder of one of the pilots next to a patch of sea that was a brighter shade of blue than other parts of the gulf . 
In addition , zooming in on the helicopter 's gauges reveals that the helicopter is not in the air at all ; the dashboard indicates that the door and ramp are open and the parking brake engaged , Gawker noted . 
The pilot appears to be holding a pre-flight checklist . 
BP spokesman Scott Dean sent The Post the original photograph . 
The Waldos do n't jump out at you . 
The helicopter was actually on the deck of a vessel at the spill site so the panorama of ships in the distance was there in the original photo . 
But the photographer , who is working on contract to BP , pasted in blue sea where the edge of the landing pad was showing . 
He also adjusted colors and contrast so that the interior of the helicopter was brighter , Dean said . 
While the changes were minor , the embarrassment was major , coming at a time when the oil giant is trying to convince the American public that it is being open and transparent about the oil spill . 
The helicopter photo is the third doctored BP image outed by bloggers this week . 
Earlier , Americablog.com noticed that BP had altered an image of its crisis response center in Houston . 
The company 's photographer had clumsily filled in blank spaces on a wall of subsea video feeds with images taken by some of the remotely operated vehicles . 
It is normal for some of those ROVs to be idle and to have some blank feeds . 
Americablog also exposed an altered image from the Houston office , showing a technical team in front of a large projection screen . 
The image on the projection screen had been enhanced using Photoshop . 
BP 's Dean also provided the original of that photo to The Post . 
In the original , the screen appears to be entirely white because of the light contrast with the rest of the room . 
Dean said that the photographer used `` the color saturation tool '' to show `` a clearer version of the same image on the projection screen . '' 
Dean said that the altered helicopter and headquarters photographs , like the doctored one of the Houston control room , would be promptly taken down from the BP Web site . 
The original and altered versions would be placed on BP 's Flickr site so people can compare them , Dean said . 
