Wednesday , July 21 , 2010 ; 6:43 PM Four oil giants are going to spend $ 1 billion to jointly design , manufacture and store equipment to respond to an oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , part of an effort to bolster their capabilities in the wake of the BP disaster and to reassure Congress members worried about future drilling . 
Exxon Mobil will lead the engineering and construction efforts , which the companies said they hoped to complete in 18 months . 
The new response plan focuses on how to quickly stop the flow of oil from a leaking subsea well and how to channel the oil to vessels nearby . 
It does not include new measures for how to skim oil from water or to clean soiled shorelines . 
The group of companies said that the plan will include a containment cap similar to the one now on top of BP 's damaged Macondo well . 
It will also include specially designed subsea manifolds , flexible riser pipes to link a damaged well to the water surface , and ships capable of capturing and storing the oil . 
The companies said that `` dedicated crews '' will ensure regular maintenance , inspection and readiness of the equipment . 
The plan comes as Congress is mulling new requirements for deepwater offshore drilling , which has been halted by an Obama administration six-month moratorium . 
The House Wednesday passed two bills that would push for better oil spill response and safety technologies . 
The joint response plan is in part a response to recent hearings of the House Energy and Commerce Committee , whose members harshly criticized the major oil companies for having nearly identical oil spill response plans . 
Some of the plans included boilerplate about walruses that are not found in the gulf and a contact number of a dead marine expert . 
All the plans claimed to be able to handle spills much larger than the one BP has been wrestling with . 
At the time , chief executives from the oil giants admitted the plans were `` an embarrassment . '' 
`` As an industry , we must rebuild trust with the American people in order to demonstrate that we can produce energy in a safe and environmentally responsible manner , '' Marvin Odum , president of Shell Oil , the U.S. affiliate of Royal Dutch , said in a statement . 
`` Beyond Shell 's absolute commitment to oil spill prevention and robust well designs , additional safeguards must be strengthened across the industry to develop the capacity to quickly respond and resolve a deepwater well blowout in the Gulf of Mexico , regardless of how unlikely it is that this situation will reoccur . '' 
The plan got a mixed review with one key lawmaker . 
`` This is only one possible tool in what must be a more robust tool kit for oil companies to respond to spills , '' said Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D.-Mass -RRB- , chairman of the House Energy and Commerce 's subcommittee on energy and environment . 
`` This could be a positive step , but it can not be the industry 's last . '' 
`` While this proposal 's response time could be quicker than this spill , the proposal these companies are submitting is essentially the current BP cap system and plan for 100 percent collection of oil , '' Markey added . 
`` This current , ad hoc system erected by BP can not and should not be the final proposal by these companies . 
While this could be a rapidly-deployed system , the oil companies must do better than BP 's current apparatus with a fresh coat of paint . 
The oil companies must also invest more in technologies that will prevent fatal blowouts in the first place . '' 
The companies said that they plan to construct equipment that would be `` flexible , adaptable and able to be deployed within days on a wide range of well designs and equipment , oil and natural gas flow rates and weather conditions . '' 
They said the system would be designed to work in depths up to 10,000 feet and to contain up to 100,000 barrels -LRB- 4.2 million gallons -RRB- a day . 
Clarence P. Cazalot , chief executive of Marathon Oil , was part of an American Petroleum Institute group in Washington this week to urge lawmakers to refrain from setting too many rules for offshore drilling . 
He said the industry would `` engineer , design , build '' a sealing cap for underwater wells . 
He said the goal would be `` to be able to plan in advance and to have this equipment on standby to deploy not just in the gulf but anywhere in the world . '' '' 
