Her new book about the quiet triumphs of the protest movement is designed to cheer up the left . 
Has Californian Rebecca Solnit spent too much time in the sun , or does she really offer a new way of looking at radical politics ? 
She talks to Stuart Jeffries Rebecca Solnit is content with her life , thank you very much . 
She is an anarchist activist and , by her own admission , an impecunious author . 
As a writer she resembles Naomi Klein , though probably more radical , and also Susan Sontag , though somewhat less of an aesthete . 
Solnit lives in a rent-controlled apartment in San Francisco , has no dependents and no nine-to-five job to get in the way of regular visits from the literary muse . 
That said , she says she may yet have children , but she enjoys her student-like existence too much to get tied down just yet . 
`` I decided to stop working in my editorial job in 1988 and that year has n't ended yet . 
Living below one 's means can give you a sense of freedom . '' 
Which is perhaps not something she should say too often outside the boho milieu of a literary festival . 
Surely then , I suggest , nobody should buy her new book - if we did , it would ruin her unimpeachably radical lifestyle ? 
She would probably wind up spending the proceeds on 4x4s , Ikea kitchens and Big Macs . 
`` No , people should buy my book , '' says Solnit , rather sternly . 
`` I 'll have no income in 2006 otherwise . 
I need clean socks . '' 
That book is called Hope in the Dark : The Untold History of People Power . 
It has been hailed by George Monbiot and Tony Benn , and joins two impressive books , Wanderlust : A History of Walking , and Motion Studies : Time , Space and Eadweard Muybridge , in an odd , offbeat , appealingly off-message oeuvre . 
If you were to put the new book 's philosophy on a placard , it would read : `` Oi ! 
Yes , the Iraq war had hideous consequences , but do n't forget that anti-war protests may well have stopped Bush from unleashing an even more terrible bombing of Baghdad than he did . 
What about Latin America , where dictators have been falling like ninepins ? 
Gays , women and blacks have all substantially overcome oppression ! 
True , that would make it a huge placard , but Solnit 's message is a complicated , counter - intuitive one . 
She was inspired to write Hope in the Dark following the gloom that descended over the left in the US and UK after the anti-Iraq war demonstrations in February 2003 . 
Our governments seemed to ignore popular protest , democracy seemed dead , despair the only rational political option . 
Solnit argues that it is a luxury to collapse into despair . 
She writes : `` To say that everything without exception is going straight to hell is not an alternative vision but only an inversion of the mainstream 's ` everything 's fine ' . '' 
She recalls the human rights activist and Irish nationalist Roger Casement who , when investigating torture and genocide in South America 's Putamayo rainforest , still found time to admire handsome local men and chase brilliantly colored local butterflies -LRB- or maybe it was the other way round -RRB- . 
From this , Solnit draws the following moral : `` Joy does n't betray but sustains activism . 
And when you face a politics that aspires to make you fearful , alienated and isolated , joy is a fine initial act of insurrection . '' 
`` I 'm a natural contrarian , '' she says , `` and a lot of what I felt contrary about was the griping and the finding fault that is so prevalent in some parts of the left . '' 
The book starts with an unexpectedly jaunty epigraph from that seeming arch leftwing male miserabilist , Noam Chomsky : `` The world is pretty awful today , but it is far better than yesterday , not only with regard to unwillingness to tolerate aggression , but also in many other ways , which we now tend to take for granted . '' 
Solnit similarly says that she sees a nuanced moral world of greys . 
`` It is always simplistic to see things in black and white . '' 
Is n't she just a smug , middle-class white Californian with an upbeat , post-hippyish philosophy ? 
`` I 'm certainly middle-class , white and Californian . 
I am certainly not saying that terrible things have not happened in Iraq . 
But what we forget are the things that did not happen - the wars , the diseases , the people who did n't die . '' 
Indeed , she says that she hopes to see George Bush indicted for war crimes during her lifetime . 
`` Or , more importantly , during his . '' 
Born the same year the Berlin wall went up -LRB- 1961 -RRB- , Solnit concedes that she had a strange upbringing for an American . 
`` I was floating in a kind of Laputa like in Gulliver 's Travels . 
I lived among radicals . 
I had to go to Nevada to see a Republican . '' 
Her Jewish mother and her Irish Catholic father contributed to her embrace of alternative politics , but it was a radical , bohemian aunt - a woman who used to fight against logging companies - who proved especially inspirational . 
Solnit describes herself as a cultural historian , but she has never fitted into the straitjacket of academe . 
Instead , she has written books and lectured on a freelance basis about such subjects as the American landscape - how indigenous inhabitants were ousted from the land that became the Yosemite national park , how the US government a century later instigated nuclear tests in Nevada . 
She often writes lyrically about these issues , describing , for instance , these two landscapes as serving as `` our national Eden and Armageddon '' . 
Solnit 's most popular book so far is her history of walking . 
But it is hardly a straight history or travel volume ; rather , it examines how walking became a political act in a technological , suburbanised society and how pedestrians - Gandhi 's salt walk , Martin Luther King 's marches , French demos - changed the world in part by physically claiming the streets . 
She insists on the joy of taking to the streets and engaging in communal activism , especially now , when we are encouraged to become discrete , passive consumers . 
She has a chastening line in her new book in which she asks her readers to imagine the world as a theater . 
`` The acts of the powerful and the official occupy center stage . 
The traditional versions of history , the conventional sources of news encourage us to fix our gaze on that stage . '' 
The result , she says , is `` the too-common silence of those who settle for being audience and who pay the price of the drama '' . 
Solnit is in the UK to lend her support to protest at the looming G8 meeting at Gleneagles . 
But she contends that local responses to global problems are at least as important as such gestures . 
For instance , she points out that , even though the US has not ratified the Kyoto treaty , her city government enforces Kyoto-style emission standards . 
She advocates what she calls `` post-oppositional activism '' . 
But to some , in a globalised world , that is an inadequate response . 
I remind Solnit that during her talk the previous evening she had been taken to task for this . 
Go preach that white , western , patronising philosophy to the street-fighting Uzbeks or to Palestinians resisting the Israeli state . 
Such was the question 's tenor . 
`` I really agree with you , '' Solnit told her accuser , post-oppositionally . 
`` I am not opposed to that kind of politics in those places . 
I just think in the world I inhabit , that stuff does n't work any more . '' 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
