Israeli firms are carrying out military training and commercial activities in Kurdish areas of north Iraq , according to reports in an Israeli newspaper . 
Yedioth Ahronoth reported yesterday that dozens of former members of Israel 's elite and covert forces were training Kurdish fighters in anti-terrorism techniques . 
Other companies , the newspaper said , were involved in telecommunications and infrastructure projects such as the building of an airport at Irbil . 
Iraq and Israel are still officially at war , though since the 1960s Israel and the Iraqi Kurds have had a relationship . 
A spokesman for the Israeli foreign ministry said his country had no relationship with the new Iraq and it remained `` at war '' . 
The article follows detailed reports in the New Yorker last year saying that Israel had become heavily involved with the Kurds from 2003 . 
It suggested Israel had a strategic interest in supporting Kurdish forces , as a counterweight to Sunni and Shia groups in Iraq . 
Involvement in the region also gave Israel better access to intelligence from Syria and Iran , particularly Iran 's nuclear program . 
Israel supported Kurdish rebels against the Ba'ath regime in Baghdad until 1975 . 
The Kurds , who are Muslim , have never been as anti-Israeli as many Muslims in other countries . 
They have felt persecuted by Sunnis and have resented Yasser Arafat 's support for Saddam Hussein . 
A spokesman for the Kurdistan regional government said : `` It is possible that people with Israeli passports visit . 
Many Jews from Kurdistan resettled in Israel . 
We do not discriminate against any nationality that wants to ... work in Kurdistan , but there are no official links . '' 
Israel can not officially admit its involvement in the regime because it might encourage extremist groups , such as al-Qaida in Iraq . 
But Israelis are regularly seen in the Kurdish towns of northern Iraq , working as security guards and trainers . 
It is not clear whether they work for international security firms or are doing independent work . 
Israelis representing private firms were seen looking for opportunities at a recent trade fair in Irbil . 
Yesterday 's report also stated that Israeli companies had set up a base in a remote area of Kurdistan , using it for weapons and anti-terrorism training and bringing in `` dozens of motorcycles , sniffer dogs , Kalashnikov-upgrading devices , flak jackets , uniforms and helmets , all Israeli-made '' . 
It claims Israelis pose as agricultural and engineering experts . 
Development and security projects in Kurdistan are undertaken by several countries , including Turkey , the US , Iran , Britain and Germany . 
Israel 's main ally in the region is Turkey , which is concerned that the Kurds might declare independence from Iraq . 
Turkey , like Syria and Iran , has a substantial Kurdish minority within its population . 
