July 16 : Workboats operate near BP 's Transocean Development Drilling Rig II at the site of the Deepwater Horizon explosion in the Gulf of Mexico . 
AP NEW ORLEANS -- The waiting game continued Saturday morning as engineers kept vigil over the massive cap holding back oil from BP 's busted Gulf well , their eyes glued to monitors in a faraway control room that displayed pressure readings , temperature gauges and underwater images . 
Their round-the-clock work deciphering a puzzle of data from undersea robots and instruments at the wellhead is helping BP and the government determine whether the cap is holding tight as the end of a critical 48-hour testing window approaches . 
Signs so far have been promising but inconclusive . 
Saturday afternoon will mark two full days since BP stopped the oil from leaking into the Gulf and entered into the pressure-testing phase . 
At that point engineers could offer more definitive evidence that the cap is working , or call for more testing . 
At any time before then , they could also reopen the cap and allow some oil to spill into the sea again . 
Scientists are watching for leaks either in the well itself or the sea floor . 
Kent Wells , a BP PLC vice president , said on an evening conference call that engineers had found no indication that the well has started leaking underground . 
`` No news is good news , I guess that 's how I 'd say it , '' Wells said . 
One mysterious development was that the pressure readings were not rising as high as expected , said retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , the government 's point man on the crisis . 
Allen said two possible reasons were being debated by scientists : The reservoir that is the source of the oil could be running lower three months into the spill . 
Or there could be an undiscovered leak somewhere down in the well . 
Allen ordered further study but remained confident . 
`` This is generally good news , '' he said . 
But he cautioned , `` We need to be careful not to do any harm or create a situation that can not be reversed . '' 
Inside BP 's command center hundreds of miles away in Houston , engineers , scientists and technicians have been carefully monitoring reams of data around the clock , BP 's chief operating officer , Doug Suttles , told The Associated Press Friday . 
Other engineers watched on monitors aboard ships at sea . 
`` You 've got a very , very focused group of people because this is very important , '' Suttles said . 
Asked if people are nervous , knowing the whole world is watching and government officials are sitting with them to monitor their work , Suttles replied : `` I would n't say they are nervous . 
I would use the word focused . '' 
Throughout the day , no one was declaring victory -- or failure . 
President Barack Obama cautioned the public `` not to get too far ahead of ourselves , '' warning of the danger of new leaks `` that could be even more catastrophic . '' 
Even if the cap passes the test , more uncertainties lie ahead : Where will the oil already spilled go ? 
How long will it take to clean up the coast ? 
What will happen to the region 's fishermen ? 
And will life on the Gulf Coast ever be the same again ? 
On Thursday , BP closed the vents on the new , tight-fitting cap and finally stopped crude from spewing into the Gulf of Mexico for the first time since the April 20 oil-rig explosion that killed 11 workers and unleashed the spill 5,000 feet down . 
With the cap working like a giant cork to keep the oil inside the well , scientists kept watch in case the buildup of pressure underground caused new leaks in the well pipe and in the surrounding bedrock that could make the disaster even worse . 
Pressure readings after 24 hours were about 6,700 pounds per square inch and rising slowly , Allen said , below the 7,500 psi that would clearly show the well was not leaking . 
He said pressure continued to rise between 2 and 10 psi per hour . 
A low pressure reading , or a falling one , could mean the oil is escaping . 
But Allen said a seismic probe of the surrounding sea floor found no sign of a leak in the ground . 
Benton F. Baugh , president of Radoil Inc. in Houston and a National Academy of Engineering member who specializes in underwater oil operations , warned that the pressure readings could mean that an underground blowout could occur . 
He said the oil coming up the well may be leaking out underground and entering a geological pocket that might not be able to hold it . 
But Roger N. Anderson , a professor of marine geology and geophysics at Columbia University , said the oil pressure might be rising slowly not because of a leak , but because of some kind of blockage in the well . 
`` If it 's rising slowly , that means the pipe 's integrity 's still there . 
It 's just getting around obstacles , '' he said . 
He added that `` any increase in pressure is good , not bad . '' 
The cap is designed to prevent oil from spilling into the Gulf , either by keeping it bottled up in the well , or by capturing it and piping it to ships on the surface . 
It is not yet clear which way the cap will be used if it passes the pressure test . 
Either way , the cap is a temporary measure until a relief well can be completed and mud and cement can be pumped into the broken well deep underground to seal it more securely than the cap . 
The first of the two relief wells being drilled could be done by late July or August . 
In a positive sign , work on the relief wells resumed Friday . 
The project had been suspended earlier this week for fear that the capping of the well could interfere with it . 
There was no end in sight to the cleanup in the water and on shore . 
Somewhere between 94 million and 184 million gallons have spilled into the Gulf , according to government estimates . 
In Orange Beach , Ala. , long strands of white absorbent boom strung along the shore were stained chocolate brown after a fresh wave of BB-size tar balls washed up . 
Charter boat captains who ca n't fish because of the spill patrolled the shore , looking for oil slicks . 
Fishing guides spent their time ferrying Coast Guard personnel . 
A flotilla of fishing boats operating as skimmers plied the waters across the Gulf . 
Large sections of the Gulf Coast have been closed to fishing and shellfish harvesting . 
Many fishermen have been hired out by BP to do cleanup work . 
Cade Thomas , a 38-year-old fishing guide from Pine , La. , said the whole mentality of the place is different . 
`` It 's all changed dramatically . 
The fishing stories are n't there , '' he said . 
`` There 's no stories to tell except where we went to today and how much oil we saw . '' 
In Grand Isle , La. , most of the summer rental cottages are vacant , tables at the single high-end seafood restaurant are empty , and souvenir shops are barely doing enough business to pay the bills . 
A hand-painted sign along the main road rechristens the tourist town `` Grand Oil . '' 
Folks are grateful the gusher has been stopped , but many say it is too late to save this summer . 
Thousands of tourists have gone elsewhere . 
Scientists can not say for certain what the long-term environmental effect will be . 
But long after the well is finally plugged , oil could still be washing up in marshes and on beaches as tar balls or patties . 
There is also fear that months from now , those tar balls could move west to Corpus Christi , Texas , or travel up and around Florida to Miami or North Carolina 's Outer Banks . 
Capping the well was a milestone in the long catastrophe , but people should n't let their guards down , said Billy Nungesser , the president of Plaquemines Parish , one of the hardest hit areas along the Gulf . 
Weber reported from Houston . 
Associated Press Writers Holbrook Mohr , Vicki Smith , Shelia Byrd , Jay Reeves , Matt Sedensky , Kevin McGill , and Ramit Plushnick-Masti contributed to this report . 
