\* Gas oversupply to end as early as 2012 \* Middle east political unrest to cut supplies \* Post-quake Japan demand to soak up more excess supplies PERTH , June 23 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Surplus global gas supplies could disappear as early as winter 2012 as a combination of factors including supply cuts due to Middle East turmoil and increasing demand from quake-hit Japan . 
`` The global oversupply of gas , which was previously forecast to end in 2015 , will now likely end in 2013 and possibly as early as 2012 . 
This oversupply is most manifest in Europe , which has become the market of last resort for LNG supply , '' Noel Tomnay , Wood Mackenzie 's head of global gas , said . 
Japan , the world 's largest importer of liquefied natural gas -LRB- LNG -RRB- , has seen the demand for the fuel jump after the earthquake earlier this year crippled several of its nuclear reactors and forced some of its coal-fired plants to shut . 
The increases in Japanese demand have reduced LNG supply to Europe by over 12 billion cubic meters -LRB- bcm -RRB- or 8.8 million tonnes of LNG in 2011 , according to Wood Mackenzie . 
Japan 's demand for the super-cooled fuel is expected to continue growing . 
Analysts expect demand up by about 8 to 10 million tonnes this year from 70 million tonnes in 2010 . 
The nuclear crisis in Japan also spurred worries about the safety of nuclear technology with Germany deciding to shut all its nuclear plants by 2022 as a result and other nations calling for safety tests of their own nuclear systems . 
As the gas glut ebbs , spot prices may climb higher than contract prices , Wood Mackenzie said . 
Contract prices are currently typically higher than spot prices due to the supply security they provide . 
Supplies are also likely to dwindle as political upheaval continues in Middle Eastern countries such as Libya . 
`` Political unrest in the Middle East and North Africa - notably the Libyan civil war and the corresponding Greenstream pipe capacity outage -- has removed 8 bcm of contracted gas , '' Tomnay said . 
Japanese demand and Middle Eastern production cuts have eroded Europe 's gas supply cushion to less than 10 bcm , the equivalent of 7.3 million tonnes of LNG , in 2011 . 
Unplanned outages like those that have occurred in Nigeria and Algeria during the last two years may add to supply tightness . 
`` The potential for future unplanned LNG outages to disrupt the smooth running of global LNG capacity can not be ruled out , whether they are technical challenges or the result of recent unrest , as that presently seen in Yemen , '' Tomnay said . 
`` Should such outages coincide with a cold winter , such an event combined with ongoing Libyan gas supply disruption could remove Europe 's gas cushion entirely by as early as winter of 2012 . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Rebekah Kebede ; Editing by Ed Lane -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
