Play for today : Hair at the Gate Theatre . 
Photograph : Tristram Kenton Hair was the incarnation of the 60s `` American Tribal Love Rock Musical '' that joyously celebrated a way of life and that in 1968 famously became the first show to benefit from the demise of theatrical censorship . 
But , delightful though it is to see it revived , I 'm not sure it gains from Daniel Kramer 's determined attempt to update it . 
The book and lyrics by Gerome Ragni and James Rado are still there : it remains the tenuous story of Claude , a New York tribal leader , separated from his gang when he goes off to a foreign war . 
And the Galt MacDermot tunes remain as fresh as ever . 
Merely to hear once again Aquarius , Good Morning Starshine , Manchester England and all the rest is to be transported back to a time of hippie optimism when the Sunday joint was to be smoked rather than eaten . 
But , in Kramer 's version , the action all takes place today . 
Instead of being drafted to Vietnam , Claude now goes to Iraq . 
Bush , Rummy and Condie became the symbols of American patriotism . 
When the tribe wants to protest about militarism it holds a candlelit vigil for peace in the Middle East . 
The problem with this is twofold . 
Claude 's heroes remain Timothy Leary and film directors such as Fellini and Antonioni which sounds anachronistic in a modern context . 
More seriously , the show is a celebration of a collective ethic : a belief that the group is stronger than the individual . 
It reeks of the 60s rather than now when the culture induces a hermetic individualism . 
Hair is as much a period-piece as No No Nanette and should be presented as such : as an evocation of a moment when sexual liberation was new , and a young generation was rejecting inherited values . 
But Kramer 's production and Ann Yee 's choreography have bags of oomph and fill the Gate stage to overflowing . 
The actors are also good . 
Charles Aitken plays Claude like a stoned angel . 
Kevin Wathen lends his chum , Berger , a feverish promiscuity . 
Nancy Wei-George sings one of the best and most touching songs , Frank Mills , with heart-rending simplicity . 
I had a good time ; and anyone who has never encountered Hairbefore will succumb even more readily to its charms . 
But I could n't help thinking back to seeing Hair in LA in 1969 when Ragni and Rado were themselves in the cast . 
It seemed then the perfect expression of the genius loci and of the mood of young America at that moment . 
I would n't deny that protest in the face of the Iraq war is still alive . 
But Hair belongs in its moment and , for all Kramer 's skill , I wish he 'd preserved its period flavor . 
Box Office : 02072290706 Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Compare and buy tickets for thousands of events 
