20 June 11 16:14 GMT Supporters of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad say his speech was encouraging and responsive to people 's demands , but his opponents say they have heard it all before and that the only solution they will accept is the fall of the regime . 
`` We were not expecting something huge from the regime because we have seen their actions and know how they are dealing with peaceful protesters , '' Adel Othman , the Damascus spokesperson of the protest co-ordinating committees , told the BBC . 
`` They put the security solution as the only -LRB- priority -RRB- . 
As for promises of reform , we are used to it What we want now is not reform , but to topple the regime and change it , '' says Mr Othman . 
Protesters in the street have also been calling for an end to the violence and killing . 
Human rights groups say at least 1,300 civilians and more than 300 soldiers have been killed since the protests started in mid-March . 
Another 10,000 people have been detained . 
The regime claims that armed gangs are trying to hijack protesters ' legitimate demands by using violence against civilians , the army and security forces . 
But the protesters insist they are peaceful . 
`` The problem is in the regime , '' says Mr Othman . 
`` What was offered does n't match the ambition of the street , so as local co-ordination committees , we refuse these offers . '' 
He called for security forces to be held accountable for their actions - noting that Mr Assad made no mention of this key demand in his address . 
`` These reform promises are just to deceive Syrians , and intended for world consumption , '' he added . 
Soon after the speech , protesters are reported to have taken to the streets in several cities including Hama , Aleppo and Latakia . 
`` No to dialogue with murderers , '' protesters were heard chanting in the Damascus suburb of Irbin , when reached by telephone by the Reuters news agency . 
At the same time , rival rallies in support of the Syrian president were also reported at Damascus University and the nearby al-Umawiyeen Square . 
A few hours after the speech , a text message was sent out on mobile networks , calling on government loyalists to rally at Umayyad Square in central Damascus on Tuesday to show their support for President Assad . 
Rateb Shallah , head of the Syrian Chambers of Commerce Federation , was at the speech on Monday and expressed confidence in the president 's promised reforms . 
`` I hope it will be a turning point in solving the crisis and that it will meet the demands of the Syrian people , '' he said . 
But several of the youth protesters who watched the address on TV said they were disappointed . 
`` Next Friday will not be peaceful and the days to come will be difficult , '' said one , speaking in Damascus on condition of anonymity . 
According to Louai Hussein , another opposition activist , the speech was addressed to the president 's loyalists , not his opponents . 
`` Nothing new was said , '' says Mr Hussein , who is part of an opposition committee that published a roadmap for political reform a few days ago . 
The roadmap outlines the steps needed to address the current crisis , but its main aim is to end the violence and killing . 
`` What was mentioned was very important , but it does n't solve the problem with the protesters . 
There is a need for real freedom so that change can start , '' he added . 
In his speech , delivered at Damascus University , Mr Assad stressed that the priority is for people to be engaged in the political process , and to contribute to decision making about political reform . 
The fact that the president addressed youth at the university may be seen as an acknowledgement that parliament does not represent the people and that there is a pressing need for free elections . 
The majority of protesters and opposition supporters believe that a political solution is the way forward , but for that to happen , there must be an immediate end to the repression and killing , they say . 
Divided Damascus -LRB- 18 Jun 11 | Middle East -RRB- 
