They long have been political hot potatoes inside the Beltway , but suddenly Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have become pawns in the 2008 presidential campaign . 
During Tuesday 's debate , Republican presidential nominee Sen. John McCain -LRB- Ariz. -RRB- charged that the mortgage finance giants `` lit this fire '' under the economic crisis . 
He said Democratic presidential nominee Sen. Barack Obama -LRB- Ill. -RRB- and `` his cronies '' encouraged the companies to make risky loans . 
And he claimed that he took a stand two years ago to rein them in . 
Obama gave a different view . 
He blamed McCain 's pursuit of `` deregulation of the financial system '' for helping to allow the housing crisis to spin out of control . 
Obama said he `` never promoted Fannie Mae . '' 
Rather , he said he warned policymakers two years ago of a brewing `` subprime lending crisis '' -- the very crisis that contributed to Fannie Mae 's and Freddie Mac 's downfall and their seizure by the government last month . 
The candidates ' records on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are not as clear as their statements during the debate . 
A former top lobbyist for the mortgage giants said neither Obama nor McCain were regarded as central players in congressional discussions about their futures . 
`` We generally viewed McCain as critical of the model and generally viewed Obama as supportive of the model , '' said the lobbyist , who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the continuing political sensitivity surrounding the companies . 
McCain has repeatedly suggested that the companies caused the crisis , but many housing specialists say their role is more ambiguous . 
The financial crisis had its origins in an era of cheap credit that helped inflate housing prices . 
Fannie and Freddie took advantage of low rates to grow quickly . 
But when the bubble burst , and housing prices fell , their massive portfolios of mortgages and mortgage guarantees took a hit and lost billions . 
Further , lenders were far more aggressive about offering subprime and other risky loans than Fannie and Freddie . 
The companies eventually joined in , driven both by pressure to show they were supporting affordable housing and by a desire to maintain market share . 
Though the number of risky loans they took on was small compared to the overall size of their holdings , the actions may have ended up fueling or amplifying the mortgage downturn . 
Christopher J. Mayer , a professor at Columbia Business School , said the companies took advantage of their special governmental status to maintain a thin financial cushion in buying loans , allowing them to buy more -- all under the oversight of the federal government . 
`` Those lower capital requirements enabled them to take risks and grow their balance sheets , '' Mayer said . 
Both campaigns cite actions they took to try and avoid a mortgage disaster . 
In January 2005 , several Republicans led by Sen. Chuck Hagel -LRB- Neb. -RRB- introduced legislation to create a new , independent regulatory agency to oversee the companies . 
They had trouble getting supporters . 
Sixteen months later , after a regulator questioned Fannie Mae accounting , McCain signed on to the legislation as a co-sponsor and made a 359-word speech in the Senate . 
The legislation failed to win approval . 
Obama said little if anything publicly about Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac before the crisis started . 
Other Democratic lawmakers , however , long protected the interests of the companies and pushed them to expand their support for low-income housing . 
Obama did warn about a looming subprime crisis in March 2007 , though by that time many analysts were already warning of the danger . 
Obama also pursued legislation to crack down on lenders who pushed unsuspecting borrowers into taking on mortgages they could not afford . 
Neither McCain and Obama is free of ties to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac insiders . 
Obama initially asked former Fannie Mae chief executive James A. Johnson to vet his vice presidential choices , but Johnson resigned as a controversy flared over his role . 
McCain 's circle of advisers includes former lobbyists and consultants for the companies . 
Obama claims that `` deregulation of the financial system , '' championed by McCain , led to the economic crisis . 
While McCain has generally subscribed to a free-market philosophy , he has favored regulation more often than many other Republicans . 
`` Only a restoration of the system of checks and balances that once protected the American investor , and that has seriously deteriorated over the past 10 years , can restore the confidence that makes financial markets work , '' McCain said in a 2002 speech . '' 
