`` Over the Cliff '' by Crooks and Liars bloggers John Amato and David Neiwert is , so far , a bit of a slog -- it 's rehashing a lot of what I know in a dry and judgmental way . 
People forget that Sean Hannity was informing viewers of Barack Obama 's `` radical ties '' long before Glenn Beck hauled out a chalkboard . 
Conservative Victory puts Hannity back in the Obama-bashing vanguard . 
Mark Lilla 's `` Tea Party Jacobins '' is the first meditation on the movement that seems to have struck a chord . 
GOP congressman : BP oil spill is a ` statistical anomaly ' Rep. John Culberson -LRB- R-Tex . -RRB- 
writes an open letter to President Obama that indicates -- accidentally or not -- why Republicans prefer to raise questions about the administration 's response to the disaster in the gulf than to re-open the debate on offshore drilling . 
The Interior Department 's moratorium on deepwater drilling , writes Culberson , is `` based more on emotion than fact . '' 
The Deepwater Horizon incident was a terrible human tragedy with devastating environmental consequences , but it must be viewed in the proper historical context as a statistical anomaly . 
The government s own records show that since 1985 , more than 7 billion barrels of oil have been produced in federal offshore waters with less than 0.001 percent spilled a 99.999 % record for clean operations . 
That 35-year record of safety should not be ignored in the haste to respond to public discord . 
That 0.001 % has been a bit of a problem , has n't it ? 
The rest of the letter , slightly more convincing , is below the fold . 
I write to express my strong opposition to the U.S. Department of the Interior s six-month moratorium on deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico . 
I am concerned that the decision to impose the moratorium is based more on emotion than fact . 
The Deepwater Horizon incident was a terrible human tragedy with devastating environmental consequences , but it must be viewed in the proper historical context as a statistical anomaly . 
The government s own records show that since 1985 , more than 7 billion barrels of oil have been produced in federal offshore waters with less than 0.001 percent spilled a 99.999 % record for clean operations . 
That 35-year record of safety should not be ignored in the haste to respond to public discord . 
Analysis from the Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association shows the moratorium would put as many as 1,400 jobs per platform at risk , and lost wages could reach $ 10 million per month per platform and up to $ 330 million per month for all 33 platforms . 
Our economy is struggling mightily , and this drilling halt will adversely impact small businesses down the entire supply chain . 
The effect will extend far past the oil industry and be most damaging in the Gulf region , where a range of businesses from restaurants and cleaners to hardware stores and garages depend on a robust offshore industry . 
The Gulf Coast is already suffering from the emotional and physical trauma of the Deepwater Horizon incident , and this moratorium will only add financial trauma to their plight . 
According to the Minerals Management Service , 80 percent of the U.S. supply of oil developed offshore comes from deepwater drilling . 
That amount is projected to rise dramatically in the coming decades , and any moratorium on domestic production will only increase our dependence on foreign nations that are often hostile to America s interests . 
Adding to the volatility is the fact that transporting oil is extremely dangerous and poses a much more serious threat to our environment than drilling in U.S. waters . 
Further complicating matters is the current confusion over the Interior Department s freeze in approving any shallow water drilling permits . 
While I understand the Department has stated that such permits may go forward as soon as operators can demonstrate adoption of enhanced safety standards , the industry requires further clarification from the administration as to exactly what those standards will be . 
Companies will then need additional time to understand the changes and deploy new standards and technology to meet the requirements . 
I fear the delay equates to a de-facto moratorium on shallow water drilling , only adding to the economic uncertainty and instability in the Gulf region . 
These companies , their workers , and all Americans who depend on the energy they produce need swift action from the department to get back to work . 
I strongly encourage you not to punish the entire oil and gas industry because of any mistakes that were made on Deepwater Horizon . 
This shortsighted moratorium is harmful to America and our fragile economy , and it will mire domestic energy production in a confusing and ineffective bureaucracy . 
I implore you to lift the moratorium and allow responsible drilling off of our coasts to continue . 
