By James Reynolds BBC Iran correspondent The US accuses Iran of directly helping President Assad in the current crisis Iran and Syria make for strange allies . 
Iran 's Supreme Leader , Ayatollah Ali Khamenei , leads a religious administration . 
Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad heads a secular and socialist government . 
One country is Persian , the other Arab . 
But since Iran 's 1979 Islamic Revolution , the two have found reason to stick together . 
`` The Iran-Syria alliance grew out of common cause - and common enemies , '' writes Professor Jubin Goodarzi in The Iran Primer . 
-LRB- Iran -RRB- is actively engaged in supporting the -LRB- Syrian -RRB- government in perpetrating the violence '' End Quote Susan Rice US Ambassador to UN `` Their common strategic goals have held the alliance together for three decades , despite repeated attempts to rend them apart . '' 
Historically the two countries came together in order to fight against a common rival , Saddam Hussein 's Iraq ; to check Israeli advances in Lebanon ; and to prevent any American attempts to enter the Middle East . 
In particular , the two countries united to provide support to the Lebanese armed Shia movement , Hezbollah , and to the Palestinian Islamist militant groups , Hamas and Islamic Jihad . 
Diplomats trying to end the fighting inside Syria recognize the influence that Iran has upon its ally . 
Kofi Annan , the joint UN-Arab League envoy to Syria , says that discussions are taking place about establishing a contact group made up of countries able to influence both sides in Syria . 
Mr Annan says that he hopes that Iran can be `` part of the solution '' . 
But the US Permanent Representative to the United Nations , Susan Rice , has called Iran `` part of the problem '' . 
The United States accuses Iran of providing direct assistance to President Assad 's government . 
Officials say that Iran has sent advisers to Syria and has provided riot gear and surveillance equipment to Syrian security forces . 
Lebanon 's Hezbollah is one cause that unites the Syrian and Iranian governments The Obama administration has already taken action against a number of Iranian security officials . 
On 18 May 2011 , the US Treasury Department sanctioned General Mohsen Chizari of Iran 's Islamic Revolution Guards Corps -LRB- IRGC -RRB- for helping the Syrian government repress protests . 
The IRGC was set up shortly after the 1979 Iranian revolution to defend the country 's Islamic system , and to provide a counterweight to the regular armed forces . 
A month later , US sanctions were imposed on two Iranian national police officials , Ismail Ahmadi Moghadam and Ahmad-Reza Radan . 
The US government said that Mr Radan had traveled to Damascus in April 2011 , `` where he met with Syrian security services and provided expertise to aid in the Syrian government 's crackdown on the Syrian people '' . 
On 6 February 2012 , Israel 's Haaretz newspaper reported that Gen Qassem Suleimani , the commander of IRGC 's elite overseas operations arm , the Quds Force , had gone to Syria and taken up a position in what the newspaper described as a `` war room '' which managed Syrian army maneuvers against opposition forces . 
Interference by other countries in Syrian affairs , we consider that to be a wrong move '' End Quote Ramin Mehmanparast Iran 's Foreign Ministry spokesman Iran quickly denied the allegation . 
The next day the government 's Foreign Ministry spokesman , Ramin Mehmanparast , said that Iran was `` in no way '' interfering in Syria 's affairs . 
`` Interference by other countries in the Syrian affairs , we consider that to be a wrong move that can endanger serenity and security in that country , '' Mr Mehmanparast told reporters . 
`` The allegations levelled at our country are aimed at pushing the atmosphere inside Syria towards chaos , and we do not find such measures and comments to be right . '' 
Opposition groups in Syria have been trying to provide visible proof of Iranian soldiers inside Syria . 
On 25 April , a video posted on YouTube allegedly showed four men in military fatigues outside a building . 
Two of them are seen with facial hair . 
The video claims that since beards are forbidden in the Syrian army , the soldiers must be from Iran . 
But other observers believe that this point is far from proven . 
US sanctions have been imposed on some Iranian officials for involvement in Syria 's uprising More conclusive , perhaps , may be an interview given by Ismail Gha'ani , the deputy head of Iran 's Quds force to Iran 's semi-official Isna news agency on 27 May 2012 . 
`` If the Islamic republic was not present in Syria , the massacre of people would have happened on a much larger scale , '' the general is quoted as saying . 
`` Before our presence in Syria , too many people were killed by the opposition but with the physical and non-physical presence of the Islamic republic , big massacres in Syria were prevented , '' he added . 
The interview was quickly removed from the website . 
And Iran repeated its denials of direct involvement inside Syria . 
But the alliance between the two countries remains in place . 
