Louisiana is already feeling the effects of the oil spill A sheen of oil from the Gulf of Mexico spill is nearing the white sand beaches of north-west Florida , officials say . 
The slick , containing thousands of tar balls , is only nine miles -LRB- 15km -RRB- from Pensacola on the Florida `` panhandle '' . 
`` It 's inevitable that we will see it on the beaches , '' said Keith Wilkins , an Escambia County official . 
Meanwhile , BP 's efforts to cap the leaking well got back on track as a saw that had become stuck in a thick pipe on the sea bed for hours was freed . 
The company is attempting to contain the spill from the well by cutting off the fractured pipe and sealing it with a cap . 
Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen said crews were shooting chemical dispersants at the oil now leaking out of the new cut . 
Forecasters suggest the oil spill may reach Florida 's shores as soon as Friday . 
Workers have been rushing to place more booms along the threatened coastline in an effort to protect its beaches and wildlife . 
Every day they wait , every day they make us wait , we 're losing our battle to protect our coast '' End Quote Bobby Jindal Louisiana governor Florida Governor Charlie Crist said the oil sheen observed off the state 's north-west coast contained thousands of tar balls , heavy globs of decayed oil . 
`` The goal is to remove that oil from near shore waters and prevent or minimize any potential impacts on our state , '' he told reporters . 
In Louisiana , the worst-affected state , Governor Bobby Jindal told a news conference that the White House had approved the construction of five sand barriers , or berms , off its coastline - and had ordered BP to pay for the work . 
Mr Jindal has strongly criticised the Obama administration and BP over the past few days for being too slow to respond to the crisis . 
`` Every day they wait , every day they make us wait , we 're losing our battle to protect our coast , '' he said . 
Oil debris has also reached Alabama 's Dauphin Island and parts of the Mississippi shoreline . 
BP estimates that the disaster has so far cost the company approximately $ 990m -LRB- # 674m -RRB- in clean-up costs , but has refused to speculate on future expenses . 
BP shares have fallen by more than a third since the spill . 
News that the US justice department has opened several civil and criminal inquiries into the Gulf spill caused futher falls on Wednesday morning . 
The BBC 's North America editor Mark Mardell says there is a growing sense of frustration that all BP 's efforts have come to naught , and things could get worse for the company . 
Clean-up crews have been working to remove oil from beaches and marshes In a speech in Pennsylvania on Wednesday , President Barack Obama said that the leak `` may prove to be a result of human error , or of corporations taking dangerous shortcuts to compromise safety '' . 
He went on : `` We have to acknowledge that there are inherent risks to drilling four miles beneath the surface of the Earth . 
`` These are risks that are bound to increase the harder oil extraction becomes . '' 
Mr Obama urged Congress to pass legislation to overhaul US energy policy and end tax breaks for oil companies , saying he would seek Republican as well as Democratic support for reform . 
`` I will continue to make the case for a clean energy future wherever and whenever I can , '' he said . 
`` I will work with anyone to get this done . '' 
The oil began leaking into the Gulf of Mexico on 20 April when the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , leased to BP , exploded , killing 11 workers . 
BP is drilling two relief wells to permanently stop the leak but they are not expected to be completed until August . 
A `` top kill '' procedure , which had been considered the best hope for plugging the leak , failed over the weekend when engineers were unable to pump enough heavy mud into the well to staunch the oil flow . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
