Few things to date have energized popular Egyptian protests against President Hosni Mubarak as much as the emotional interview given by Wael Ghonim , a 30-year-old Egyptian internet activist , almost immediately after his release from 12 days of detention by the feared state security police . 
It is fair to talk now about a second stage in the protests against Mubarak 's government as thousands of ordinary Egyptians cast aside their doubts and joined to make the street protests the next day the biggest yet . 
Why did this one interview , this one person , so galvanize the protest movement ? 
Because it was the first time ordinary Egyptians heard a protest leader passionately defend the revolt , free from the vicious anti-protester propaganda of the state-dominated media . 
Journalists from the state controlled-media themselves joined the revolt and started reporting the truth . 
For two weeks , Egypt 's state-dominated media had engaged in a campaign of lies and slander against the democracy protesters , accusing them of being funded by outside conspirators as diverse as the American CIA , Iranian spies , Israel 's Mossad , Qatar 's Al-Jazeera television station and Hamas . 
One television interview featured a fake `` protest organizer '' who claimed there were 23,000 guns inside the demonstrators ' camp on Tahrir Square , and that the protest had been taken over by bearded fundamentalists\/Islamists . 
The tactics , crude as they were , made many ordinary Egyptians doubt the sincerity of the protest movement and helped unleash a wave of xenophobic violence that gripped Cairo on February 2 and 3 . 
And then there was Ghonim on TV on Tuesday , disheveled , unshaven and blinking into the camera after so many days of being blindfolded in incommunicado detention , suddenly facing a national audience on one of Egypt 's few semi-independent television channels . 
He had been the driving force behind the Facebook page `` We are all Khalid Said '' -- dedicated to the memory of the 28-year-old Egyptian man beaten to death in Alexandria last year by two undercover policemen -- which soon became a central organizing vehicle for the mass protest movement that has shaken Egypt 's ruling elite . 
On January 27 , the eve of the first of several massive Friday protests in which the police left the streets after daylong clashes , Ghonim literally disappeared into the dark hole of Egypt 's security services . 
