February 10 , 2011 | By Joe Sterling , CNN Save the Children and other NGOs are concerned that Egyptians are endangering their children by bringing them to protests . 
As fighting erupted across Egyptian society , Save the Children , an international aid group devoted to helping poor boys and girls , and other agencies watched their world and work start unraveling . 
The group said in a February 3 statement that eyewitnesses reported that many in the protests are children , and that the clashes in Egypt `` put thousands at risk of death , injury and psychological trauma . '' 
`` The combination of a highly charged atmosphere , rival political protesters , and weapons on the streets puts children in grave danger , '' said Jane Gibreel , Save the Children 's country director in Egypt . 
`` We want to send a clear message to all Egyptians that they have a responsibility to protect their children . '' 
Other international non-governmental organizations operating in Egypt share this concern and fear about the unrest . 
They realize that `` it 's no longer business as usual , '' said Kevin Fitzcharles , CARE director in Egypt . 
The heads of several missions are gathering on Monday , and plan to discuss preparing contingency plans to respond to emergencies and the implications of the changes rippling through society . 
Most international non-governmental organizations -- which forge partnerships with local NGOs to carry out projects -- had to suspend their work after the anti-government protests erupted . 
One is Plan Egypt , an organization that provides a range of programs for poor children and their families . 
`` All of this activity is on hold at the moment , '' said Edward Abbey , country director of Plan Egypt . 
There have been two main reasons for the delay , which affected 200 employees , Abbey said . 
It was too dangerous to go to work . 
And , the group works closely with the Ministry of Social Solidarity . 
So when the government shut down , Plan Egypt could n't coordinate with that ministry . 
Only a handful of employees are back to work for Plan Egypt and Abbey said they are replanning projects . 
The group hopes it can get back to normal soon . 
Ayman Ramsis is country director of Diakonia , which addresses human rights , gender equality , and other matters . 
He also heard unsettling reports and rumors that children were engulfed by the anarchy , with some moving to Tahrir Square for security and food and even some who were paid by police to attack demonstrators . 
While the country and the NGO operations are slowly getting back to normal , these problems show that Egypt ca n't return to the state it was in before the protests broke out in late January . 
