Get To Know Piers Morgan Tonight : Donny Deutsch Guest Hosts This evening `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' welcomes the return of Donny Deutsch , as the brand guru is back for a fourth stint as guest host Following the breaking Egypt news in today we have a live show covering all aspects of the developing story . 
ABC News anchor Christiane Amanpour is back , as are Ben Wedeman , Arwa Damon and Ivan Watson from CNN . 
From DC , we 're joined by Wolf Blitzer and John King . 
We also have John Negroponte , Paul Wolfowitz , Reza Aslan and Rafat Ali . 
Sarah Sirgany , who is back reporting via Twitter from Cairo , will be returning to `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' as well . 
See all this and more , live at 9pmET . 
I am tired of listening to his lies . 
I did not watch Mubarak 's speech tonight because I knew he was not going to step down . 
Everything about that government is a lie . 
He does not care about his people nor does anyone in his goverment . 
They are only concerned with their special interests . 
He only wants to continue to supress his people . 
This has gone on far too long . 
The only solution is a coup , which I hope happens tomorrow without more innocent civilians being killed . 
Piers needs to STOP interrupting his guests . 
He does n't let them finish an answer to his questions . 
I will not watch him as he continues to use the airwaves to get his own opinions accross . 
Larry , please come back . 
You know how to get people to talk . 
Piers , get a clue . 
r mitchell ... I 've been totally irritated by the interruptions , too . 
Piers asks a good questions , and the people start to answer him , and he cuts them off halfway through their sentence !! Piers , we 're watching because we want to hear the answers-we want to hear the guests speak ! 
Please remember that it 's not actually ABOUT YOU ! 
Just relax and let the people respond ! 
I have to completely agree with Dara et al. . 
PIERS i actually got excited about you and your new show , and now i think you are a complete big headed idiot . 
Let people speak and stop taking over the interview . 
Thats why you are interviewing , caus your supposed to let them answer . 
Just caus CNN was dumb enough to give you the show , doesnt mean your gonna last forever especially if you keep this up . 
I look forward to the day your replaced on the air and someon einterviews you and cuts you off every time you try to answer a question . 
I think you should go back to Britain , and be rude and obnoxious there . 
Only a real stupid guy could screw this up . 
And millions share my view . 
You were nothing on britains got talent and your continuing the trend . 
BRAVO !!!!! February 13 , 2011 at 1:38 am | Report abuse | Can someone ask how women are involved in this and how do they plan to incorporate THEIR rights in this `` freedom '' from the repressive govt of Mubarak ... thanks William , , ur a true MORON and u need to be keept in a ZOO . 
ur a thug and lowlife go hide in shame idiot `` The director of the CIA was saying he would step down . . 
what happened '' -- Hey Piers , it 's called democracy , and it should n't be up to the CIA to make the calls on Egypt 's regime . 
If America is truly interested in the spread of democracy , they will allow the Egyptian people to choose who to govern their country . . 
unless the US wants Egypt choosing Palin 2012 ? 
For CNN , i was whatching aljazeeras less than an hour ago for a good while and they talked to a white house advisor , who seemed to have just come out of the white house , who said among a lot of other interesting things that the Obama administration are now nearly decided that the change cant take place with Sullieman and Mubarak in power . 
It has seemed to me that the white house thought the change could go on with mubarak keeping things calm while they sorted out something new , mind you i have not been following the news in th elast twenty four hours much , it is a big change if the White House think the effort to move on to a democratic government can not happen with Mubarak in power . 
THey also were saying that america does nt have much influence but i never know how seriously to take claims that they dont have much influence . 
rose macaskie Yes both Thugs Mubarak and Suleiman must be arrested and put on trial for murder and massacre , as well as the whole dectatorship regime of Mubarak . 
Watching this unfold in Egypt is both inspirational and reminiscent of the `` change '' young Americans came together for in our last election . 
I hope Mubarak funds the decency and backbone to accept his defeat and steps down peacefully . 
I am so happy with the change we 've had so far -- more of my family and friends have left -LRB- lost -RRB- their jobs , and owe more to the banks than ever . 
Meanwhile , the same staff have the same positions as before we had our ` change ' . 
Sooooooo happy for the Change ! 
I am concerned that Mubarak has not taken a firm stance with his countrymen that `` Time is needed to form firm candidates for an election '' with the possibility of an election come June or July '' . 
I , personally have no evidence of any real candidates on any of the new programs . 
The Egyptians have a real grievance but due process must take place for change . 
The White House is taking a neutral approach as always to play the winning card . 
Unfortunately , the U.S government stands for liberty and democracy when it suits them ????? Toooo bad . 
Great to see Wolfowitz , my hero on Piers tonight . 
The architect of the Gulf War is exactly what we need to figure out how to make this situation into America 's . 
Is there Oil in Egypt ? 
What can we get if we take over Egypt ? 
We are much more mature to run other countries , I wish the World would all go American and I could use my money anywhere instead of changing my greenbacks for funny money if I travel -- still have to get a passport though . . 
My hat is off to Mr. Piers Morgan for being able to take on the change in his shows ' formate to cover the Egypt situation . 
Mr Morgan is articulate , caring -- poised under pressure while displaying conversational elegance and keen insight . 
How refreshing and how important the information he hand caries into the wasteland of network `` reporting '' . 
Mr Morgan delivers over and over again . 
Thank you for your professionalism and your skill . 
Keep up your seemingly prescient reporting . 
Thanks CNN for Mr. Morgan Why are we having this discussion with the neocon war criminal Wolfowitz ? 
In my opinion , he is on the same low moral plane as Mubarak and his torturer ilk ! 
Wolfowitz is not a credible commentator . 
Please do not include him in the future . 
you 're not funny nor amusing , you just do n't appreciaate a good reporting . . 
Even if u try alll your life , you will not reach the intelligence or the knowledge of Anderson Cooper . 
As an average citizen , I am distressed that you have given Paul Wolfowitz a forum this evening . 
He has been totally discredited several years ago and should not be commenting on Egypt . 
We also need to be more careful as a people about pontificating on events in Egypt , that frankly , most Americans can not understand . 
Mubarak is no saint . 
I just spent two weeks in Egypt . 
The government does not provide basic services that we all take for granted . 
Please , CNN , be more careful with your choice of so-called `` expert '' commentary . 
Guess you know nothing of Anderson Cooper . 
He 's quite familiar with the Middle East , try reading his book . 
And he sure as heck has more courage than you do . 
not only reading his books , Cooper is well educated and traveled the world . 
He has more knowledge than all of us here , , , , surprisingly non of you guys take the effort bing and search before making any oppinion ????? Poorly run program with even poorer testimonies from burned and unreliable invitees . 
you guys focus on how poorly run the program and forget the essence and main topic that people getting killed for raising their voices and demanding freedom and democracy ... Was unsure of Piers Morgan at first , but find that I enjoy his interviews very much , indeed Yes , he interrupts at times -- but he 's sure to get feedback on that and address it . 
I 'm impressed by his coverage of the situation in Egypt ; he 's certainly holding his own . 
Let us all listen and concentrate on the pain topic , , which is Egypt and how the current regime have been committing crimes against humanity ... ?? We are all concerned about people getting killed for raising their voices , not only in Egipt , but in other countries as well . 
All tiranies have to step down , but that does n't justify a poorly run program , and even less the unreliable invitees that have been responsible of some of oiur dark history why do n't you at least spell Egypt correctly first , and stick with essence ... and pay attention , , , today the topic is Egypt , so when the topic is Armenia , we will discuss it then ???? What I can `` t understand is why the knee jerk reaction everytime something is `` supposed '' to happen !! You cancel advertised programs and run to Egypt to get what ? 
none news !!! You get these experts on to tell us what they think will happen when they don `` t have a clue either . 
To me they just make themselves look stupid . 
You have Blitzer and Spitzer on for two hours before your shoe giving us `` news '' which is obviously incorrect and then you change your schedule to give us more of the same !! If you want to cover Egypt . 
Why not take a few days to get some facts together and then give us a show with some genuine information instead of making space for a bunch of so called experts to fall over themselves with obvious missinformation and conjecture !! Good lord most of our opinions are probably just as accurate as the specialists you have on . 
Cuz the evens in Egypt changing constantly , so here you have it ... CNN have stationed reporters for many years in Egypt and they live the truth ??? Agree . 
While the happenings in Egypt are newsworthy they 1 -RRB- forget there is other news happening in the world and 2 -RRB- nobody cares about what is going on at 4AM over there , which is nothing . 
They have pre-empted the Firth interview 3 times to have us listen to a bunch of blowhards have a Q&A with Piers that amount to nothing but drivel . 
iers has driven me from CNN . 
He replaced L. King ok , lets give change a chance , he 's awful . 
I 've been with CNN for a long time , I resonate with AC 360 , and his panel of analysts ; however , Piers always interrupts , ALWAYS , his questions are delivered with arrogance , not engaging the viewer or the person he interviews . 
Howard Stern , the Hollywood scene , return AC 360 . 
I 'm switching to another station during Piers ' time slot . 
Amanpour is one of many who are salient , Piers does not fit this learned group . 
The Egyptian consituiton has a line of succession ! 
When Nixon resigned he was not forced to leave the country so why is Murbarak required to leave Egypt ? 
Nixon flew home to California . 
Let Mubarak go back to his home and become just another Egyptian citizen . 
You are right , it is Egypt , and it was a typo error , but in all honesty , spelling does n't have anything to do with essence . 
At least you know my last name , beause I do n't hide like others do . 
Today it is about Egypt . 
When it comes to Armenia or any other country , we can further discuss , but being unpolite will not help you support your position I do n't mind the error , but i was making a point for you and everyone in here to stick with topic and to stop talking about cosmatic things regarding the show and programming . 
We should all to help anyone in need of freedom and democracy ... Avedik ... Could n't agree with you more ... as for Marc `` s comment ... he can `` t seem to help it !!! just read his previous statements on this page and notice his wonderful way with words !!! I refrain from pointing out his spelling in every blog !! I am too polite for that !!! As for you Marc ... making insulting remarks certainly doesn `` t help you cause . . 
making a small spelling eror is only a cosmetic fault no ? 
Along with a constant call for violence as a result of protester 's anger , exacerbated by a firebrand Republican and , of all people , a prime reason for the Iraqi invasion Paul Wolfowitz , Morgan ca n't get beyond his opinion . 
Piers Morgan and Glenn Beck ! 
Sorry Piers , but I still have n't gotten over your bestowal of respectability upon the uber-imperialist Wolfowitz . 
What other conquistadors can we expect as guest commentators ? 
Will we get to hear Henry Kissinger pontificate on peace and freedom ? 
It 's a shame Dr. Strangelove is a fictional character -- he would be perfect for your show ! 
I apologize for the delayed reaction . 
I 've been glued to the set for the last hour watching the talking heads commenting as they watch nothing happening in Tahir Square . 
February 10 , 2011 at 11:31 pm | Report abuse | Gonernments are the same all over the world-they all lie manipulate their own people-they all should step down I wonder-how many billions the Wall st. is going to make , thanks to this crisis in Egypt ? 
watching crissis in egypt it seems to me that some cnn reporters does ' t understand what happen and theirs comment are not objective expecialy mr. anderson cooper \ s , his comments are onesided in supporting protestors . 
But it is complicated problem , which is simmilar which was 30 years ego in poland , and still polish people learn how is democracy . 
Democracy and transition is not going happen day by day , it needs time and preparation . 
In poland there was protestors and frustration , on the end governent make state of emergency , today over 50 % polish people are saying it was right , and prevent national disaster , which happen in hungary in 56 and czekoslovakia 68 . 
, Today in egypt situation is complicated and kind of simmilar but mentality of arabs world is different , who is going to take control over egypt , crowd from the squere , army , which can rule egypt for next 20 or 30 years or egypt may be religion state like in iran . 
It is nessesary to understand that all governent agenda including army right now is mubarak 's , i do n't think that opposition is prepare to take over , right away , it is for sure , people of egypt want changes and they have right for it , but step down of mubarak nothing change now in rules of egyptian governent it may just calm down demonstrators , they probably accept army rules and others but they want to step down mubarak right away , what happen next nobody know . 
Peace and stabilization in the middle east is very important for rest of us . 
Today reporters and media have huge impact on opinion of the world and they can pervent increasing conflict if they understand many situations and sides in conflict , they are obective and they have imagination what could happen in many situations which could happen , i understand that they have their own opinions but reporters should be objective I have been so looking forward to the Colin Firth interview -- I can watch the Egyptian issue on the news all day long , I thought Piers Morgan was hosting an interview program ! 
I am deeply disappointed ! 
Hey Piers Morgan , who gave you in charge the war criminals menagerie ? 
Please do not bring them next time . 
Yeah Piers you 're doing fine . 
Did I miss some coverage of Egypt though ... Is there no leader emerging from or leading this dusty democratic uprising ? 
I have n't heard him or her speak ... otherwise are n't they just a mob that should be dispersed with tear gas , rubber bullets or water canons ? 
Mubarak said he would step down later this year after passing the reigns onto another government , what 's six more months for a peacful transition when it 's taken you this long to protest his rule . 
If this uprising could produce a suitable person maybe it would be sooner . 
Step up to the plate . 
Had to laugh at AC crying about getting harrassed ... it 's not your country little man and no they do n't have to let you report . 
i find it amazing that the media prima donnas , like Christiana Amanpour , who attacked the Bush administration for not finding `` weapons of mass destruction '' in Iraq , because the intelligence was incorrect all over the world ... stand before us and blame the bad intelligence they received for them getting the EGYPT scenaria wrong night after night after night ! 
If you think politicians wo n't admit when they are wrong -- just watch the media `` darlings . '' 
They put politicians to shame . 
I LIKE THE SHOW , PIERS ! 
Relief !! Someone must have talked to Piers about his annoying and rude interruptions . 
I watched the entire show tonight for the first time without the urge to switch him off ... and without the urge to murmur `` boor ! '' 
under my breath ... specifically because he refrained from constantly interrupting his guests . 
I 've been looking forward to the Firth interview as well , but since it was pre-recorded I hope it 's not another episode of `` Piers Morgan Interrupts ... '' Have you totally taken leave of your senses ? 
How could you possibly have invited Paul Wolfowitz onto your show . 
He was one of the ones who talked Bush into invading Iraq . 
He 's a war criminal and should be in jail or at least be put on trail at the Hague . 
Pay attention to whom you invite ... I 'm tired of hearing the same old BS again and again . 
I loved watching Mr Arslan on your show . 
He knows what he is talking about . 
His views represent the views of most muslims worldwide , who believe that we can have pluralism and democracy in the muslim coulntries with religion playing a role in these societies . . 
At first , I was excited to see the interviews that Piers Morgan would bring to CNN after being a long time Larry King fan . 
But I am very disappointed in his rude style AND because you can never tell when an interview will be shown . 
I have waited to see Colin Firth four times , only to see him bumped so they can show you another hour of the stuff from Egypt . 
CNN shows Egypt ALL DAY ... people need a break ! 
I was very happy to see Colin Firth on the Bravo channel on `` Inside The Actor 's Studio '' a couple of days ago and I am sure that interview is much better than Piers Morgan can do . 
I am finished with him ! 
The only the that will get me to watch this show is when they finally do show the Colin Firth interview . 
As you have pointed out , nothing is going on in Egypt at 4 a.m. , and anything that has happened has been rehashed ad infinitum by so-called experts who like to hear themselves talk . 
Watching the various journalists actually in Egypt , you can actually be amazed at how many different ways they can say the same thing which is essentially that they do n't know anything . 
I think it is insulting to Colin Firth -LRB- and Geoffrey Rush and Helena Bonham Carter -RRB- to keep pre-empting them and then to see what interviews do get through . 
Gracious as they are , they will be understanding , but COME ON , FOLKS ! 
Piers is only marginally less annoying than Wolf or John King . 
Talking about the Middle East ? 
You 've got to be kidding . 
You 're either nuts , cynical or clueless . 
I think most people on her do n't have a clue . 
Rember politicians do n't tell you everything and the press does not ether . 
We need to stop believing everything we here on the news . 
Thank God Mubarak stepped down . 
I am so happy for the Egyptian people and their freedom ! 
Just saw the Paul Wolfowitz interview . 
How can you leave that sort of interview with Wolfowitz having the final word . 
I can tell that you have so much more to say . 
Take the risk and people will follow . 
Just take the risk . 
It will pay off . 
Paul Wolfowitz is a war criminal who should be on trial right now , not allowed to be giving `` expert '' opinion . 
-LRB- Right now he 's on Fareed Zakaria 's show , sharing his Middle East wisdom with us yet again . -RRB- 
Remember , this is the man who claimed that the war in Iraq would cost us essentially nothing , being paid for by oil revenues . 
The world has already suffered incalculably because this man 's advice was listened to . 
We all should consider boycotting all CNN shows that feature him as an expert witness . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
Everything from #Paterno to #Rihanna , Melissa McCarthy to the Pope , plus #OBL 's shooter & #GunsinAmerica . 
@DonnyDeutsch is on it ! 
9p #CNN 8:13 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Will the 4th time be a charm ? 
Probably , just like the 1st , 2nd , and 3rd . 
RT @reallorraine Thanks @piersmorgan and Life Stories team & brilliant audience - made me feel very relaxed and happy ! 
