By Ed Husain , Special to CNN Just out of jail , Wael Ghonim is embraced by the mother of Khalid Said , who was allegedly beaten to death by police . 
Ed Husain : Egyptian , young , passionate , educated : Wael Ghonim a symbol of revolution Morale among activists was declining under accusations of betraying Egypt , Husain says Husain : Ghonim came out of jail to give interview that reignited passion of protesters Husain : His Facebook page for Khalid Said , killed by police , inspired the young Editor 's note : Ed Husain is a senior fellow at The Council on Foreign Relations and author of `` The Islamist . '' 
-LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Wael Ghonim is a symbol of the revolution in Egypt . 
During his highly emotive interview on a popular Egyptian show Monday night , he went out of his way to rebut the accusations made by the older generation of Mubarak 's supporters that the protesters were `` traitors to Egypt '' and `` foreign agents . '' 
These accusations were not only repeated on state media , but when Ghonim was arrested on January 28 and spent 12 nights in a Cairo prison , his fellow inmates accused him of the worst possible cultural and political trait for an Arab : khiyanah , or betrayal . 
With foreign media presence and international support for the protesters , that accusation of treachery to Egypt and foreign involvement was gaining credence in many quarters in Egypt last week . 
Morale was slowly dropping . 
Then came Ghonim 's explosive interview Monday night . 
With one stroke , he galvanized an entire generation of Egyptians . 
His story is sincere and selfless : The regime 's treatment of him was why millions opposed the Mubarak government . 
If Egyptians had forgotten , Ghonim 's plight reminded them . 
With passion and intellectual clarity , he asked why he was arrested . 
Why were his frail parents not informed ? 
His parents had wandered from hospital to hospital crying -- why had n't police simply told them that he was in prison , and not dead ? 
The face of Egypt 's revolution Ghonim : ` I 'm ready to die ' Ghonim : Welcome to Egypt revolution 2.0 Ghonim : ` No longer ' time to negotiate The widespread culture of democracy activists disappearing -- or worse , being tortured and killed -- had inspired Ghonim to create a Facebook page in memory of Khalid Said , who was beaten to death by police . 
That page was instrumental in mobilizing a younger generation of Arabs to the January 25 protest meetings . 
Ghonim 's interview was cataclysmic because he was candid : He has a job abroad in the Emirates , he lives comfortably in a villa , and he has nothing personal to gain from the dangers he and his wealthy friends put themselves in . 
Their sacrifice was for the country and people they loved : Egypt and Egyptians . 
This was not treachery , but sacrifice . 
Ghonim 's clarity provided an emotional uplift to the protesters and their supporters . 
He spoke about the dreams of ordinary Egyptians to live in freedom , and he struck a popular chord when he divulged that for 12 nights in prison , he sang '' Dream with Me , '' a popular Egyptian song by Hamza Namireh , another young Arab of the revolution who , eyewitnesses tell me , has been singing in Tahrir Square this week . 
Where others would have relished the media attention , Ghonim 's piety and modesty shone as he paid tribute to the martyrs and heroes who were on the cold streets night after night . 
He had slept in prison , he said , and so he was not a hero . 
It is these sentiments and experiences -- the ability to dream and sing in adversity -- that resonate today in Egypt . 
Ghonim exemplifies an entire generation of patriotic , educated young Egyptians . 
But for all his strengths , he is not likely to become Egypt 's next president , a demand made by his many followers on a 200,000-strong Facebook page . 
Revolutions do not produce certainty . 
The short term in Egypt will be unpredictable , and the successor to Mubarak is unknown . 
It would be wrong for us in the West to express preferences , or groom leaders . 
The last two weeks of protests in Egypt have been organic , and led by a coalition of people from tattooed freedom lovers to government-trained clerics . 
This broad alliance will produce its own leaders when the country goes to the polls in September . 
In a true democracy , the result of the ballot is unknown until the papers are counted . 
Ghonim and his supporters want that free and democratic Egypt . 
Ghonim may wish to be a candidate , or he may not . 
But it is too soon to want to centralize a mass movement by imposing a figurehead on what is a broad coalition . 
This is an Egyptian uprising , so let Egypt decide its fate through free and fair elections . 
The opinions expressed in the commentary are solely those of Ed Husain . 
