Feelings of elation and hope collapsed into anger and frustration as ardent anti-Mubarak protesters in London listened in disbelief as Egypt 's president refused to step down . 
Sitting in a Lebanese restaurant in the heart of the Arab community on London 's Edgware Road , all eyes were fixed on a television screen in the corner of the room ; the change in mood palpable with groans and shouts as President Hosni Mubarak made his intentions clear . 
After the speech , 22-year-old student Mohamed Ezeldin Ahmed told CNN he was bitterly disappointed by the news . 
`` I am angry and frustrated : we thought he was going but Mubarak just does n't get the message . 
`` He 's playing a game with the Egyptian people who are kind and forgiving . 
Mubarak is trying to create conflict between the people so they fight within themselves : he wants civil war . '' 
London-based make-up artist Sally Ibrahim , 23 , has been protesting outside the Egyptian Embassy every day . 
She thought Friday would be her last day on the streets ; not protesting but celebrating . 
`` We 're really disappointed , '' she said . 
`` But we 're not going to stop . 
We 're now going to go back to the embassy every day and carry on fighting until he leaves . '' 
It was a day of mixed emotions for the group , who left jubilant scenes of dancing and singing outside London 's Egyptian Embassy , only to have their hopes crushed while watching the much-anticipated speech . 
Businesswoman Azza Zaki , 45 , left Egypt two years ago and has been protesting outside the embassy ever since protesters flocked to Cairo 's Tahrir Square 17 days ago . 
She told CNN she felt it was her moral obligation to protest : `` I 've been living all these years rejecting what 's been going on and what 's happening to my people . 
Although I was n't affected , what I saw back home was very inhuman , yet I was a coward and did n't speak out . '' 
She continued : `` These heroes in Tahrir Square , they gave us back our humanity and gave us back our pride to go out and say no more . '' 
Sara Ibrahim , a 28-year-old mother of two , took her three-year-old and one-month old sons to Thursday 's protests in London , hoping they would witness history . 
`` It means a lot to us , '' Ibrahim said . 
`` Even if I take a picture -LRB- of my son -RRB- and show him when he 's older , he can see he was part of history , creating history . 
He will probably be taught about the Egyptian revolution , like people talk about the French Revolution , at school or college . '' 
Although these ex-patriot Egyptians are adamant Mubarak must go , most admit this is just the beginning of a difficult transition period for their country . 
`` It 's time for the young , the educated people to step up , '' said 34-year-old college lecturer Khairy Eteiwy . 
`` The west should not worry about Egypt or about the Muslim Brotherhood . 
They have a place there , but they are not the majority by any means . 
The majority of the protesters and the Egyptian people ... they like a moderate kind of life and they like to follow democracy . '' 
But as these Egyptians sipped their mint teas and began to digest the news that the protests back home had failed to dislodge their president , talk turned to Friday 's gathering that many of them had hoped just minutes earlier would be a celebration . 
