After a tumultuous day of speculation , disappointment and then anger , Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak remains the titular head of his country . 
`` So I thought I would delegate powers to the vice president , according to the constitution , stipulations of the constitution , '' Mubarak said during his national televised address Thursday night . 
The vice president is former intelligence head Omar Suleiman , tapped for the spot early in Mubarak 's response to the protests . 
The Egyptian constitution allows the president to delegate powers to the vice president , a provision originally put into the document in case the president is temporarily incapacitated . 
The constitution reserves three particular powers for the president alone -- they can not be delegated to the vice president . 
Those are the right to dismiss parliament , to request constitutional amendments and to alter the structure of the government . 
Egypt 's ambassador to the United States , Sameh Shoukry , said that while Mubarak was by law still the president , Suleiman was now `` the de facto president . '' 
Suleiman has already begun negotiations with some of Egypt 's opposition , and Mubarak said he 's already asked for the modification of five constitutional articles -- 76 , 77 , 88 , 93 and 198 -- and the repeal of a sixth -- 179 . 
Articles 76 and 77 deal with how presidential elections are conducted . 
Article 76 sets standards for qualifying parties , which currently all but guarantee the ruling NDP a spot on the ballot , while 77 sets presidential terms at 6 years with no limits on re-election . 
Articles 88 and 93 deal with how members of parliament will be elected . 
Article 88 in particular requires judges to oversee the elections . 
Those changes , if implemented , would answer demands to open Egyptian elections to more opposition candidates and loosen the grip of Mubarak 's party on power . 
Article 198 allows the president to issue decrees with the force of law `` in exceptional cases '' as OK 'd by two-thirds of parliament -- essentially a codification of emergency power , but it sets a limited period of time for that power . 
And article 179 , which Mubarak proposed repealing altogether , allows the president to send anyone suspected of involvement in terrorism to a military court . 
Mubarak and Suleiman both pledged to continue this work -- but perhaps the real question about what comes next in Egypt can only be answered by the `` youth movement '' that launched the protests more than two weeks ago -- and the military 's response . 
