2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
in Cairo 's Tahrir Square as President Hosni Mubarak said late Thursday he was delegating power to his vice president and made no mention of stepping down . 
`` I do n't know if he has a brain or if his brain is elsewhere , '' one protester in the square said , expressing frustration that Mubarak appeared to be saying that he enjoyed support from most Egyptians . 
Watching Mubarak 's address on what appeared to be a sheet hoisted over the square , the crowd became angry as they heard Mubarak say he would `` delegate powers '' to Vice President Omar Suleiman but did not mention leaving office . 
They broke into cries of , `` Illegitimate ! '' 
and `` Mubarak the coward must stand down . '' 
After the statement , parliamentary speaker Ahmed Fathi Srour told Nile TV that Mubarak 's move had put the authority for the day-to-day running of the government in Suleiman 's hands . 
That would include oversight of the police , the interior ministry and other key agencies , as well as control of economic policy and running any negotiations with opposition figures . 
Srour added that the constitution specifically prohibits the president from delegating certain key powers to the vice president , including the power to dismiss parliament or dismiss the government and the power to ask for amendments to the constitution . 
If Mubarak and his regime leave the power all christians can forget Egypt as a tourist destination . 
Who will be on power afther him-moslem brothers ? 
C'mon people ... February 10 , 2011 at 8:53 pm | Report abuse | Reply I think they should just let it go ... I mean come on ! 
I 'm tired of seeing about this in my newsfeed . 
Its his country and he should do what he wants . 
If they do n't like it , they move somewhere else . 
I can see why these people are fighting for their freedom ; I support that , but what i hate is people blaming one political group for the problems , because they are all the same , they are all men\/women , they can all be corrupted just like everyone else . 
I do believe that a smart man , at the begining of creating america , once said , `` two things will seperate America : greed and political parties . '' 
More support for the people in their struggle . 
Your strength & dignity is awe inspiring & humbling . 
Skarphace , I can not agree more with you . 
Keep up the well reasoned commentaries & responses . 
Hey guys over there in Egypt , Build Mr. Mubarak a pyramid , he 'll step down with all his Camel riding whipping rooneys . 
The pyramid must be bigger than any of the exisixiting ones . 
Promise him it will be closed after his death but as soon as he & his entourage enters , just do the needful !!!!!!! I ca n't believe some of the comments made on here . 
I also ca n't believe that our country ever backed Mubarak it is like Iraq all over again . 
Why would our country who believes in a democracy give so much to a country who dictates how there people will live . 
I also ca n't believe that anyone here would ever complain about another country wanting rights like we have here . 
We tip toe around many countries that do n't give a crap about the U.S. and give them money but the sad part is we have to borrow the money to give it . 
Maybe we are the ones that need to be demonstrating and saying enough is enough . 
Dear Customers : We are very proud to introduce a new concept `` FUK A SOUL '' Jeff you are racist and a total IDIOT , I blame your mother for having you !!!!! -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
