First time my political pundit -LRB- my dad -RRB- agree with Obama on this Past 36 years we didn t get 100 % facts from that region finally our president most of the media really know what is going on that part of the world February 10 , 2011 09:00 pm at 9:00 pm | It is not up to the US to tell another country how and what to do . 
We already tried that with the criminal administration of cheney and his boy bush . 
We ended up in two wars in which thousands have been killed in the name of democracy . 
I did n't see any foreign country try to take us down when bush stole the election and the old farts in the supreme court appointed him president . 
Even though I wish somebody had spoken up and stopped the travesty . 
February 10 , 2011 09:04 pm at 9:04 pm | This is such a delicate balancing act not only for the President but for the U.S. as a whole . 
It is easy to give verbal support to the Egyptian protesters now that the U.S. has slipped in their support for Suleiman as next in charge . 
He 's even worse so you still have dracula in charge of the blood bank . 
It therefore keeps America 's political interests in place . 
Keep in mind we have spent over a trilion dollars to invade Iraq and Afghanistan , thousands of lives of US\/Coalition soldiers and hundreds of thosands of Iraqi and Afghani citizens . 
All of it to protect the US and Israeli interests in the region . 
So how can we think that our government will so easily lose Egypt to a bunch of common Egyptians . 
The US and Israel will always control Egypt by proxy . 
The Egyptian army is owned by us . 
The best Egypt can expect is a moderate dictatorship in full support of US and Israeli interests . 
The idea that our intelligence service misinformed President Obama should be scrutinized carefully . 
This is an agency funded by a million or billion dollar black budget with technology so refined they can pull information out of thin air . 
They can track every word and movement of Mubarak without even being there . 
Add our best remote viewers and it makes it even more accurate . 
I 'd like to believe that President Obama was misinformed today because I do believe he is an individual of character and integrity but careful assessments may be in order on all sides . 
February 10 , 2011 09:04 pm at 9:04 pm | I guess that makes Bush and Obama even . 
Bush was given wrong information on weapons of mass destruction , who knew there was no such thing . 
Obama was lead to believe Mubarak was stepping down and he did n't step down . 
The lesson we should learn is that we should n't trust information from these countries , Mubarak today was perfect proof of it . 
Bush did the best he could and so did Obama . 
February 10 , 2011 09:05 pm at 9:05 pm | February 10 , 2011 09:09 pm at 9:09 pm | Many are saying President Obama acted too slow And at the same time picking apart his speech in Cairo If he jumped out too quickly on the Protesters side The crazy far right would say `` he 's Muslim '' that 's why President Obama is DAMNED if he DO and DAMNED if he DO N'T And he 's constantly being analyzed under a microSCOPE It does not matter what he says -- people will take it WRONG !! So President continue your stride and above all remain STRONG !!! Even though we do not SHOUT the LOUDEST we re with you President Obama !!! February 10 , 2011 09:11 pm at 9:11 pm | If we would get several hundreds of thousand unemployed to protest Obama yiou think he would he leave office ? 
February 10 , 2011 10:08 pm at 10:08 pm | I am sorry mentioning this ; Americans , we are being pushed to the edge of the frightening Hill . 
This is the time carefully to review C.I.A agents backgrounds , their daily activities and FOR WHOM THEY WORK FOR . 
Including the past tragedies , 9\/11 . 
As Today , the C.I.A made a dangerous mistakes by MIS-LEADING the American President , by saying , `` Egyptian President , Mubarak is going to step down from his Presidency '' . 
This leads the American President to side with the demonstrates . 
He also , with trust of the C.I.A messages , openly passed the messages to Worldwide Audiences and Viewers . 
Since this is a severe mistake\/hurting the President , the C.I.A must be punished . 
I guess , this Agent is Arab\/Egyptian background . 
Other than the constant call for Mubarak to go I do not hear a coherent set of demands from the protesters be they the Muslim brotherhood or other interested politically individuals\/parties ? 
El Baradei could put something together , but is not doing so ... why not ? 
Frankly unless Mubarak and Suleiman go and the military agrees to subservient to the government duly elected from all parties a.s.a.p this uprising will in the end change nothing really . 
Who believes such bold . . 
COURAGEOUS and timely claims of support ? 
Support is the true problem obviously ... maybe there is some southern swamp land to be sold cheaply to the next `` supported '' diplomacy contractors . 
February 10 , 2011 11:45 pm at 11:45 pm | America always \* supports democracy and will of the people . 
\* Except if the will of the people is to throw out puppet tyrants we kept supporting for decades . 
See the entire 20th century histories of : Iran , Saud Arabia , Yemen , Pakistan , Chile , Haiti , Cuba , Belorussia , Egypt , Uzbekistan , South Africa , Lybia . 
All countries where at one time or another we have supported\/are still supporting a dictator despite the will of the people , and we have opposed popular uprisings . 
February 11 , 2011 01:03 am at 1:03 am | Now you understand why the rest of the world does n't trust America 's so-called democracy ? 
Because all we do is give it lipservice , but at no time do we actually give it support . 
Even after our invasion of Iraq the Bush administration deliberately delayed democratic elections until we could repress half the Iraqi population , to make sure their elections will install a government that can be our puppet . 
And yet we criticize other countries for selecting who can run ? 
Oh , it 's okay for us to select so-called legitimate candidates for other countries , but not for another country to select its OWN legitimate candidates ? 
February 11 , 2011 01:08 am at 1:08 am | February 11 , 2011 06:55 am at 6:55 am | Two men charged in death of Chicago girl who performed in inauguration event - wp . 
me\/p4HKM -191 H Rove and Trump ` all good Republicans , ' says McDonnell - wp . 
me\/p4HKM -191 E 6:28 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Apple CEO Tim Cook to be Obama 's State of the Union guest - wp . 
me\/p4HKM -191 A CNN 's GUT CHECK for February 11 , 2013 - wp . 
