Here are the remarks of Egyptian Vice President Omar Suleiman following President Hosni Mubarak 's speech : `` This is a very historic hour in the history of the homeland . 
People are concerned about the stability of Egypt . 
We call upon you to unite and to think rationally and to look toward future . 
The youth movement of January 25 has succeeded in implementing a very important change in process of democracy , and the change has already started . 
The constitutional decisions have been taken and the committees have been meeting regarding the decisions taken by the president in his first speech on Februrary 1 . 
`` What the president declared today affirms one more time his national sense and the response to the demands of the people and his commitment to pledges he made upon himself . 
It also proves for his awareness of the danger and the gravity of the very critical moment that Egypt is going through right now . 
`` Mr. President has also made a priority of the interests of Egypt over any other consideration , and he is also responsible for the national action in order to restore the safety and security of Egypt and the stability of Egypt and the preservation of its gains and achievements and to repel all the dangers against the people and to restore tranquility to the hands of the people and to restore life to normalcy . 
I ask -- I call upon all the people to continue to achieve this objective , and I have no doubt that the people will also be able to protect its own interests . 
`` We have opened the door of dialogue and we have reached some understanding , and we have a road map to achieve most of the demands in accordance with the given time door . 
The door is still open for more dialogue . 
In this context I want to confirm the following : I am committed to do whatever it takes in order to have an orderly transition of powers in accordance with the constitution , and I 'm also committed to implementing all that I have taken , all the pledges that I have taken for the national dialogue , and what we have agreed to do later . 
