Obama says ready to '' ` kick ass '' over Gulf oil spill Credit : Reuters\/Pete Souza\/The White House By Anna Driver and JoAnne Allen VENICE , La\/WASHINGTON | Tue Jun 8 , 2010 9:26 am EDT VENICE , La\/WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - President Barack Obama said he wanted to know `` whose ass to kick '' over the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , adding to the pressure on energy giant BP Plc as it sought to capture more of the leak from its gushing well . 
In an interview with NBC News ' `` Today '' aired on Tuesday , Obama also said that if BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward worked for him , he would have fired him by now over his response to the 50-day-old spill , the worst environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
It was triggered by an April 20 well blowout and rig explosion that killed 11 workers . 
The U.S. president , who himself faces growing criticism that his administration was slow to react to the economic and ecological catastrophe hitting four U.S. Gulf states , said he did not want to prejudge the investigation into the incident . 
`` But the initial reports indicate there may be situations in which not only human error was involved , but you also saw some corner cutting in terms of safety , '' Obama said in some of his angriest public words yet about the catastrophe . 
Hayward says a `` series of failures '' led to the accident but denies these resulted from BP efforts to save costs . 
Responding to critics who say his response to the spill should be more engaged and forceful , Obama said : `` I was down there a month ago , before most of these talking heads were even paying attention to the Gulf . '' 
`` And I do n't sit around just talking to experts because this is a college seminar ; we talk to these folks because they potentially have the best answers , so I know whose ass to kick , '' he added . 
In London , BP 's share price was down more than 2 percent after Obama 's remarks . 
BP shares have lost about a third of their value since the crisis erupted , and the company suffered another blow when Goldman Sachs downgraded its rating on BP to `` neutral '' from `` buy '' this week . 
The stakes are high for Obama too . 
A Washington Post\/ABC poll found that 69 percent of Americans believe the government had done a `` not so good '' or `` poor '' job handling the spill . 
Just over 1,000 people were surveyed in the poll , conducted between June 3 and 6 . 
The spill has affected 120 miles of coastline , fouling wildlife refuges in Louisiana and barrier islands in Mississippi and Alabama and also sending tar balls ashore on northwest beaches of Florida , where the $ 60 billion-a-year tourism industry accounts for nearly 1 million jobs . 
The Obama administration has imposed a six-month moratorium on new drilling permits for exploration and development wells in waters deeper than 500 feet . 
But the U.S. Interior Department may issue new safety and environmental requirements as soon as Tuesday for companies that want to drill in shallow waters . 
The Gulf of Mexico incident has also started to have international ramifications . 
Britain said it would increase its inspection of North Sea drilling rigs and monitoring of offshore practices in light of the Gulf of Mexico spill . 
The International Energy Agency said it may cut its oil output estimates for the Gulf of Mexico by up to 300,000 barrels a day for 2015 on potentially tighter U.S. laws on deepwater drilling after the BP well accident . 
While a complete halt to the flow of oil is not expected until August at the earliest , BP has reported an increase in the amount of oil it is capturing from the well in its latest containment effort . 
Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen , who leads the government 's relief effort , said on Monday that London-based BP hoped to collect 20,000 barrels -LRB- 840,000 gallons\/3 .18 million liters -RRB- per day in its latest effort . 
BP said it had collected 7,541 barrels of oil in the first 12 hours of Monday . 
If it collected the same amount the rest of the day , the total for Monday would be more than 15,000 barrels , about 35 percent higher than the amount collected on Sunday . 
Neither Allen nor BP gave an estimate of how much oil is still flowing into the Gulf . 
BP 's latest attempt involves placing a containment cap on top of the gushing pipe on the ocean floor . 
Away from the action in the Gulf , the political heat remains intense in Washington with yet another congressional hearing set to bring BP and its peers under renewed scrutiny . 
The Senate Judiciary Committee holds a hearing at 10:00 EDT -LRB- 1400 GMT -RRB- on Tuesday titled : `` The Risky Business of Big Oil : Have Recent Court Decisions and Liability Caps Encouraged Irresponsible Corporate Behavior ? '' 
Democrats in Congress have been looking at lifting such caps . 
CALLS FOR PUNISHMENT OF COMPANIES The Senate hearing follows one in Chalmette , Louisiana , where two women who lost their husbands in the explosion that unleashed the crisis urged members of Congress to hold BP accountable . 
`` I am asking you to please consider harsh punishments on companies who choose to ignore safety standards before other families are destroyed , '' said Courtney Kemp , whose husband , Wyatt , was killed in the explosion . 
The gravity of the spill was spelled out by Admiral Allen , who said its environmental consequences could last for years . 
`` Dealing with the oil spill on the surface is going to go on for a couple of months '' once the well is plugged , he said . 
`` Long-term issues of restoring the environment and the habitats ... will be years . '' 
Images of birds struggling through oil-soaked waters ringing Louisiana 's ecologically fragile barrier islands and marshes have added to the public outcry and pressure on Obama . 
One-third of the Gulf 's federal waters , or 78,000 square miles -LRB- 200,000 square km -RRB- , remains closed to fishing , and the toll of dead and injured birds and marine animals is climbing . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
