Chris Oynes announced Monday he was retiring as head of the oil and gas drilling office in the Minerals Management Service -LRB- MMS . 
gov -RRB- The head of the Interior Department 's embattled oil and gas drilling program announced Monday he is retiring at the end of the month , a move that comes as the agency he runs faces a shake-up following the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Chris Oynes , the associated director of the Offshore Energy and Minerals Management Program within the Mineral Management Service at the Interior Department , announced his departure in an e-mail to his staff . 
President Obama , meanwhile , has decided to have a presidential commission investigate the cause of the rig explosion that unleashed millions of barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico , where engineers are struggling after three weeks to stop the flow . 
The presidential panel will be similar to ones that examined the Challenger space shuttle disaster and Three Mile Island nuclear power plant accident , said a White House official , speaking on condition of anonymity because the decision had not been formally announced . 
Oynes is responsible for the Outer Continental Shelf oil and gas program , as well as developing and implementing the new alternative energy program . 
Oynes ' biography on the Mineral Manager Service 's website notes that he has been involved in how the agency conducts its resource projections , environmental reviews and operational safeguards . 
He also was directly responsible for 30 lease sales . 
The agency specifically has been accused of being too cozy with the oil and gas lessees it oversees . 
In Congress , more attention was focused on the Gulf spill . 
Sen. Barbara Boxer , D-Calif . 
, and seven other senators asked the Justice Department to determine whether BP PLC made false and misleading claims to the government about its ability to prevent a serious oil spill when it applied for permission last year to drill the Deepwater Horizon well that has unleashed environmental havoc along the Gulf coast . 
But lawmakers are taking aim not only at BP at hearings this week , but also the Interior Department 's regulation of offshore drilling that allowed BP to operate without assurance a massive spill could be prevented . 
Anticipating tough questioning on Capitol Hill at hearings this week , Interior Secretary Ken Salazar on Monday announced a tightening of requirements for onshore oil and gas drilling . 
The new measures would not apply to oil rigs at sea . 
`` The BP oil spill is a stark reminder of how we must continue to push ahead with the reforms we have been working on and which we know are needed , '' Salazar said . 
Oynes is the first person to resign at his agency since an April 20 explosion at the Deepwater Horizon oil rig sunk the rig and caused the massive oil spill . 
The spill continues to grow as oil officials and federal authorities race to stop the flow and protect the coast . 
Rep. Darrell Issa , R-Calif . 
, ranking member of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee , issued a statement saying that Oynes ' departure is a start . 
`` For more than a decade spanning three administrations , MMS has been a corrupt agency with an extensive history of mismanagement . 
This was n't the doing of one , single person , but rather the culmination of a bureaucratic breakdown . 
Removing one person might be a start , but MMS is in need of an exhaustive overhaul and comprehensive reform , '' Issa said . 
Fox News ' Major Garrett and The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
