An image from a video of a jagged pipe leaking millions of gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico , recorded by a BP camera a mile below the water 's surface . 
BP BP 's mile-long tube is only collecting about one-fifth of the oil spewing into the Gulf of Mexico , its executives said Monday . 
The energy giant 's chief operating officer , Doug Suttles , said the tube has been siphoning more than 1,000 barrels a day , or 42,000 gallons , in an interview Monday with NBC 's `` Today Show . '' 
BP has estimated about 5,000 barrels a day , or 210,000 gallons a day , has been leaking out . 
Suttles said they hope to be able to collect more oil as they ramp up the effort but they wo n't be able to get all of it . 
In a major step toward containing the massive oil leak , BP PLC crews on Sunday hooked up the tube to funnel the crude into a tanker ship . 
However , millions of gallons of crude are already in the Gulf . 
The contraption was hooked up successfully and sucking oil from a pipe at the blown well Sunday afternoon after being hindered by several setbacks . 
Engineers remotely guiding robot submersibles had worked since Friday to place the tube into a 21-inch -LRB- 53-centimeter -RRB- pipe nearly a mile -LRB- 1.6 kilometers -RRB- below the sea . 
Kent Wells , BP 's senior vice president for exploration and production , said during a news conference that the amount being drawn was gradually increasing , and it would take several days to measure it . 
Company spokesman Mark Proegler at the joint spill command center in Louisiana had initially said the tube was containing most of the oil coming from the pipe , which is contributing an estimated 85 percent of the crude in the spill . 
In a statement Sunday , BP said that the tube was `` successfully tested and inserted into the leaking riser , capturing some amounts of oil and gas . '' 
`` While not collecting all of the leaking oil , this tool is an important step in reducing the amount of oil being released into Gulf waters , '' BP said . 
Previous attempts to use emergency valves and a 100-ton container had failed to stop the leak that has spilled millions of gallons of oil into the Gulf , threatening sea life , commercial fishing and the coastal tourism industry from Louisiana to Florida . 
BP PLC has also been burning small amounts of floating oil and spraying chemical dispersants above and below the surface . 
The tube 's success gave crews partial control of the leak for the first time in more than three weeks . 
Oil has been spewing since the rig Deepwater Horizon exploded April 20 , killing 11 people and sinking two days later . 
The government shortly afterward estimated the spill at 210,000 gallons -LRB- 795,000 liters -RRB- -- or 5,000 barrels -- a day , a figure that has since been questioned by some scientists who fear it could be far more . 
BP executives have stood by the estimate while acknowledging there 's no way to know for sure . 
Researchers warned Sunday that miles-long -LRB- kilometers-long -RRB- underwater plumes of oil from the spill could poison and suffocate sea life across the food chain , with damage that could endure for a decade or more . 
Researchers have found more underwater plumes of oil than they can count from the blown-out well , said Samantha Joye , a professor of marine sciences at the University of Georgia . 
She said careful measurements taken of one plume showed it stretching for 10 miles -LRB- 16 kilometers -RRB- , with a 3-mile -LRB- 5-kilometer -RRB- width . 
The hazardous effects of the plume are twofold . 
Joye said the oil itself can prove toxic to fish swimming in the sea , while vast amount of oxygen are also being sucked from the water by microbes that eat oil . 
Dispersants used to fight the oil are also food for the microbes , speeding up the oxygen depletion . 
`` So , first you have oily water that may be toxic to certain organisms and also the oxygen issue , so there are two problems here , '' said Joye , who 's working with a group of scientists who discovered the underwater plumes in a recent boat expedition to the Gulf . 
`` This can interrupt the food chain at the lowest level , and will trickle up and certainly impact organisms higher . 
Whales , dolphins and tuna all depend on lower depths to survive . '' 
She said it could take years or even decades for the ecosystem to recover . 
BP has been casting about for ways to contain the leak since it was discovered several days after the blast . 
First robot submarines were unable to get valves to work on machinery at the well head called the blowout preventer . 
Then the company failed to capture the oil with a 100-ton box after icelike crystals formed in it . 
A relief well , considered the permanent solution the leak , is still being drilled and is months away from completion . 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
