Hundreds of miles of booms are being laid along the coastline BP officials desperate to stem a huge oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico are considering stuffing the well with golf balls and tyres , it was revealed . 
BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said the so-called `` junk shot '' of debris was one option after previous attempts to stem the flow failed . 
A growing slick from the BP-leased rig is threatening an environmental disaster along US coasts . 
Some 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons -RRB- of oil a day are flowing into the sea . 
Mr Suttles said it may be possible to stem the flow by blocking the well 's failed blowout preventer . 
`` We have some pipe work on the blowout preventer , and if we can open certain valves on that we could inject basically just rubber and other type of material into -LRB- it -RRB- to plug it up , not much different to the way you might plug up a toilet , '' he said . 
Admiral Thad Allen of the US Coast Guard said it could plug the main leak . 
`` They 're going to take a bunch of debris , shredded up tyres , golf balls and things like that , and under very high pressure shoot it into the preventer itself and see if they can clog it up and stop the leak , '' he told CBS television . 
Booms have been partly successful although rough seas have washed oil over them Some controlled burning of oil has taken place , but it causes serious air pollution About 325,000 gallons of dispersant have been used , although scientists warn it may kill marine life A relief well is being drilled but could take many weeks A huge steel funnel suffered a build-up of ice-like crystals and had to be put aside However , experts have warned that any further damage to the blowout preventer - a huge valve system meant to turn the oil off - could see it shooting out at 12 times the current rate . 
In other developments , a BP official told the Associated Press news agency on Monday that the company had received US government approval to continuously pump dispersant chemicals underwater . 
BP spokesman Mark Proegler said engineers began pumping dispersant on the site on Monday morning . 
Thousands of gallons of dispersant have been dropped over oil on the surface , but have not been tried at such depths before . 
Scientists and fishermen have expressed concern that the chemicals could kill marine life . 
BP revealed on Monday that the oil spill had cost the company $ 350m -LRB- # 233m -RRB- so far . 
It did not speculate on the final bill , which many analysts expect to run into tens of billions of dollars . 
The Deepwater Horizon rig caught fire and sank following an explosion last month . 
The resulting slick has so far thwarted all efforts by BP and US officials to bring it under control . 
A 98-tonne concrete-and-steel funnel lowered 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- to the seabed had been BP 's best hope to contain the main leak while it tried to stop it altogether by drilling relief wells nearby . 
But a build-up of gas hydrates - crystalline water-based solids resembling ice - inside the funnel blocked the exit at the top , and it had to be put aside on Saturday . 
Mr Suttles said other options being discussed were to make a smaller containment dome or to tap into the broken riser pipe and take the oil directly to the surface . 
The broken pipe is almost a mile -LRB- 1.6 km -RRB- down on the ocean floor with little visibility for engineers using remotely controlled vehicles . 
Although the Deepwater Horizon was operated by Transocean , BP is responsible for the clean-up . 
Wildlife in the Gulf of Mexico is already suffering The slick has so far covered about 2,000 sq miles -LRB- 5,200 sq km -RRB- . 
US President Barack Obama is due to meet senior officials at the White House on Monday to review BP 's efforts . 
A sheen from the edge of the slick is surrounding island nature reserves off Louisiana and tar balls have reached as far as the Alabama coast . 
The low-lying region contains vital spawning grounds for fish , shrimp and crabs and is an important migratory stop for many species of rare birds . 
Louisiana 's fishing industry has ground to a halt in certain areas due to health concerns about polluted fish . 
Booms and bundles of absorbent material have been laid along shorelines to try to protect them . 
Teams are also filling sandbags which the Louisiana National Guard will airlift on Monday to five spots along a threatened stretch of coastline . 
The first two oiled birds rescued from the spill have been cleaned and were due to be released back into the wild later in the day . 
The birds - a gannet and a pelican - were to be freed at Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge in Florida . 
