General Growth Properties , the giant shopping mall company whose holdings stretch from Tysons Corner to the planned community of Columbia and Baltimore 's Inner Harbor , yesterday sought protection in bankruptcy court , citing debts of more than $ 27 billion . 
The bankruptcy heralds a wave of trouble in commercial real estate that threatens to put another damper on the economy , industry analysts said . 
By the end of 2011 , $ 1.2 trillion of commercial real estate debt will come due , and like General Growth , many of the borrowers will be unable to refinance or repay their loans , said Gregory H. Leisch , chief executive of Delta Associates , which tracks the industry . 
That would spell more losses for banks and institutional investors such as life insurance companies that are already coping with the meltdown in residential real estate . 
The bankruptcy adds a new element of uncertainty to the future development of Columbia , where General Growth has been working on a long-term plan that county officials have been counting on to revitalize the downtown . 
The economic crisis already assured a delay for the first major effort to remake the 1960-era planned community in decades . 
But for people visiting General Growth 's malls , the Chapter 11 reorganization could be imperceptible . 
`` We 're convinced that we 're going to make this bankruptcy filing invisible to the shoppers in our malls , '' company president Thomas J. Nolan Jr. told reporters . 
`` We 're open for business today , and we 're going to be open for business tomorrow . '' 
General Growth , the nation 's second-largest shopping mall owner , had struggled for months to win reprieves on billions of dollars of debt , much of which was past due . 
The company tried to sell some properties to raise money , but the same lack of credit that prevented it from replacing its loans kept prospective buyers from raising money . 
`` What it tells you is that if they do n't get the financial system restarted , then every real estate company is going to go bankrupt , '' said William Ackman , principal of the hedge fund Pershing Square Capital Management , which holds a major stake in General Growth . 
Other observers said General Growth left itself exceptionally vulnerable to the recession and credit crunch because it had mortgaged itself so heavily . 
`` They 're the poster child for too much debt , and they have been for five years , '' said analyst Richard Moore of RBC Capital Markets . 
The company , based in Chicago , owns or manages more than 200 malls in 44 states . 
Its interests include Harborplace and the Gallery in Baltimore , Boston 's Faneuil Hall Marketplace , New York 's South Street Seaport , the Fashion Show Mall in Las Vegas , Alexandria 's Landmark Mall as well as Laurel Commons and Tysons Galleria . 
General Growth 's problems can be traced partly to its debt-financed purchase in 2004 of Rouse , the pioneering developer of Columbia and of festival markets such as Harborplace . 
