Fri May 28 , 2010 8:06 pm EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Since the April 20 Deepwater Horizon rig explosion in the Gulf of Mexico triggered the worst U.S. oil spill ever , the economic and environmental impact of the accident has widened . 
Here are some facts about the impact of the spill : Louisiana , the nearest state to BP 's gushing undersea well 42 miles out in the Gulf of Mexico , has been the most affected by the spill so far . 
Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal said this week that more than 100 miles of Louisiana 's 400-mile coast had so far been affected by the spilled oil , including fragile marshlands and wildlife refuges . 
He and other state and local officials have reported heavy sheets of oil soiling wetlands and seeping into marine and bird nurseries , leaving a thick stain of sticky crude on the Roseau cane that binds the marshes together . 
Billy Nungesser , president of Plaquemines Parish , said he saw dying cane and `` no life '' in parts of the Pass-a-Loutre wildlife refuge . 
`` Oil debris , '' in the form of tar balls and surface `` sheen , '' has also been reported coming ashore in outlying parts of coastal Mississippi and Alabama . 
In the week of May 17 , Coast Guard officials found tar balls on some beaches in the Florida Keys , raising fears that a so-called Loop Current that runs from the Gulf of Mexico through the Florida Straits may have already brought oil from the spill far to the southeast . 
But laboratory tests subsequently showed the tar balls were not from the BP oil spill , the Coast Guard said . 
The U.S. government has declared a `` fishery disaster '' in the seafood-producing states of Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama due to the oil spill . 
This makes them eligible for federal funds to offset the current and future impact on fisherman and their communities of the oil pollution in their fishing grounds . 
Louisiana 's $ 2.4 billion seafood industry supplies up to 40 percent of U.S. seafood and employs over 27,000 people . 
The state is the second-biggest U.S. seafood harvester , after Alaska , and the top provider of shrimp , oysters , crab and crawfish . 
NOAA on Friday extended the area closed to fishing in the Gulf as a result of the spill to 25 percent of Gulf U.S. federal waters , an area covering 60,683 square miles -LRB- 157,169 square km -RRB- , up from 20 percent previously . 
It says it is taking this step as a precautionary measure to ensure seafood from the Gulf remains safe for consumers . 
NOAA points out that approximately 75 percent of Gulf federal waters are still available for fishing . 
But the ban affects hundreds of thousands of commercial and recreational fishermen , hitting the livelihoods of shrimpers , oystercatchers and charter boat operators . 
Oil , some of it in thick sheets , but also in the form of sheen and tar balls , has already come ashore in Louisiana wildlife reserves like the Breton National Wildlife Refuge on the offshore Breton and Chandeleur Islands , and the Pass-a-Loutre refuge farther to the south . 
Wildlife officials have reported more than 300 sea birds , nearly 200 turtles and 19 dolphins have been found dead along the Gulf Coast during the first five weeks after spill . 
But they stress that only a relatively low number of these had signs of external oiling , so they may not all be related to the spill . 
The 316 dead birds collected along the shores of Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida -- plus 10 others that died or were euthanized at wildlife rehabilitation centers after they were captured alive -- far outnumber the 31 surviving birds found oiled over that period . 
Journalists and scientists have also reported seeing at least one shark , and other creatures like eels and turtles , swimming through surface oil . 
Wildlife officials say they expect more marine creatures , birds and mammals will be affected as more of the oil comes ashore . 
Tourism operators in Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama -- from hotel owners to restaurateurs and boat charterers -- have reported cancellations as a result of the spill , although some are picking up other business from journalists , officials and cleanup workers who have flocked to the Gulf Coast . 
Amidst a scare involving tar balls found on Florida Keys beaches -- later declared not to have come from the BP oil spill -- Florida 's $ 60-billion-a-year tourism industry is also losing millions as a result of the incident , a top state tourism marketing official said earlier this month . 
Of all the threatened states , Florida has the most to lose . 
Tourism is its economic lifeblood , its largest industry , generating $ 60 billion in spending from more than 80 million visitors a year , bringing in 21 percent of all state sales taxes and employing nearly 1 million Floridians . 
Officials say even the threat of pollution that could come from the spill is enough to make a significant `` dent '' in the tourism industries of Florida and other Gulf states . 
Major shipping channels and ports on the U.S. Gulf Coast remain open , although some industry sources have reported possible delays caused by the oil slick . 
NOAA said on Friday it had begun work to survey a new ship anchorage site at the mouth of the Mississippi River for ships to undergo inspection and oil decontamination before entering ports . 
U.S. authorities are anxious to keep Gulf shipping operating to maintain vital U.S. exports and imports . 
NOAA says Lower Mississippi River ports export over 50 million metric tons of corn , soybeans and wheat each year , more than 55 percent of all U.S. grains inspected for shipment . 
-LRB- Reporting by Matthew Bigg , Steve Gorman and Pascal Fletcher , editing by Pascal Fletcher and Todd Eastham -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
