BEIRUT | Mon Mar 21 , 2011 3:30 pm GMT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Four days of protests against corruption and stifling one-party rule have finally brought the Arab uprising to Syria , posing the gravest domestic challenge yet to President Bashar al-Assad . 
At least four people have been killed in the protests and demonstrators have set fire to public buildings in open defiance of authorities known for tolerating no dissent . 
Serious unrest has been confined to the southern city of Deraa , echoing to the chants of `` God , Syria , Freedom , '' but analysts say disenchantment at Assad 's rule and the exhilarating spirit of regional upheaval may fuel wider rebellion . 
`` It is a semi-totalitarian state ... corruption is everywhere , '' said Hazem Saghieh , columnist at pan-Arab Al-Hayat newspaper . 
`` All the reasons are there to expect drastic change . '' 
Any turmoil in Syria would have an impact well beyond its borders . 
Under Assad and his father before him , Syria has been Iran 's closest Arab ally , a major force in Lebanon , and a supporter of Palestinian and Lebanese militant groups . 
The Baath Party , which seized power nearly 50 years ago , has governed under emergency laws and banned all opposition . 
Other grievances against authorities include the dominance of Assad 's minority Alawites over the Sunni Muslim majority , corruption , economic hardship and a rising cost of living . 
Assad has said Syria 's foreign policy -- hardline opposition to Israel and support for its foes Hamas and Hezbollah -- means that uniquely among Arab rulers , he is in tune with the mood of his people on one of the most resonant Arab causes . 
But this so-called `` Syrian exception '' may offer little protection from protesters focussed on domestic demands for more rights , jobs and better living standards . 
When the Muslim Brotherhood staged an armed revolt against the late Hafez al-Assad , he sent troops into Hama , killing many thousands and razing part of the city to the ground in 1982 . 
Such sustained repression -- the military operation in Hama took weeks and was completed before the outside world learned its full extent -- may not be an option in an era where mobile phone footage of protests reaches the Internet in minutes . 
`` The Syrians have shown in the past they are capable of calibrating repression with flexibility , '' said Habib Malik , history professor at the Lebanese American University . 
`` I think they realize what happened in Hama is not possible in today 's world , '' he said , adding that the challenge to Assad , although grave , may still be `` contained or nipped in the bud . '' 
Like other Arab states trying to contain dissent , Syria has reversed decisions on lifting subsidies and has raised salaries . 
Volker Perthes , director of the German Institute for International Politics and Security , said it could also defuse tensions in restive Kurdish regions in the northeast by implementing a pledge to grant citizenship to stateless Kurds . 
A diplomat in Damascus said Assad , who was elected president unopposed when his father died in 2000 , had repeatedly stalled on promised political reform and mistakenly believed that limited economic liberalisation was the key to survival . 
`` They have been trying to put economic band-aids on a wound gushing with the blood of frustration , '' the diplomat said . 
`` Bashar had the time to take pre-emptive moves and embark on genuine reform . 
Instead the regime is making very bad mistakes . '' 
Smaller , possibly coordinated , demonstrations took place after Friday prayers in the central city of Homs and the coastal town of Banias , while a crowd briefly chanted slogans for freedom inside the Ummayad Mosque in Damascus . 
A peaceful demonstration for the release of political prisoners was broken up in Damascus last week . 
But the scale of the protests in Deraa , where thousands of people have taken to the streets , suggests the real threat to Assad comes less from Syria 's scattered and weakened opposition groups than from spontaneous grassroots protest . 
If Libyan rebels , now backed by Western military power , make further gains in their fight against Muammar Gaddafi , Syrian protesters would be further emboldened , Saghieh said . 
Demonstrations could then intensify throughout the country , and few expect Assad to follow Egyptian and Tunisian presidents who eventually yielded to mass protests and stood aside . 
`` I think a regime like the Baath regime in Syria would not leave smoothly . 
It would opt for something like Libya or Yemen , '' said Saghieh . 
`` If it is civil war and anarchy , no one would benefit . 
Iranians would lose their ally , but the Israelis would have on their borders a very volatile situation , '' he said . 
Since 2005 , when the United States withdrew its ambassador to Damascus after the assassination of Lebanese statesman Rafik al-Hariri , Assad has engineered a rapprochement with the West , but maintained a hard line against criticism at home . 
He has said he is willing to resume peace talks with Israel , insisting on a full Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights occupied in 1967 , while continuing to position Syria as a champion of Arab resistance to Israel . 
`` The Syrian exception has long rested on the regime 's skill in developing a foreign policy in synch with public opinion -- a unique case in the Arab world . 
But popular sentiment has refocused around a host of domestic issues left unaddressed for too long , '' said Peter Harling , Damascus-based analyst with the International Crisis Group . 
`` Authorities currently face challenges akin to other regimes of the region , and for the time being are responding in similar fashion . 
The future now hinges on their ability to reinvent the Syrian exception , by staking out a credible and comprehensive vision for change , '' Harling added . 
`` Repression can only make a volatile situation worse . '' 
