Tuesday 3 May 2005 11.57 BST Guardsman Anthony Wakefield by the Tyne in his home city of Newcastle . 
Photograph : Owen Humphreys\/PA A Coldstream Guardsman was killed and another injured by the blast of a roadside bomb in southern Iraq late yesterday , the Ministry of Defense said . 
The two were on a night patrol in armored Land Rovers of the 1st Battalion , Coldstream Guards , near Amara . 
The Shia-dominated city in the British-controlled zone has seen relatively few attacks in recent months . 
The dead soldier was named as Guardsman Anthony John Wakefield , 24 , from Newcastle upon Tyne , who was married with three children . 
`` He was acting as the top cover sentry in the second of a two-vehicle patrol when what appears to have been an improvised explosive device detonated - disabling the vehicle and injuring another soldier , '' Lt Col Andrew Williams said . 
`` Despite receiving first aid at the scene and in the helicopter that evacuated him , he sadly died of wounds . '' 
His colleague is thought not to be seriously injured . 
The war in Iraq has been high on the general election agenda for the past week , and the death of a soldier so close to polling day will add to the pressure on Tony Blair . 
Details of the attack emerged as insurgents continued their onslaught on Baghdad , with four car bombs killing 14 people yesterday on the eve of the swearing-in of the Iraqi government cabinet . 
Explosions shook the capital for a fifth consecutive day , and civilians again bore the brunt of attacks ; at least 127 people have been killed since a new administration was formed last week . 
Nine people died when a van packed with explosives blew up in a mixed Shia and Sunni shopping district , hurling glass and debris across the street . 
The defense secretary , Geoff Hoon , said yesterday that Guardsman Wakefield 's death had come on what had been expected to be a routine operation . 
He was the first British serviceman killed in action since January , and the 87th to die since March 2003 . 
Last year Amara , on the Tigris near the Iranian border , saw fierce fighting between the city 's 1,000-strong British garrison and the Mahdi army militia of a radical Shia cleric , Moqtada al-Sadr , who led two uprisings against the US-led occupation . 
Since a ceasefire agreed last August , attacks on British troops had dwindled to just a few small-scale efforts each week that until Sunday caused no casualties . 
Amara is 90 % Shia , and its residents turned out in force for the election that gave Shias their first taste of power in decades . 
Mr Blair , speaking in London at Labor 's election news conference , said he offered his `` profound condolences '' to Guardsman Wakefield 's family . 
The prime minister said his death `` underlines once again the extraordinary work and sacrifice that British armed forces are making in Iraq , to help Iraq become a stable and democratic country that 's no longer a threat to its region and the world '' . 
The Conservative leader , Michael Howard , expressed his `` deep sympathy and sincere condolences '' to Guardsman Wakefield 's family , and the Liberal Democrat deputy leader , Sir Menzies Campbell , said : `` It 's a reminder that we have 8,000 young men and women in Iraq who expose themselves to danger on a daily basis . '' 
Yesterday Guardsman Wakefield 's seven-year-old son Scott stood to attention in his pyjamas on the doorstep of the family home in Newcastle upon Tyne . 
In a trembling voice he said : `` I am proud of my daddy ; he served his country and he died a hero . '' 
His mother , Ann Toward , 30 , told how she had been told of her husband 's death early yesterday . 
`` I heard a knock at the door at 3.30 this morning and knew instantly what had happened , '' she said . 
`` I answered the door to a man in a smart suit who handed me his card saying he was from the MoD . 
I invited him in and he broke the news ... I am devastated and shocked . 
`` He was such a brave man , I had two children with him and I am trying to explain to them that their dad wo n't be coming home . 
It is very , very hard , it is only just beginning to sink in . '' 
Ms Toward last night blamed the prime minister for her husband 's death . 
Speaking on the ITV News Channel , she said Mr Blair had deprived her three children of their father . 
`` He sent the troops over and he should not have done it . 
If it was not for that , their dad would have been here today . '' 
Besides Scott and Corey , two , Guardsman Wakefield also had a stepdaughter Stacey , 11 , from Ms Toward 's previous relationship . 
Ms Toward added : `` It is only just beginning to sink in for Scott , he has been talking about his dad and wants to write him a letter to tell him how proud he is that he fought and died for his country . 
He had been in the army for six years . '' 
The couple had been married for two years , but were in the process of separating . 
Ms Toward said that she remembered her husband as a `` wonderful , fun , happy man - we were so close it was only the amount of time he was away that took its toll . '' 
A classified version of the US report into the shooting of Italian agent Nicola Calipari , killed escorting the freed Italian journalist Giuliana Sgrena to safety , last night revealed the true strength of the insur gency , writes Gary Younge . 
A computer error enabled readers to remove blacked out parts of the document by simply cutting and pasting . 
Confidential elements of the report revealed that , `` from 1 November 2004 to 12 March 2005 there were a total of 3,306 attacks in the Baghdad area . 
Of these , 2,400 were directed against Coalition Forces '' . 
