Just how sharply have the estimates changed ? 
US scientists issued a figure of 35,000-60 ,000 barrels -LRB- 1.5-2 .5 million gallons -RRB- per day on 15 June . 
The figure was accepted by US Energy Secretary Steven Chu as `` a significant step forward in our effort to put a number on the oil '' . 
By contrast , an estimate announced by US officials on 26 April put the flow at just 1,000 barrels per day . 
That figure was later revised to 5,000 barrels . 
Then it was 12,000-19 ,000 , then 20,000-40 ,000 . 
Why does the flow rate keep rising ? 
Normally the flow from a well is measured on a rig but the flow meters on the Deepwater Horizon were destroyed along with the rig in the explosion . 
The 15 June estimate is based partially on data gathered from pressure meters placed on the sea-bed on BP 's containment cap , which is collecting some of the oil . 
Another method scientists have used to measure the flow is to combine data from satellite photos of the slick on the sea surface with estimates of the oil 's thickness . 
But the reliability of this approach depends partly on how much oil has reached the surface , says Geoffrey Maitland , professor of energy engineering at Imperial College , London . 
Experts in fluid mechanics have been tracking particles coming out of the broken riser pipe and measuring their velocity . 
They have been refining their models of the flow based on the levels of oil , gas and solid particles coming from the well . 
Other estimates are based on video from the downhole of the well . 
A team from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in the US is also using acoustic techniques to measure flow rates . 
How much oil is being collected by BP ? 
BP says the containment cap -LRB- the lower marine riser package , or LMRP -RRB- it placed on the well 's damaged blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- on 3 June is collecting about 15,000 barrels a day , piping it up to a ship on the surface . 
Even if the amount of oil escaping is the low-end figure of 35,000 barrels , that leaves 20,000 leaking into the sea daily . 
The British company was due , as of mid-June , to start up a second containment system -LRB- SCS -RRB- that would increase collection to 20,000-28 ,000 barrels a day . 
The SCS is meant to take oil and gas from the BOP 's choke line through a separate riser pipe to another vessel on the surface , where the fuels will be burnt off . 
The company plans to be able to handle 80,000 barrels of escaped oil per day by mid-July . 
BP `` under-estimated the flow rate '' and `` over-estimated their ability to fight against that flow rate '' , says Ian MacDonald , professor of oceanography at Florida State University . 
He told the BBC : `` This was perhaps a fatal miscalculation ... with the result that this crisis has continued much longer , with much greater release of oil than would have been necessary had they -LRB- BP -RRB- made much more accurate flow rates at the very start . '' 
How accurate are the latest measurements ? 
It is very difficult to say because the models are constantly being revised and combined with observation . 
The main plume of oil is being treated with dispersants and surfactants , wetting agents which lower the surface tension of the oil so it can mix with the water . 
These make an emulsion which brings the oil more quickly to the surface , where it can be scooped up by collection vessels . 
There are concerns that some of the oil is forming separate , smaller plumes below the surface , Professor Maitland says . 
This may make it more difficult to estimate the total size of the spill . 
Not all the oil has surfaced yet , but it will eventually , because oil is lighter than water . 
The uncertainty in measuring the total size of the spill is harming BP , Professor Maitland warns . 
`` It depletes confidence that BP have complete control of what is going on and their ability to collect the oil or cap it eventually . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
