Obama vows to ` make BP pay ' for oil spill damage President Obama : `` We will make BP pay for the damage their company has caused '' President Barack Obama has vowed to `` make BP pay '' for damage caused by the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , in his first national address from the Oval Office . 
Mr Obama said he would meet company executives later and tell them that they must set up a fund to compensate those affected by the spill . 
He described the spill as an assault on the shores and citizens of the US that tested the limits of human technology . 
And he said it demonstrated the need to end the US `` addiction '' to fossil fuels . 
Hours after the government sharply increased its estimate of how much oil was flowing into the Gulf from the broken well , Mr Obama warned that the risks of another such incident would continue to rise because `` we 're running out of places to drill on land and in shallow water '' . 
He called on the Senate to pass an energy bill that has already cleared the House of Representatives . 
Presidents use the Oval Office for what they regard as vital national issues . 
The speech comes as opinion polls suggest a majority of Americans disapprove of how Mr Obama has handled the crisis - the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
In his speech , Mr Obama likened the spill to an `` epidemic '' and reiterated that BP would be made to pay for the damage . 
I say we ca n't afford not to change how we produce and use energy - because the long-term costs to our economy , our national security , and our environment are far greater '' `` We will make BP pay for the damage their company has caused , '' Mr Obama promised . 
He said he would meet BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg later on Wednesday and `` inform him that he is to set aside whatever resources are required to compensate the workers and business owners who have been harmed as a result of his company 's recklessness '' . 
He added : `` We will fight this spill with everything we 've got for as long it takes . '' 
In response to the speech , BP said in a statement that it shared Mr Obama 's goal of cleaning up the oil and helping the people affected by the spill . 
The firm said it was looking forward to Wednesday 's meeting `` for a constructive discussion about how best to achieve these mutual goals '' . 
Mr Obama also used the speech to renew calls for the US to embark on a future of clean energy . 
Paul Adams BBC News , Washington When the president speaks from the Oval Office , it is serious , and it is personal . 
This was Barack Obama attempting to show that he is now in charge of dealing with the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
He pledged that BP would pay for the damage ; that the Gulf Coast would be restored ; that an offshore drilling moratorium would be kept in place while lessons were learned ; and that the body charged with regulating the oil industry would be reformed . 
The president did not stop there . 
He spoke in lofty terms about moving away from fossil fuels , embracing a clean energy future and shaping the country 's destiny . 
But most Americans just want the leak to stop and that , two months after it began , remains a distant prospect . 
`` I say we ca n't afford not to change how we produce and use energy - because the long-term costs to our economy , our national security , and our environment are far greater , '' he said . 
But he gave few details and made no pledges about specific legislation , instead promising to look at ideas from Republicans and Democrats on the issue . 
He also announced that the national commission he set up to investigate the causes of the oil spill would be headed by Ray Mabus , a former governor of Mississippi . 
With this speech , the president has made a lofty appeal to American idealism , analysts say , but that appeal will not be universally welcomed at a time when Americans are mostly worried about the more pressing need simply to stop the leak . 
The Republicans were quick to criticise the address , with party chairman Michael Steele accusing Mr Obama of exploiting the crisis for his own political gain . 
Oil has been spewing into the Gulf of Mexico since a drilling rig leased by BP exploded on 20 April . 
Mark Mardell BBC News , Washington Obama promised to heal the Gulf and to find out what caused this disaster The explosion killed 11 workers , and the rig sank two days later . 
BP managed to place a cap over the leaking oil pipe earlier this month , and is now collecting much of the oil . 
But estimates of how much oil is gushing out of the well have again risen dramatically . 
A government panel of scientists now believes 35,000-60 ,000 barrels are leaking from the well each day , up from its estimate last week of 20,000-40 ,000 . 
BP 's initial estimates were 1,000-5 ,000 . 
US Congressmen have been fiercely critical of BP , accusing its executives of failing to follow proper procedures . 
Politicians have spoken of legal action - and even the possibility of criminal charges - against BP . 
As the rhetoric has become increasingly bitter , the firm 's share price has continued to tumble , with billions of dollars being wiped off its value . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
