Plugging the Gulf oil spill : ` top kill ' ` Top kill ' is BP 's attempt to shut off the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico - the first five hours as it happened Oil from the Deepwater Horizon well approaching the coast of Louisiana . 
Photograph : Liz Condo\/AP 2pm : Here we go : BP has announced it has started its procedure known as `` top kill '' its latest attempt to shut off the thousands of barrels of oil daily gushing from the ruins of the Deepwater Horizon 's subsea well . 
All the action is taking place deep on the sea floor of the Gulf of Mexico and the good news is that we may get to see it all happen in real time , after BP reversed its ealier plans to shut off the live video feed from the sea floor while the procedure was taking place . 
What we 'll actually get to see is another matter . 
But stay tuned here for updates and news as it happens . 
BP was given the go-ahead earlier today by US government officials , and the Coast Guard 's area commander posted this statement : Federal On-Scene Coordinator Rear Admiral Mary Landry and the Unified Area Command , acting on the validation of government scientists and in consultation with the National Incident Commander Admiral Thad Allen , have given approval to proceed with the top kill operation today to stop the flow of oil from the MC252 well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The procedure is intended to stem the flow of oil and gas and ultimately kill the well by injecting heavy drilling fluids through the blow out preventer on the seabed , down into the well . 
2.15 pm : So how will `` top kill '' work , and why does it sound like a new TV series starring Jeremy Clarkson testing firearms ? 
Here 's my clever colleague Ian Sample from earlier today : The process works by forcing `` heavy mud '' into the well to overcome the rising oil and shut down the flow . 
If the mud does the job , engineers will follow up by pumping concrete into the well to plug the leak . 
BP has several boats in the region holding a total of 50,000 barrels of heavy mud , far more than the company believes it will need . 
Heavy mud is made by mixing a natural mineral called barite with water and sometimes polymers to thicken the mixture . 
To kill the well , the heavy mud is pumped from one of the surface vessels to BP 's offshore platform that floats above the well . 
From here , it is channelled down a drill pipe into two narrower hoses , which pass into a manifold on the seafloor . 
The manifold controls the flow of mud through two more hoses into the `` blowout preventer '' unit that sits on top of the well on the sea floor . 
2.33 pm : Something is stirring 5,000 feet below the sea . 
BP 's live video floor from the sea-bed has sprung to life , showing many different views of the machinery around the well-head -LRB- I 'm guessing , it may be all in a swimming pool in Houston of course -RRB- . 
If you want to follow it live on the web then the link is here , with the catchy title of `` Live video link from the ROV monitoring the damaged riser '' . 
But be warned : it 's very slow and jerky , and if your browser is anything like mine , then it will slow your ` puter down to a 1995-era PC . 
Throughout the extended top kill procedure which may take up to two days to complete - very significant changes in the appearance of the flows at the seabed may be expected . 
These will not provide a reliable indicator of the overall progress , or success or failure , of the top kill operation as a whole . 
BP will report on the progress of the operation as appropriate and on its outcome when complete . 
In other words , do n't be alarmed , BP 's got everything ... well , just do n't be alarmed . 
No word about what happens if sentient giant squid appear and launch their scheme for world domination although that may be the plot for `` Top Kill : The Movie '' . 
3.04 pm : CNN are speaking to an oil expert named Eric Smith from Tulane University 's energy institute , and he thinks everyone is being too pessimistic about top kill 's chances of success . 
He reckons it has a 70 % chance of success , based on the fact that the technique has been used multiple times in the past . 
Asked why if it 's such a good idea then why did n't BP try it earlier instead of waiting 37 days , Smith said that engineers have a `` mindset '' whereby they try all the safe options first . 
3.15 pm : Oh and here 's some not-good news from the Christian Science Monitor -LRB- despite the name it 's a very reputable publication in the US , for those of you who are n't familiar with it -RRB- : There is a possibility that the top-kill could backfire , breaking the flow of oil wide open from where it 's currently restricted as it moves through a the crumpled `` riser '' pipe left lying on the Gulf floor after the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank on April 22 . 
3.17 pm : So it has come to this Democratic Senator Bill Nelson on cable news right now : `` If this thing does n't work then the President has got to turn this over to the US military . '' 
That leaves CNN 's idiot anchor to start speculating about using the US navy 's nuclear submarines . 
And they are meant to do what , exactly ? 
3.28 pm : Wow , CNN anchor Rick Sanchez is asking a retired admiral some very silly questions , such as why ca n't we use our nuclear submarines ? 
-LRB- Because they could n't do anything , the admiral says gently . -RRB- 
But then Sanchez goes one step further in demanding to know why the US military are n't being used in the Gulf right now : We see our guys over there solving the problems of the Iraqis ... and now it 's our country that 's in need , why ca n't we use those boots on the ground to solve our problems in our country ? 
Who needs Fox News when CNN has comedy gold like that ? 
3.40 pm : The White House has announced that President Obama is to cut short a visit to Chicago on Friday to make another trip to the Gulf of Mexico and visit the site of the spill . 
More from Florida 's Senator Bill Nelson , who wants the US government to take over running the whole operation and put the military in charge : `` The military has an apparatus , the organization by which it can bring together the civilian agencies of government and to get this thing done . '' 
Nelson 's comments reflect growing frustration among lawmakers in Congress even in the president 's own party that the administration has not done enough to stop the spill and quell the damage . 
4pm : So what is actually going down there ? 
Looking at the BP live feed , most of the shots are of the blow out preventer 's valves , in particular the so-called `` kill valve '' and choke valve . 
In normal operations the value would have a tube or line attached to the oil rig at the surface , but of course since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded last month they are n't . 
According to experts being interviewed on cable news , lines have been added to the valves - and in some shots tubes can been seen with the markings `` kill '' and `` BOP '' -LRB- for blow out preventer -RRB- and arrows . 
These are presumably now pumping heavy mud into the valves right now . 
How we will know if the top kill is working ? 
The oil leak at the riser at the top of the damaged blow out preventer will start to change color once the mud has been pumped down to a sufficient depth , from its current dark gray or black to a light gray , signifying that mud and not oil is leaking out . 
4.30 pm : So it 's all about the state of the blow out preventer . 
It has been damaged and will have to cope with enormous pressure : 50,000 pounds of heavy drilling mud pumped at high velocity . 
So ... how are those relief wells coming along ? 
5pm : Bobby Jindal , the governor of Louisiana , holds a press conference but because of his habit of speaking at such a rapid pace that youcanbarelyunderstandhim it 's hard to tell what he wants , other than more resources , or as Bobby calls it , `` moreresources '' , or even `` moresources '' . 
More seriously , Jindal says that more than 100 miles of Louisiana coast have now been affected by the oil spill . 
5.30 pm : The Centre for American Progress 's Wonk Room blog has a good piece on what the federal government should be doing as of now : But if government has little choice but to keep the perpetrator on the job at the immediate crime scene , it does have a choice when it comes to operations beyond the urgent task of quelling the erupting well . 
In addition to the efforts to stop the leaks , BP now controls claims processing , environmental contractors on land and sea , volunteer assistance , access to the disaster site , and data collection . 
Federal and state governments in the gulf must take greater charge of containing the ecological impacts and coordinating the response , as the President has full authority to do . 
6.00 pm : Here 's a video animation from the Deepwater Horizon response team that should make what 's happening today even clearer . 
It 's silent so do not adjust your laptop . 
6.37 pm : Tony Hayward , the chief executive of BP , steps up to the camera to make a statement . 
Everyone is working very hard , he says , and then remarks that he 's sure everyone is watching the video feed . 
`` I 'm sure it 's not really an indication of what 's going on ... we will be continuing for another 24 hours , and it will be another 24 hours before we know if it 's successful . '' 
And with that he walks off camera . 
7pm : Latest opinion poll shows that Obama and the administration is getting heat , along with BP , for the response to the Gulf oil spill . 
From USA Today : The response to the disaster by energy giant BP , President Obama and the federal government all get terrible grades from Americans in a USA TODAY\/Gallup Poll . 
Nearly three-fourths of those surveyed Monday and Tuesday say BP is doing a `` poor '' or `` very poor '' job in handling the calamity . 
Six of 10 say that of the federal government . 
And a 53 % majority give Obama a poor rating . 
Good news , however : there does appear to be a shift in public sentiment towards future oil exploration . 
Now , 53 % of Americans say protection of the environment should be given priority , `` even at the risk of limiting energy supplies '' , which is a turnaround from previous surveys . 
7.15 pm : So , five hours into `` top kill '' and we 're still waiting to hear what the outcome is going to be with BP saying it may be another 24 hours before the success or failure is known . 
There 's a lot riding on this , obvious . 
Public anger at the response and clean-up is building , and if this fails then the White House will be expected to do something more dramatic to take charge of the clean-up , at the very least . 
You might think things ca n't get any worse , although documents revealed at a congressional hearing earlier today suggest that the company may have low-balled its earliest estimates of the size of the oil leak , saying one thing in public while contemporary internal documents showed much higher estimates : In today 's natural resources hearing on the BP disaster , -LRB- congressman -RRB- Ed Markey brought out proof that BP knew it was lying about the flow of oil from its disaster . 
He brought two BP documents showing that even when their Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles was giving low-ball estimates of 1,000 BBL\/day , BP 's own internal documents showed that their best guess was 5,000 . 
Presumably BP would be very , very happy if the US government took charge . 
Asked directly about the operation 's progress so far , Suttles replied : `` It 's too hard to say we 've all been here a long time and ridden the roller-coaster , and we just need to wait 24 hours and see . '' 
He said that so far 7,000 barrels of mud had been pumped into the valves of the blow out protector through its choke line and kill line , and that was `` proceeding as expected today '' , and that no new leaks had appeared as a result of the top kill operation . 
Pumping would continue , followed an evaluation and ultimately cement would be pumped in to seal the well . 
`` We expect these activities to be completed in the next 24 hours , '' Suttles said . 
Asked what would happen if the top kill failed , Suttles said BP had other plans , including placing a new blow out preventer on top of the existing failed blow out preventer , while drilling of a relief well would continue in any case . 
Challenged as to why BP had n't tried the top kill method earlier , Suttles said : `` We did n't want to take any action to make it worse , '' and that considerable time and effort was required to gather the data to carry out the top kill . 
Back on shore there are signs that BP 's troubles wo n't end even if the top kill is a success . 
The Associated Press reports : Dozens of witness statements obtained by The Associated Press show a combination of equipment failure and a deference to the chain of command impeded the system that should have stopped the gusher before it became an environmental disaster . 
In a handwritten statement to the Coast Guard obtained by the AP , Transocean rig worker Truitt Crawford said : `` I overheard upper management talking saying that BP was taking shortcuts by displacing the well with saltwater instead of mud without sealing the well with cement plugs , this is why it blew out . '' 
At a Coast Guard hearing in New Orleans , Doug Brown , chief rig mechanic aboard the platform , testified that the trouble began at a meeting hours before the blowout , with a `` skirmish '' between a BP official and rig workers who did not want to replace heavy drilling fluid in the well with saltwater . 
The switch presumably would have allowed the company to remove the fluid and use it for another project , but the seawater would have provided less weight to counteract the surging pressure from the ocean depths . 
Brown said the BP official , whom he identified only as the `` company man , '' overruled the drillers , declaring , `` This is how it 's going to be . '' 
Brown said the top Transocean official on the rig grumbled , `` Well , I guess that 's what we have those pinchers for , '' which he took to be a reference to devices on the blowout preventer , the five-story piece of equipment that can slam a well shut in an emergency . 
