BP attempts to plug Gulf of Mexico oil leak with mud in ` top kill ' technique Company awaits test results before trying to choke off Deepwater Horizon leak by force-feeding it mud and cement Live video of BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The latest effort to stem the leak comes as two congressman said warning signs were identitifed before the explosion last month that brought down the company 's Deepwater Horizon oil rig . 
The company is awaiting the results of diagnostic tests , which will indicate whether it can later today begin the top kill procedure of choking off the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico by force-feeding it heavy drilling mud and cement . 
The process has never been tried so deep underwater before and if it fails , it could make the leak worse . 
It comes as politicians and others are losing patience with the company over its several failed attempts to stop the leak that started more than a month ago after an offshore drilling rig exploded . 
About 7m gallons of crude have spilled into the sea since , fouling Louisiana 's marshes and coating birds and other wildlife . 
`` We want what everybody wants to stop the flow at the source as quickly as possible , '' said BP spokesman John Curry . 
`` We understand the frustration and we just want to bring this to closure . '' 
BP chief executive officer , Tony Hayward , pegged its chances of success at 60 % to 70 % . 
And the company said those who want to can watch the procedure online . 
Live video of the leak has been available for the past few days , and BP said that it will continue throughout the procedure . 
The attempt comes as more hearings this week focused on what led to the explosion on 20 April aboard the Deepwater Horizon that killed 11 workers and triggered the catastrophe . 
Senior managers from Transocean , which owned the rig , were complaining that day that BP was `` taking shortcuts '' by replacing heavy drilling fluid with seawater in the well , according to sworn testimony by Truitt Crawford , a rig roustabout . 
BP was leasing the rig and is responsible for stopping the leak and the cleanup . 
The seawater was being used in preparation for dropping a final blob of cement into the well as a temporary plug for the pipe . 
Workers had finished pumping the cement into the exploratory well to bolster and seal it against leaks until a later production phase . 
Crawford said seawater would provide less weight to contain surging pressure from the ocean depths . 
His testimony was expected to be part of a hearing in New Orleans . 
A BP spokesman declined to comment on what he said . 
Dozens of worker statements obtained by The Associated Press describe the hours and minutes before the sudden , violent blowout and many said they were concerned about the pressure coming from below . 
And tests within an hour of the blast indicated the pressure was building , according to a congressional memo . 
The buildup was an `` indicator of a very large abnormality , '' in the well , BP 's investigator said . 
The rig team was `` satisfied '' that another test was successful and resumed adding the seawater , said the memo by Henry Waxman and Bart Stupak to members of the committee on energy and commerce , which is investigating what went wrong . 
There were other warning signs of problems included an unexpected loss of fluid from a pipe known as a `` riser '' five hours before the explosion , which could have indicated a leak in the blowout preventer , the memo said . 
The blowout preventer is designed to shut down the well in case of an emergency . 
BP has cited its failure as a contributor to the blast . 
If all goes as planned , engineers will pump fluid twice as dense as water from two barges into two 3-inch-wide lines that will feed it into the blowout preventer . 
Crews plan to pump it in at a rate of 1,680 to 2,100 gallons per minute in an attempt counteract the upward pressure of oil gushing to the surface . 
They stockpiled some 50,000 barrels of the heavy mud , a manufactured substance that resembles clay . 
Bob Bea , an engineering professor at the University of California at Berkeley , said the procedure carries a high risk of failure because of the velocity at which the oil may be spewing . 
`` I certainly pray that it works , because if it does n't there 's this long waiting time '' before BP can dig relief wells that would cut off the flow , Bea told The Associated Press . 
Wells said it could take up to two days to determine whether the top kill is working . 
