Fighting in Libya started with anti-government demonstrations in February and escalated into a nationwide civil war . 
For months , rebel fighters -- who have controlled the eastern city of Benghazi and other areas -- have been trying to move closer toward Tripoli , in the west . 
They are seeking the ouster of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , who has ruled Libya for 42 years . 
International leaders have accused Gadhafi 's regime of committing human rights violations and killing civilians . 
Libyan officials have repeatedly accused NATO of killing civilians in airstrikes . 
Here are some key points CNN has reported in the conflict . 
Three days after the fall of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak , calls go out on Facebook for peaceful demonstrations in Libya against leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
The Libyan leader , who has ruled over the country for more than four decades , voiced support for Mubarak during the Egyptian crisis . 
About 200 demonstrators protesting the arrest of a human activist take to the streets in the coastal city of Benghazi , witnesses say . 
Several of them are arrested amid confrontations with police . 
A highly placed source close to the Libyan government tells CNN , `` There is nothing serious here . 
These are just young people fighting each other . '' 
Libyan state television shows images of men chanting pro-Gadhafi slogans , waving flags and singing around the Libyan leader 's limousine as it creeps through Tripoli . 
In Benghazi , human rights groups and protesters claim they 're under attack by pro-government security forces . 
Among the tens of thousands of protesters who take to the streets , at least 20 people are killed and 200 are wounded , according to medical sources . 
Protests continue to turn violent , however the death and injury toll is unclear . 
In Benghazi , witnesses report bloody clashes with soldiers firing tear gas and bullets . 
Witnesses say protests have erupted in cities across the country . 
Human Rights Watch reports that 84 people have been killed in Libyan demonstrations since February 15 . 
Violence surges in Benghazi where a witness says protesters have taken control of the city and much of Tripoli . 
Gadhafi 's son Saif al-Islam Gadhafi appears on state television to warn demonstrators that the country could fall into civil war if their protests do not subside . 
The Libyan newspaper Quryna reports that the country 's justice minister has resigned to protest what he calls a `` bloody situation and use of excessive force '' by security forces against protesters . 
