Conrad Murray ` responsible ' for Michael Jackson 's death Dr Steven Shafer : '' ` Yes ' is not what a doctor says to a patient request that is not in their best interest . '' 
Michael Jackson 's doctor made 17 flagrant violations when administering propofol to the star , an expert on the potent anesthetic has told the court . 
Dr Steven Shafer said the drug should never be used to treat insomnia and Dr Conrad Murray 's negligence was directly responsible for Jackson 's death . 
The expert called Dr Murray `` clueless '' about the drug that contributed to the 50-year-old singer 's June 2009 death . 
Dr Murray denies involuntary manslaughter of the star . 
Dr Shafer , who helped write the guidance on every bottle of propofol , told the Los Angeles court that Dr Murray did not know how to respond when the star stopped breathing . 
He said of Dr Murray 's delay in calling 911 : `` I almost do n't know what to say . 
That is so completely and utterly inexcusable . '' 
The Columbia University professor said propofol should never be taken as a sleeping aid . 
`` We are in pharmacological never-never land here , something that was done to Michael Jackson and no one else in history to my knowledge , '' he told the jury . 
The expert in anaesthesiology also said Dr Murray had acted like the pop star 's obedient `` employee '' and not his doctor , who should have refused the star 's requests for propofol . 
Dr Conrad Murray -LRB- right -RRB- denies involuntary manslaughter of the pop star `` Saying ` yes ' is not what doctors do , '' said Dr Shafer . 
`` A competent doctor would know you do not do this . '' 
Dr Shafer testified that Dr Murray should have taken minute-by-minute notes of Jackson 's condition while he was under the influence of propofol . 
He said Dr Murray 's lack of record keeping had been a denial of Jackson 's rights . 
Dr Shafer also criticised Dr Murray for talking on the phone in the hours before Jackson 's death . 
The anaesthesiology expert said doctors should never multi-task while monitoring a sedated patient . 
`` A patient who is about to die does not look all that different from a patient who is OK , '' he said . 
Dr Shafer is expected to be the prosecution 's final witness , and his testimony will continue on Thursday . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
