He 's a friend of Fidel Castro , a fierce critic of the war in Iraq , and wants to spread revolutionary fervor throughout South America . 
Venezuela 's president , Hugo Ch vez , has long been a thorn in the side of the US - a fact highlighted this week when televangelist Pat Robertson called for his assassination . 
Richard Gott on a man at war with the White House Hugo Chvez , the president of Venezuela , is a genial fellow with a good sense of humor and a steely political purpose . 
As a former military officer , he is accustomed to the language of battle and he thrives under attack . 
He will laugh off this week 's suggestion by Pat Robertson , the US televangelist , that he should be assassinated , but he will also seize on it to ratchet up the verbal conflict with the United States that has lasted throughout his presidency . 
Chvez , now 51 , is the same age as Tony Blair , and after nearly seven years as president he has been in power for almost as long . 
But there the similarities end . 
Chvez is a man of the left and , like most Latin Americans with a sense of history , he is distrustful of the United States . 
Free elections in Latin America have often thrown up radical governments that Washington would like to see overthrown , and the Chvez government is no exception to this rule . 
Chvez is a genuinely revolutionary figure , one of those larger-than-life characters who surface regularly in the history of Latin America - and achieve power perhaps twice in a hundred years . 
He wants to change the history of the continent . 
His close friend and role model is Fidel Castro , Cuba 's long-serving leader . 
The two men meet regularly , talk constantly on the telephone , and have formed a close political and military alliance . 
Venezuela has deployed more than 20,000 Cuban doctors in its shanty-towns , and Cuba is the grateful recipient of cheap Venezuelan oil , replacing the subsidised oil it once used to receive from the Soviet Union . 
This , in the eyes of the US government , would itself be a heinous crime that would put Chvez at the top of its list for removal . 
The US has been at war with Cuba for nearly half a century , mostly conducted by economic means , and it only abandoned plans for Castro 's direct overthrow after subscribing to a tacit agreement not to do so with the Soviet Union after the missile crisis of 1962 . 
The Americans would have dealt with Chvez long ago had they not been faced by two crucial obstacles . 
First , they have been notably preoccupied in recent years in other parts of the world , and have hardly had the time , the personnel , or the attention span to deal with the charismatic colonel . 
Second , Venezuela is one of the principal suppliers of oil to the US market -LRB- literally so in that 13,000 US petrol stations are owned by Citgo , an extension of Venezuela 's state oil company -RRB- . 
Any hasty attempt to overthrow the Venezuelan government would undoubtedly threaten this oil lifeline , and Chvez himself has long warned that his assassination would close down the pumps . 
With his popularity topping 70 % in the polls , he would be a difficult figure to dislodge . 
Chvez comes from the provinces of Venezuela , from the vast southern cattle lands of the Llanos that stretch down to the Apure and Orinoco river system . 
Of black and Indian ancestry , his parents were local schoolteachers , and he has inherited their didactic skills . 
His talents first came to the fore when he joined the army and became a popular lecturer at the war college in Caracas . 
He is a brilliant communicator , speaking for hours on television in a folksy manner that captivates his admirers and irritates his opponents . 
He never stops talking and he never stops working . 
He has time for everyone and never forgets a face . 
For several years he traveled incessantly around the country , to keep an eye on what was going on . 
This was not mere electioneering , for he would talk for hours to those who had hardly a vote among them . 
He exhausts his cadres , his secretaries and his ministers . 
I have traveled with him and them into the deepest corners of the country , and then , after a 16-hour day , he would call the grey-faced cabinet together for an impromptu meeting to analyze what they had discovered and what measures they should take . 
There was always a touch of the 19th century about this frenetic activity , as though the president were still on horseback , and Castro is known to have warned Chvez not to absorb himself unduly in the minutiae of administration . 
`` You are the president of Venezuela , '' he is reported to have said , `` not the mayor of Caracas . '' 
Chvez has taken the advice to heart , and has become less the populist folk hero and more the impressive statesman . 
Concern about possible assassination has long predated Robertson 's outburst , and for the past two years Chvez has cut down his travels inside the country and been accompanied everywhere by fearsome-looking guards . 
Abroad , however , he is a frequent visitor to the capitals of Latin America , and he is widely perceived as the leader of the group of left-leaning presidents recently elected in Brazil , Argentina , and Uruguay , as well as the inspiration of the radicalised indigenous movements now clamouring at the gates of power in Bolivia and Ecuador . 
There is another touch of the 19th century here , for Chvez is a follower and promoter of the ideas and career of Simn Bolvar , the Venezuelan leader who brought the philosophy of the European Enlightenment and the French Revolution to Latin America , and liberated much of the continent from Spanish rule . 
Chvez has labeled his movement the `` Bolivarian Revolution '' , and he hopes that his political ideas will spread throughout the continent . 
This in itself would be alarming enough to the United States , had it the time to pay proper attention . 
Equally worrying for the Americans is the time Chvez has devoted to the Middle East , successfully courting the governments that belong to Opec , the oil producers ' organization , some of whom have been labeled by the Americans as `` the axis of evil '' . 
Today 's high oil price has much to do with increased demand from China and India , and from the Iraq war , but the spadework that has given Opec fresh credibility was put in by Chvez . 
Soon he will be helping to show the new Iranian president , using the Venezuelan example , how to increase the revenues of a state-owned oil company and channel them into programs to help the poor . 
Chvez is widely popular today , but for much of his presidency he has been a contested , even a hated figure , arousing widespread discontent within Venezuela 's traditional white elite . 
Yet although his rhetoric is revolutionary , his reforms have been moderate and social democratic . 
He criticises the policies of `` savage neo-liberalism '' that have done so much harm to the poorer peoples of Venezuela and Latin America in the past 20 years , yet the private sector is still alive and well . 
His land reform is aimed chiefly at unproductive land and provides for compensation . 
His most obvious achievement , which should not have been controversial , has been to channel increased oil revenues into a fresh range of social projects that bring health and education into neglected shanty-towns . 
The hatred that he arouses in the old opposition parties , which have seen their membership and influence dwindle , lies more in ideology and racial antipathy than in material loss . 
Some opponents dislike his friendship with Castro , his verbal hostility to the United States , and his criticisms of the Catholic church , and some people still have a residual hostility to the fact that he staged an unsuccessful military coup in 1992 when a young colonel in the parachute regiment . 
Many Latin Americans still find it difficult to come to terms with the idea of a progressive military man . 
But mostly they are alarmed by the way in which he has enfranchised the country 's vast underclass , interrupting the cosy , US-influenced lifestyle of the white middle class with visions of a frightening world that lives beyond their apartheid-gated communities . 
Over the past few years this anxious opposition has made several attempts to get rid of Chvez , with the tacit encouragement of Washington . 
They organised a coup in April 2002 that rebounded against them two days later when the kidnapped Chvez was returned to power by an alliance of the army and the people . 
They tried an economic coup by closing down the oil refineries , and this too was a failure . 
Last year 's recall-referendum , designed to lead to a defeat for Chvez , was an overwhelming victory for him . 
The local opposition , and by extension the United States , have shot their final bolt . 
There is nothing left in the locker , except of course assassination . 
The fingers of mad preachers are usually far from the button , but the untimely words of Pat Robertson , easily discounted in Washington and airily dismissed by the state department as `` inappropriate '' , might yet wake an echo among zealots in Venezuela . 
A similar call was made last year by a former Venezuelan president . 
Assassinations may be easy to plan , and not difficult to accomplish . 
But their legacy is incalculable . 
The radical leader of neighbouring Colombia , Jorge Gaitn , was assassinated more than 50 years ago , in 1948 . 
In terms of civil war and violence , the Colombians have been paying the price ever since . 
No one would wish that fate on Venezuela . 
Richard Gott is the author of Hugo Chvez and the Bolivarian Revolution , published this month by Verso , price # 9.99 . 
