ARBIL , Iraq | Mon Sep 5 , 2011 6:20 am EDT ARBIL , Iraq -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Shan Abdullah Ahmed travels to Arbil in northern Iraq at least once a month so her teenage daughter can shop for the latest catwalk fashions and stroll freely through an amusement park without fear of bombs . 
Arbil lies in the heart of the semi-autonomous Kurdish area , a safe haven for Iraqis seeking fun and a break from the almost daily attacks that still hit most of the country more than eight years after the U.S.-led invasion . 
The province 's capital city , also called Arbil , boasts a top designer-label shopping experience in one of its many malls and is home to the Citadel , one of the oldest continuously inhabited settlements in the world . 
`` It 's like an independent Iraq , '' said Ahmed , who lives in Tikrit , the home town of former dictator Saddam Hussein who was toppled by the 2003 invasion . 
`` Other parts of Iraq have no electricity , no water . 
Just bombs , '' she added , while sitting with her husband and daughter at the foot of the Citadel , enjoying a cool spray from one of the many lit-up fountains dotted around the area . 
Her 14-year-old daughter , Rasan , agrees . 
`` It 's much better here . 
We are more free , we can walk , go anywhere . 
In Tikrit , my day involves going from school to home , studying and then sleeping , '' she said . 
`` Here I like to shop and go to the amusement park . '' 
The Kurdish region has been virtually autonomous for 20 years and was little affected by the country 's most recent war . 
Foreign investment has been steady , allowing for the development of chic shopping malls , five-star hotels , fitness centres and even an indoor ice-skating rink . 
Over the 3-day Eid al-Fitr festival last week , 152,000 people visited the Kurdish region , of which 99,000 went to the province of Arbil , according to Mawlawi Jabbar , director general of tourism in Iraqi Kurdistan . 
Jabbar said 143,000 of the 152,000 were Iraqis from other parts of the country while 9,000 came from Iran or Turkey . 
`` The capacity of hotels and motels in Kurdistan is about 50,000 beds . 
Due to the heavy flow , we had an unprecedented number of visitors who were processed and accommodated in tourist camps set up in Shaqlawa , north of Arbil , and in Arbil itself , '' he said . 
BLEND OF OLD VERSUS NEW One of Arbil 's main appeals for war-weary Iraqis is security . 
The city last witnessed a bombing in May 2007 and is a far cry from the blast walls and checkpoints scattered around Iraq 's capital , Baghdad . 
Iraq is still building its police and army to battle a Sunni Islamist insurgency and Shi'ite militias as U.S. forces get ready to leave by end-December . 
The Kurdish zone also has peshmerga security forces . 
The mountainous borders of Kurdistan have recently been the target of air strikes from Turkey and shelling from Iran , both aimed at Kurdish guerrillas in the area fighting for a separate Kurdish state . 
But Arbil , a few hours drive away from the border , has not been affected by the assaults . 
Arbil 's blend of old meets new , from its mosques to a fun park with a roller coaster and a carousel , appeal to both the young and the old . 
`` We came here for pleasure , '' said Shaheen Ahmed Khalid , an assistant medic from Kirkuk who brought his family to Arbil to celebrate Eid . 
`` Arbil is safer and it 's better for tourism . 
There 's more to do . '' 
Some Iraqis said regional turmoil had also prompted them to change their travel plans to neighbouring countries . 
A wave of pro-democracy protests across parts of the Middle East and North Africa this year sparked a civil war in Libya and a violent crackdown by Syria 's government has killed 2,000 people , the United Nations says . 
`` Sometimes we go to Turkey and to Syria , but in Syria there is bad security , so we changed . 
Instead of going to Syria , we came here , '' said Aziz Abbas , a 50-year-old Higher Education ministry employee from Samarra who was visiting Arbil . 
Iraq itself has not been immune to protests . 
Demonstrators took to the streets earlier this year over jobs and poor services . 
Rallies in Sulaimaniya by protesters who said they were seeking an end to corruption and authoritarian rule were met by a big show of force by the Kurdistan Regional Government . 
Protests in Arbil were small . 
