July 15 : Freshly sorted blue crabs sit in a box in Hopedale , La. . 
Researchers wondering how badly the Gulf of Mexico will suffer from the oil spill are paying close attention to the blue crab . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- BARATARIA , La. -LRB- AP -RRB- -- To assess how heavy a blow the BP oil spill has dealt the Gulf of Mexico , researchers are closely watching a staple of the seafood industry and primary indicator of the ecosystem 's health : the blue crab . 
Weeks ago , before engineers pumped in mud and cement to plug the gusher , scientists began finding specks of oil in crab larvae plucked from waters across the Gulf coast . 
The government said last week that three-quarters of the spilled oil has been removed or naturally dissipated from the water . 
But the crab larvae discovery was an ominous sign that crude had already infiltrated the Gulf 's vast food web -- and could affect it for years to come . 
`` It would suggest the oil has reached a position where it can start moving up the food chain instead of just hanging in the water , '' said Bob Thomas , a biologist at Loyola University in New Orleans . 
`` Something likely will eat those oiled larvae ... and then that animal will be eaten by something bigger and so on . '' 
Tiny creatures might take in such low amounts of oil that they could survive , Thomas said . 
But those at the top of the chain , such as dolphins and tuna , could get fatal `` megadoses . '' 
Marine biologists routinely gather shellfish for study . 
Since the spill began , many of the crab larvae collected have had the distinctive orange oil droplets , said Harriet Perry , a biologist with the University of Southern Mississippi 's Gulf Coast Research Laboratory . 
`` In my 42 years of studying crabs I 've never seen this , '' Perry said . 
She would n't estimate how much of the crab larvae are contaminated overall , but said about 40 percent of the area they are known to inhabit has been affected by oil from the spill . 
Tulane University researchers are investigating whether the splotches also contain toxic chemical dispersants that were spread to break up the oil but have reached no conclusions , biologist Caz Taylor said . 
If large numbers of blue crab larvae are tainted , their population is virtually certain to take a hit over the next year and perhaps longer , scientists say . 
How large the die-off would be is unclear , Perry said . 
An estimated 207 million gallons of oil have spewed into the Gulf since an April 20 drilling rig explosion triggered the spill , and thousands of gallons of dispersant chemicals have been dumped . 
Scientists will be focusing on crabs because they 're a `` keystone species '' that play a crucial role in the food web as both predator and prey , Perry said . 
Richard Condrey , a Louisiana State University oceanographer , said the crabs are `` a living repository of information on the health of the environment . '' 
Named for the light-blue tint of their claws , the crabs have thick shells and 10 legs , allowing them to swim and scuttle across bottomlands . 
As adults , they live in the Gulf 's bays and estuaries amid marshes that offer protection and abundant food , including snails , tiny shellfish , plants and even smaller crabs . 
In turn , they provide sustenance for a variety of wildlife , from redfish to raccoons and whooping cranes . 
Adults could be harmed by direct contact with oil and from eating polluted food . 
But scientists are particularly worried about the vulnerable larvae . 
That 's because females do n't lay their eggs in sheltered places , but in areas where estuaries meet the open sea . 
Condrey discovered several years ago that some even deposit offspring on shoals miles offshore in the Gulf . 
The larvae grow as they drift with the currents back toward the estuaries for a month or longer . 
Many are eaten by predators , and only a handful of the 3 million or so eggs from a single female live to adulthood . 
But their survival could drop even lower if the larvae run into oil and dispersants . 
`` Crabs are very abundant . 
I do n't think we 're looking at extinction or anything close to it , '' said Taylor , one of the researchers who discovered the orange spots . 
Still , crabs and other estuary-dependent species such as shrimp and red snapper could feel the effects of remnants of the spill for years , Perry said . 
`` There could be some mortality , but how much is impossible to say at this point , '' said Vince Guillory , biologist manager with the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries . 
Perry , Taylor and Condrey will be among scientists monitoring crabs for negative effects such as population drop-offs and damage to reproductive capabilities and growth rates . 
Crabs are big business in the region . 
In Louisiana alone , some 33 million pounds are harvested annually , generating nearly $ 300 million in economic activity , Guillory said . 
But fishermen who can make a six-figure income off crabs in a good year now are now idled -- and worried about the future . 
`` If they 'd let us go out and fish today , we 'd probably catch crabs , '' said Glen Despaux , 37 , who sets his traps in Louisiana 's Barataria Bay . 
`` But what 's going to happen next year , if this water is polluted and it 's killing the eggs and the larvae ? 
I think it 's going to be a long-term problem . '' 
