' I lost my husband in the war but now I 've found a lifeline ' Jon Robins on a group that aims to get army widows back on their feet by giving vital information and support ` Looking back now I do n't know if I was really coping with my grief or not , ' recalls Samantha Roberts . 
` But at the time , I do n't believe you even think about whether you are coping or not . ' 
Samantha 's husband was the first soldier to die in action in the Iraq war and this time last year the 34-year-old was scarcely out of the press , as a result of a highly personal campaign to uncover the circumstances of her husband 's death . 
Steve , a 33-year-old sergeant from the 2nd Royal Tank Regiment , was shot in the stomach and chest by ` friendly fire ' in March 2003 as he was trying to calm a demonstration near Basra . 
Hours earlier he had been told to hand over his flak jacket to a soldier who was not equipped with one . 
Samantha was cast as the feisty widow from west Yorkshire who could bring down the Defense Secretary , Geoff Hoon , who appeared to be on the ropes following the furore over the death of government scientist Dr David Kelly . 
The ` showdown ' between grieving widow and minister , as the papers put it , took place a year ago this week . 
It was not until eight months after that low point that Samantha felt that she was coming to terms with Steve 's death . 
The occasion was when she met 30 other bereaved women at Amport House , the Armed Forces Chaplaincy Centre , near Andover in Hampshire . 
The chaplain talked about how grief affects people differently . 
` Up to that point I had never had anyone explain to me just what happens when you grieve , ' she says . 
` He talked for about 45 minutes and it shocked me when he described exactly how I felt . ' 
It was those few days that led her and the other women to set up a new group , the Army Widows Association , to provide a lifeline for the women who lose loved ones in the armed forces . 
The group aims to help widows get back on their feet by providing vital information on pension rights , accommodation entitlements and , most importantly , creating a network of women who share the same experience . 
Heather Saunders , another founding member of the group , was at the Amport House meeting . 
` Our husbands were taken from us ; they did n't choose to leave us , ' she says . 
` It is a shattering thing and what you want is support from other people who have been through it . ' 
Heather 's husband , Stephen , was defense attach at the British embassy in Athens when he was shot dead by two men on a motorbike as he drove to work . 
` People often come up and they sympathise , but how the hell do they know how I feel ? ' 
` They have n't a clue . ' 
The War Widows Association , a powerful political force , especially on pension rights , welcomes the new group . 
There are 47,000 war widows and 70 per cent are over 80 . 
Debbie Bowles , the group 's press officer , lost her husband in an aircraft crash 14 years ago over the North Sea . ' 
I remember going to church on a Sunday and thinking I ought to be sitting with the old ladies now I 'm a widow - but I was only 32 , ' she says . 
` You get a sense of understanding through knowing someone of your age who has been through it as well . ' 
Army widows often feel isolated . 
Geraldine McCool , a partner at the law firm McCool Patterson Hemsi , specialises in claims against the military . 
She represents more than 20 families of Iraqi servicemen , including Samantha Roberts , as well as the families of those killed in large-scale accidents , such as the 25 anti-terrorist experts who died when an RAF Chinook crashed in fog on the Mull of Kintyre in 1994 . 
` If you are living on base , you 're part of army life , ' she says . 
` If you lose your husband , then , in a way , you lose your wider family , which is the backing of the military community . ' 
The military can be very supportive to the bereaved if you embrace that life , she says , but it can also cut women adrift socially and in other ways . 
For example , the loss of a partner in the armed forces can mean the end of your subsidised home and perks such as Council Tax contributions , travel warrants , access to child care and creche or boarding school allowances . 
` Women have often sacrificed their careers to follow their husbands , ' Geraldine McCool points out . 
` For obvious reasons , it is extremely difficult to keep careers going on short-term deployments , particularly abroad . ' 
Unfortunately war widows ' pensions are not particularly generous -LRB- and end if you re-marry -RRB- . 
Samantha Roberts , who has no children , receives # 600 from her husband 's pension plus a war widow 's pension of # 90 . 
` That 's pretty insulting since Steve gave 15 years to the army and ultimately gave them his life , ' she says . 
She has always lived outside army quarters and been financially independent . 
Occasionally the Ministry of Defense acts with crass insensitivity . 
Take the case of Lianne Seymour , whose husband Ian Seymour , a Royal Marine , died when a US helicopter crashed in Kuwait at the start of the Iraq conflict in 2003 . 
Three days later she was told that she and her three-year-old son had six months to vacate their MoD-owned home and that she would have to return nine days ' wages paid to her husband in error . 
Mrs Seymour later received a personal apology from Geoff Hoon . 
The women behind the new Army Widows Association hope that they can help the army develop a new sensitivity . 
They are particularly concerned about the lack of training for liaison officers appointed to assist the bereaved . 
One widow recalls how the delegated soldier arrived at her house to drive her to pick up her husband 's body from the airport . 
` It was the second worst day of my life , ' she recalls . 
` But he turned up , full of the joys of spring , and the first thing he did was hand me this joke he 'd just been emailed . 
It was in such bad taste and possibly the most inappropriate thing he could have done . ' 
Army liaison officers are often ` the nearest person at the time ' , reports Heather Saunders . 
` They 're reading their brief on `` How to be a counsellor '' on their way to see a widow for the first time , ' she adds . 
Most importantly , the women hope that the group will help others through the bureaucratic fight for information with the MoD that takes over many women 's lives . 
` The army shies away from dealing with widows because they seem to think any sign of admitting fault or showing compassion will mean everyone is going to be on their back and suing them for thousands of pounds , ' says Heather Saunders . 
You can contact the Army Widows Association at S4 , the Ministry of Defense 's Casualty Cell , on 01980 615959 . 
The War Widows Association can be contacted on on 08702411305 or see its website at www.warwidowsassociation.org.uk Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@observer.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : ' I lost my husband in the war but now I 've found a lifeline ' 00.32 GMT on Sunday 30 January 2005 
