It 's time to bin the past Fred Halliday , a leading expert on international affairs , says we are still infected by Cold War ills : an arrogant West , shabby dictators , naive protests Sunday 30 January 2005 01.25 GMT The thinkers and managers of world hegemony met amid the snow in Davos , Swizerland , last week while the anti-globalisation forces convened in the tropical summer of Porto Alegre , Brazil . 
As they assembled , the international system presented a much clearer picture than that through which the world had moved in the 14 years since the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War . 
In America we can see a President resolute in international bellicosity and a national consensus arrogantly indifferent to external concerns . 
We can also see the impact , within the US and internationally , of 9\/11 . 
The battle lines are drawn . 
Al-Qaeda does not have the capacity to destroy the West , but it does have the capacity to mobilise for years to come . 
In Ariel Sharon and George Bush it has found two stalwart recruiting sergeants . 
More important still has been the consolidated rise of China . 
After five centuries when the Atlantic was the strategic and economic center of the world , the focus has shifted to East Asia and the Pacific . 
This , not Iraq , is the dominant story of 2004 . 
Last year marked the end of the interregnum following the end of the Cold War , the third chapter in the great European civil war in which the two world wars marked the initial two chapters . 
Yet this apparent distance between the contemporary world and the Cold War is delusory and dangerously so . 
The intellectual challenge is how to characterise this condition . 
We have had some grand , if preposterous , theories : the New World Order , the New Middle Ages , the End of History , the Clash of Civilisations , now the War Against Terrorism . 
In an attempt to comprehend the contemporary international system , this article proposes another narrative : the Three Dustbins Theory . 
The Three Dustbins Theory rests on the claim that , despite the receding of the Cold War , we remain , in key respects , prisoners of its legacy and will , unless we face up to these questions , remain so . 
As with all unacknowledged influences from the past , these repositories of conflict and myth are all the more powerful because unacknowledged . 
Dustbin Number One contains the legacies of the Soviet and communist periods . 
Among its contents are : an array of uncontrolled and unmonitored nuclear materials ; a set of unresolved , sanguinary inter-ethnic problems inherited from the Soviet period - Bosnia , Kosovo , Transdniestr , Nagorno-Karabakh , Chechnya , Eritrea-Ethiopia - in all of which the costs of ethnic expulsion and fragmented government have provided a context for entrenched mafioso power ; and the consolidation , in nearly all of the former Soviet Union and much of former pro-Soviet Africa -LRB- as in the Horn of Africa and Mozambique -RRB- of corrupt elites , a transition not to democracy but to post-Marxist kleptocracy . 
Most significant of all of these is the political character of the two most important states to have undergone the communist experiment : the neo-authoritarian dictatorship of Vladimir Putin in Russia , and the politically immobile dictatorship of the communist leaders in China . 
No transition to democracy here and none likely , not least because these two groups of rulers play the coquette to Washington in the matter of their ` wars ' against Chechen and Sinkiang opponents . 
The Second Dustbin is that of the West , and the US in particular . 
One of the costs of winning the Cold War is that the West has failed to rethink its assumptions about the conduct of international relations . 
Instead , and above all with the Bush administration , we have seen the recycling , often by veterans of the confrontations with the Soviet Union in the 1970s , of policies that were as wrong then as they are now : the fabrication of threats , accompanied by dire warnings about how time ` is running out ' , about hostile states ; the repetition ad nauseam of platitudes about the role of force in international affairs that no first-year student could get away with ; a suspicion , if not disdain , for international institutions , notably the UN and international law ; a facile , historically short-sighted and grossly exaggerated set of claims about how many states conform to an acceptable model of democracy -LRB- the ` Free World ' of the 1950s and 1960s recycled -RRB- . 
Of the cruel , and intellectually bankrupt , certainties of neo-liberalism , which has undermined the social provision and regulation roles of the state across the world , there is no need to say more . 
Meanwhile , US neo-conservative family planning policy , by blocking the use of contraception and abortion , is in league with the patriarch of St Peter 's Square , condemning millions to avoidable death . 
However , the greatest , and least acknowledged , legacies of the Cold War on the Western side lie in two other domains . 
Here pervasive denial , compounded by self-righteous declamation , reign supreme . 
One such legacy concerns the origins of the terrorist threat itself : al-Qaeda and its like did not arise suddenly in 2001 , or from the subconscious of the Islamic or Arab minds , but from the Cold War , in particular the financing , training and arming of tens of thousands of jihadi militants by the US , Saudi Arabia and Pakistan for the war in Afghanistan in the 1980s . 
That war was to the early 21st century what the Spanish Civil War was to the mid-20th , the devils kitchen in which the criminal practices later unleashed on the world were first brewed . 
It is the greatest , if not the only , solecism of Bush 's anti-terrorist campaign that he is incapable , as is American public opinion as a whole , of recognizing how far the US helped to prepare this movement , as it did the Unita murderers in Angola , the Contras in Nicaragua , and , at one remove , Renamo in Mozambique . 
The other , now more evident than ever , legacy of Cold War on the Western side is both simple and all-pervasive : the mental attitude accompanying the exercise of power over other peoples , and the discussion of it , by Washington , one predominantly of arrogance , ignorance and instinctive resort to force . 
This mindset , often decked out with frothing claims about ` imperial burdens ' and ` grand strategy ' , was evident in the Cold War itself , not least in the grotesque continuation of a nuclear arms race over four decades , but also draws in the US , as it does in much of post-imperial Europe , on the unacknowledged cultural legacy of colonialism . 
The West has still not learned to treat the rest of the world on an equal footing , a point most graphically illustrated by the photographs from Abu Ghraib : it is , above all , not because the victims were Muslim , Arab , or even non-white , but because they were from a subordinate people that they were subjected with such levity and sadism to their tortures . 
It might be thought prudent to stop the argument there , with a denunciation of the powerful in East and West . 
But the unacknowledged legacy of the Cold War does not stop there , and is equally to be found among those protesting against globalisation and meeting in Porto Alegre . 
The Third Dustbin is that of the contemporary global protest movement , to a considerable degree a children 's crusade of intellectual demagogues , recycled 1960s bunkeristas with their fellow travellers in literary circles , dreamers and political manipulators , of the old and new lefts , whose claim to moral and analytic superiority too often masks a set of unexamined , and themselves often recycled , platitudes from the Cold War period and , indeed , from the ideology of the communist world . 
It is as if , having appeared to die in Moscow in 1991 , the anti-capitalist world movement leapt from the coffin , like James Joyce 's corpse Finegan at his Wake , at Seattle in 1999 , having learned nothing at all . 
Indeed the contents of this Third Dustbin are familiar enough : a ritual incantantion of ` no war ' that avoids any substantive engagement with problems of international peace and security , or reflection on how positively to help peoples in zones of conflict ; a set of vague , unthought out , uncosted and often dangerous utopian ideas about an alternative world ; a pleasing but vapid invocation of global human values and internationalism that blithely ignores the misuses to which that term was put in the 20th century -LRB- for example by Stalin or Mao -RRB- ; a complacent attitude , innocent when not indulgent , towards political violence -LRB- witness the cult of Che Guevara , a cruel and dangerous man , and the invitees from Northern Ireland , Palestine and Iran , to name but three at the London Social Summit in October -RRB- . 
This was a capitulation , that would have shocked their socialist forebears , to nationalist and religious bigots -LRB- as in the reception by the supposedly left-wing Mayor of London of Sheikh Yusif al-Qaradawi , the descendant of a line of Mus lim fascist thinkers -RRB- . 
There is also a vapid and politically ineffective attitude to nature , forgetting , as the tsunami should have reminded all of us , that nature can also kill . 
And all of this is mixed up with a shallow , repetitive critique of globalisation , in the name of what we are never sure , and a naive , uninformed , analysis of the US . 
Such a critique applies , in the first place , to the Western and affiliated Third World protest movement . 
But it applies with even greater force to the murderous vapidities promulgated by the most prominent alternative center of resistance , that of radical Sunni jihadism , be it of Bin Laden or al-Zarqawi : these people are devoid of any substantive ideas about how to run a modern society , economy or political system . 
Here is in essence the Three Dustbins Theory . 
That unchallenged ideas and political legacies take their toll was familiar to the wise of earlier times . 
Marx remarked that the legacy of past generations weighs like a nightmare on the brain of the living . 
Keynes said that behind the ideas of every politician lay the thought of some dead economist . 
Freud warned us of the toll taken by the repressed . 
All would find much that is familiar in the world today . 
We can assess the outcome of discussions in Davos and Porto Alegre to see if thinking on the current crises of the world has moved on . 
Here ideas and policies should meet what I term the ` Vilanova Test ' , named after the flinty Spanish writer Pere Vilanova , who , on the basis of years of political engagement and debate in Spain and the Arab world , has argued consistently for pensamiento duro , ` tough thinking ' , in the contemporary world . 
We certainly have , and may again be treated to , plenty of the other . 
Fred Halliday 's ` The International Relations of the Middle East ' -LRB- CUP -RRB- and ` One Hundred Myths About the Middle East ' -LRB- Saqi -RRB- will be published in the spring Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@observer.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
