Peter Stevenson is Operations Commander for the UK 's International Search and Rescue Team Emergency crews , charities and the UK government are co-ordinating efforts to help with the rescue operation in Haiti after it was hit by an earthquake . 
The 7.0-magnitude quake that hit south of the Haitian capital Port-au-Prince is feared to have killed thousands of people across the Caribbean country . 
Prime Minister Gordon Brown said he was `` deeply saddened '' by the disaster and pledged whatever support was needed . 
A government spokesman said no British casualties had been reported so far . 
A 61-strong team of firefighters from across the UK has volunteered to fly out to the quake zone . 
The team will be taking specialist equipment and two search dogs . 
But aid from the UK has been delayed after the closure of Gatwick Airport because of the heavy snow and treacherous weather . 
Lincolnshire 's chief fire officer , Mike Thomas , will act as team leader for the whole of the UK response . 
He said many of the team members had helped out in similar situations before and knew what to expect in the rescue operation . 
Douglas Alexander promises UK aid to Haiti `` We know the devastation , risks and shock this can have on a community and we 'll be there to help as best we can , '' he said . 
Greater Manchester firefighter Peter Stevenson , who will work as operation commander when the volunteers arrive in Haiti , said they would work in two teams to search for survivors . 
`` One rescue can take between six and 10 hours , depending on the situation and what the building is made from , '' Mr Stevenson said . 
`` We go totally self-reliant , with several tonnes of equipment so we can work 24 hours a day on at least two separate sites . '' 
The teams will be using heavy breaking equipment , specialist cameras and acoustic listening devices . 
The group includes volunteers from fire and rescue services in Greater Manchester , Lancashire , West Sussex , Kent , the West Midlands , Lincolnshire , Hampshire , and mid and west Wales . 
Cornwall-based international relief charity Shelterbox , which provides survival and shelter equipment in disaster zones , has also mobilised a response team from the UK and the US to assess the aid requirements of victims left homeless by the earthquake . 
The firefighters do not know how long they will have to stay in Haiti but a spokesman for Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service said they would only have a `` small window of opportunity '' to try to reach people buried beneath the rubble . 
The earthquake caused buildings to topple , trapping people Mr Brown expressed his sympathy for the victims of the earthquake . 
He said : `` I am deeply saddened and worried about the reported scale of the earthquake in Haiti . 
`` I am sending a message of sympathy and support to President Preval and we are sending a team from the Department for International Development to assess the humanitarian needs . 
`` We stand ready to provide whatever humanitarian assistance is required . '' 
Much of Haiti 's nine million population is impoverished and the disaster comes after years of political instability . 
The country has suffered a number of recent disasters , including hurricanes and storms in 2008 . 
The Department for International Development -LRB- DFID -RRB- is helping to co-ordinate UK aid being sent to Haiti . 
Haiti has moved to the center of the world 's thoughts , and the world 's compassion International Development Secretary Douglas Alexander warned Haiti would not only need help in rescuing individuals , but also in rebuilding damaged infrastructure and restoring vital public services . 
He told the BBC News Channel : `` While it is vital and urgent that we get people on to the ground in terms of rescuing people from the rubble , this is going to be a longer-term endeavor . 
`` That is why the whole international community needs to work together to address the needs that are uncovered as a result of this terrible tragedy . '' 
Save the Children has released # 50,000 and the British Red Cross released # 200,000 from its funds to help in the emergency . 
Christian Aid also launched a # 1m emergency appeal for victims . 
