Haiti devastated by massive earthquake `` All of a sudden everything was just falling apart ... there was no place to hide '' A massive 7.0-magnitude earthquake has struck the Caribbean nation of Haiti . 
The extent of the devastation is still unclear but there are fears thousands of people may have died . 
Haiti 's worst quake in two centuries hit south of the capital Port-au-Prince on Tuesday , wrecking the presidential palace , UN HQ and other buildings . 
A `` large number '' of UN personnel were reported missing by the organization . 
Many people have spent the night outside amid fears of more aftershocks . 
The Red Cross says up to three million people have been affected . 
Describing the earthquake as a `` catastrophe '' , Haiti 's envoy to the US said the cost of the damage could run into billions . 
A number of nations , including the US , UK and Venezuela , are gearing up to send aid . 
The quake , which struck about 15km -LRB- 10 miles -RRB- south-west of Port-au-Prince , was quickly followed by two strong aftershocks of 5.9 and 5.5 magnitude . 
The tremor hit at 1653 -LRB- 2153 GMT -RRB- on Tuesday , the US Geological Survey said . 
Phone lines to the country failed shortly afterwards . 
There is still no official word on casualties and the extent of the devastation is only now becoming clearer with dawn breaking . 
China has already indicated in reports in state media that eight of its peacekeepers are buried and feared dead , with another 10 unaccounted for . 
I think hundreds of casualties would be a serious understatement Rachmani Domersant , operations manager , Food for the Poor The AFP news agency quoted the Jordanian army as saying three of its peacekeepers had been killed and 21 wounded . 
The Brazilian army said four of its peacekeepers were killed and a large number were missing . 
A French official told AFP about 200 people were missing in the collapsed Hotel Montana , which is popular with tourists . 
There have also been some reports of looting overnight . 
Rachmani Domersant , an operations manager with the Food for the Poor charity , told Reuters that overnight the capital was in total darkness . 
`` You have thousands of people sitting in the streets with nowhere to go . 
There are people running , crying , screaming . 
`` People are trying to dig victims out with flashlights . 
I think hundreds of casualties would be a serious understatement . '' 
Earlier , bodies white with dust could be seen piled on the back of a pick-up truck as vehicles tried to ferry the injured to hospital . 
Haiti is the poorest country in the western hemisphere and has suffered a number of recent disasters , including four hurricanes and storms in 2008 that killed hundreds . 
In a statement issued in New York , the UN said that its local HQ in Haiti had `` sustained serious damage along with other UN installations '' and `` a large number '' of personnel were missing . 
Carel Pedre , TV and radio presenter , Port-au-Prince I saw a lot of people crying for help , a lot of buildings collapsed , a lot of car damage , a lot of people without help , people bleeding . 
I saw a movie theater , a supermarket , a cybercafe , an apartment building which collapsed . 
Now it 's dark outside , there is no electricity , all the phone networks are down , so there 's no way that people can get in touch with their family and friends . 
There are aftershocks every 15 to 20 minutes . 
They last from three to five seconds . 
The first shock was really strong , people were falling in the streets and buildings collapsed . 
I did n't see any emergency services , the people at the neighborhood were trying to help each other . 
The streets are narrow and there is lot of traffic and everyone is trying to reach family and friends . 
Traffic now is really difficult . 
People do n't know where to go or where to start . 
UN peacekeeping chief Alain Le Roy said it was unclear how many people were in the building . 
The head of the UN mission in Haiti , Hedi Annabi , was reported to have been inside and is unaccounted for . 
French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner said he was believed to be dead . 
The UN 's stabilisation mission plays a vital role in ensuring security in Haiti . 
Raymond Joseph , Haiti 's ambassador to the US , said the presidential palace , the tax office , the ministry of commerce and the foreign ministry had all been damaged , but the airport was intact . 
He and Haiti 's ambassador to Mexico , Robert Manuel , both said that President Rene Preval and his wife had survived the quake . 
The World Bank said its local offices were destroyed but most of the staff were accounted for , Reuters reported . 
US President Barack Obama said his `` thoughts and prayers '' were with the people of Haiti and that he expected `` an aggressive , coordinated -LRB- aid -RRB- effort by the US government '' . 
Venezuela says it will send a 50-strong `` humanitarian assistance team '' . 
Population of 10 million people Most live on less than $ 2 a day Democratic rule restored in 2006 Economy in ruins and unemployment is chronic UN peacekeepers deployed - foreign aid seen as vital Massive deforestation has left just 2 % forest Storms and hurricanes in 2008 left almost 800 dead The Inter-American Development Bank said it was immediately approving a $ 200,000 grant for emergency aid . 
The UK said it was mobilising help and was `` ready to provide whatever humanitarian assistance may be required '' . 
Canada , Australia , France and a number of Latin American nations have also said they are mobilising their aid response . 
Pope Benedict XVI has called for a generous response to the `` tragic situation '' in Haiti . 
In the minutes after the quake , Henry Bahn , a visiting official from the US Department of Agriculture , said he had seen houses which had tumbled into a ravine . 
`` Everybody is just totally , totally freaked out and shaken , '' said Mr Bahn , who described the sky as `` just gray with dust '' . 
He said he had been walking to his hotel room when the ground began to shake . 
`` I just held on and bounced across the wall , '' he said . 
`` I just heard a tremendous amount of noise and shouting and screaming in the distance . '' 
Reports on the Twitter message site , which can not yet be verified by the BBC , expressed the chaos in the wake of the quake . 
Tweets from troylivesay spoke of the worst damage being in the Carrefour district , where `` many two and three storey buildings did not make it '' . 
In the immediate aftermath of the quake , a tsunami watch was put out for Haiti , Cuba and the Bahamas , but this was later lifted . 
Have you been affected by the earthquake ? 
If you have any information you wish to share with the BBC you can do so using the form below : You can send pictures and video to yourpics@bbc.co.uk, text them to +447725100100 or if you have a large file you can click here to upload . 
The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
