Haiti appears to have had more than its fair share of political upheaval , misrule , poverty and natural disasters . 
And , as has happened so often in the nation 's past , just when the situation was getting better , a fresh catastrophe struck , writes Nick Caistor . 
Until it was destroyed in the earthquake on Tuesday , Haiti 's presidential palace was the most beautiful building in the capital , Port-au-Prince . 
Before and after pictures of the presidential palace Gleaming white , its imposing , harmonious structure was a symbol of the promise that has so often been dashed in this country of 10 million inhabitants . 
The palace is situated on the Champ de Mars , the huge open square down near the port area of Port-au-Prince . 
This is the center of the city , where all the main administrative and community buildings are clustered . 
Many of them , including the cathedral , the main hospital , and the UN peacekeeping headquarters are reported to have been crushed in the worst earthquake to hit the country in more than 200 years . 
Hundreds may have died here , but the death toll is likely to be even higher in the nearby squalid slums such as Cite Soleil , where tens of thousands of the poorest Haitians live in wooden or tin shacks , with no running water , no sewage systems , and no electricity . 
Many of these slum dwellers have been forced to come into Port-au-Prince because , if anything , conditions in the countryside are even harsher . 
Serious malnutrition , Aids , and other chronic diseases are widespread . 
The city of Gonaives was devastated in 2008 Haiti occupies the mountainous western third of the island of Hispaniola . 
When the Europeans first arrived more than 500 years ago , they were amazed at how wooded the country was . 
Now only some 3 % of those original forests remain . 
The rest have been chopped down for lumber or for charcoal , which is still the most widely used fuel in the countryside . 
It is this deforestation that increased the havoc caused by a series of storms in 2008 , when almost a thousand people were killed and up to a million were made homeless after four hurricanes struck around the important town of Gonaives in as many weeks . 
In 2004 , a tropical storm struck the northwest of the country . 
The historic port of Cap Haitien bore the brunt on that occasion , with an estimated 3,000 people killed . 
In addition to these natural disasters , Haiti has suffered throughout its history from political turmoil and misrule . 
Haiti got its first democratically elected leader after ` Baby Doc ' was ousted When ` Baby Doc ' Duvalier was forced from power in 1986 , it seemed as though the country might finally enjoy a period of democratic rule . 
After several years of unrest , this new hope was symbolised by the election in 1990 of a young former Catholic priest , Jean-Bertrand Aristide . 
But his period in office came to an end after only a few months , when army colonels seized power . 
The democratic experience was cut short , several thousand people became victims of the new regime , and thousands more tried to flee the country on home-made rafts . 
It was the huge influx of these boat people into the United States in 1994 which helped persuade President Bill Clinton that the time had come to kick out the colonels . 
Once again , Jean-Bertrand Aristide returned to power , and a new , more promising political era seemed about to begin . 
Under his rule , and that of his successor Rene Preval , and with the help of the United Nations and other international aid organizations , life improved a little , although Haiti remained the poorest country in the Western hemisphere , with average income of less than two dollars a day . 
It was when Mr Aristide was elected president for a second term in 2001 that the political situation began to slip back into confusion and growing violence . 
Refugees were often picked up off the coast of Miami in the early 1990s . 
President Aristide was forced out of power early in 2004 , after several months of increasing political turmoil . 
A UN peacekeeping force of 9,000 has been in Haiti ever since , trying not only to bring stability but also to help build roads and other vital infrastructure projects . 
Mr Clinton , now a UN special envoy , has spearheaded attempts to get international donors to live up to their promises of aid . 
Under Rene Preval , who was elected for a second term in 2006 , there has been a small but significant improvement in conditions in Haiti : jobs have been created , the slums have become less violent , and there have been some timid signs of a growth in tourism . 
Now , as has happened so often in Haiti 's past , the fresh hopes have been extinguished . 
It will take a massive effort from the United Nations and the international community simply to rescue the thousands of victims and clean up after the earthquake . 
Speaking after the 2008 disasters , President Preval said that Haiti needed long-term help if it were not to be `` left as always , truly alone , to face new catastrophes '' . 
Across the Champ de Mars from the presidential palace in Port-au-Prince is - or was - a tall statue to the maroons , the runaway slaves who are the symbol of Haiti 's fight for independence at the end of the 18th century . 
Haitians will need the same spirit now if they are to overcome this latest blow to their nation . 
