Rescue team ` can not afford Haiti mission ' The IRC are desperate to go to Haiti to help the rescue operation A Scottish-based rescue organization has warned that it faces bankruptcy if it sends a team to help survivors of the Haiti earthquake . 
Derek Jolly , from the International Rescue Corps -LRB- IRC -RRB- , said the charity was desperate for more funds so it could go to the disaster-struck nation . 
The IRC , based in Grangemouth , has just # 30,000 left in the bank . 
A rescue mission would cost at least # 35,000 . 
Haiti was hit by a massive 7.0-magnitude earthquake on Tuesday . 
Thousands are feared dead and the Red Cross has estimated that up to three million people have been affected . 
Mr Jolly , 39 , said the IRC faced a stark decision . 
`` It looks like if we make a decision to go to Haiti today , the charity will fold . 
`` But if we decide not to go then we are going against what we 're constitutionally bound to do , '' he said . 
`` I 've been doing this for 12 years . 
To see it fold would be unbelievable . 
We chuck so much time into it - family life suffers , work life suffers . '' 
Derek Jolly has been a member of the team for 12 years The charity was formed in 1981 after the 1980 earthquake in Italy which claimed the lives of almost 3,000 people . 
IRC volunteers come from a range of backgrounds and generally take unpaid leave when they are deployed to a disaster zone . 
`` In the past , people put # 24,000 on their Visa cards to fund a trip and came back with no idea how to pay it back - but no-one 's that gung-ho any more , '' said Mr Jolly , who teaches intensive care nurses in Edinburgh . 
`` If I get away for a week I usually take a # 500 hit for it . 
People are more wary about putting their hand in their pockets now . '' 
He said donations to the IRC had slowed as a result of the recession , and they were also less likely to receive free flights and food from businesses and governments . 
I 've been in tears on the phone this morning , talking to other members of the team The charity has about 150 members , about 40 of whom are on standby to go to disasters . 
Mr Jolly said despite the huge financial and emotional commitment , team members were desperate to get to Haiti as quickly as possible . 
`` We might get no-one out alive , but maybe we can give a family back a body they might not have found . 
`` Other times you find lots of people alive and you think , what would happen if we were n't there ? '' 
The earthquake is Haiti 's worst in two centuries . 
It struck south of the capital Port-au-Prince at 1653 -LRB- 2153 GMT -RRB- on Tuesday . 
Mr Jolly , a father of two , said it was frustrating that the money needed was a lot to the IRC - but was `` pocket money '' to some organizations . 
`` I 've been in tears on the phone this morning , talking to other members of the team , '' he added . 
Scottish Catholic aid agency Sciaf and Oxfam Scotland have launched appeals to help the victims . 
Edinburgh Evening News Volunteers for Aids charity unable to head to Haiti due to lack of donations - 8 hrs ago STV . 
