Eyewitnesses have spoken of scenes of devastation after a 7.0-magnitude earthquake rocked Haiti , toppling buildings in and around the capital , Port-au-Prince . 
People rushed into the streets after the earthquake hit Reuters reporter Joseph Guyler Delva said when the quake hit the city `` everything started shaking , people were screaming , houses started collapsing '' . 
Mr Delva said he had seen dozens of casualties . 
`` I saw people under the rubble , and people killed . 
People were screaming ` Jesus , Jesus ' and running in all directions . '' 
He described the scene as one of total chaos . 
Ian Rodgers , an Australian working with Save the Children in Port-au-Prince , said people were searching for loved one in the debris . 
`` You are hearing the grief of people as they realize they 've lost people , they ca n't find their children , '' he told Reuters . 
`` But then again you are still hearing these cries coming out , people who are rescuing other people from the rubble as somebody comes out alive . '' 
Mr Rodgers said rescuers were trying to find vehicles to evacuate injured people but the city 's power and infrastructure were all down , leaving it `` very , very dark '' . 
There have been few reports from outside the capital , but Global Orphan Project posted a video on the YouTube website it said had been filmed in the south of Haiti `` a long way from ground zero '' . 
The video showed what appeared to be collapsed buildings and people walking around streets strewn with debris . 
Henry Bahn , an official for the US Agriculture Department visiting Haiti , said everybody there was `` just totally freaked out and shaken '' , the Associated Press news agency reported . 
He said he was walking to his hotel when the ground began to shake . 
`` I could hear a tremendous amount of noise and shouting and screaming in the distance . '' 
Mr Bahn described seeing a ravine where several houses had been standing . 
`` It 's just full of collapsed walls and rubble and barbed wire . '' 
People are screaming and freaking out down towards the stadium Writing on Twitter , Troy Livesay - a Christian missionary working in Port-au-Prince - described seeing bodies in the street that had been pulled out of collapsed buildings and people standing around in a state of shock . 
The capital had `` always looked a little rough around the edges , so driving around at night it seems hard to see the damage , then you come upon huge piles of rubble where a supermarket used to be '' , he said . 
Several people spoke of hearing people screaming across the city following the quake followed by singing and prayers later on . 
Mr Livesay said it was `` a beautiful sound in the middle of a horrible tragedy '' . 
A user of the social networking website Twitter , identifying himself as RAMhaiti , said the singing had become `` louder and more emotional '' before subsiding . 
He said he could hear no ambulances or helicopters and that aftershocks were still causing panic . 
`` People are screaming and freaking out down towards the stadium , '' he said . 
Valerie Moliere , 15 , had to be helped out of her family 's home by her father and said the scene was one of confusion and anguish . 
She said people were in the streets `` hugging and crying '' and the damage was substantial . 
`` I see broken houses and many people are walking in front of me and they have blood all over them , '' she said . 
The passengers of a flight from Haiti to Miami , which left shortly after the quake hit , said the airport building had been severely damaged . 
`` The whole outside had deteriorated , from top to bottom it was cracked up totally , '' one man told reporters . 
`` We thought it was something that hit the building , but it turned out it was an earthquake . '' 
Other passengers spoke of their fears for family members left behind in Haiti . 
Carel Pedre , a TV and radio presenter in Port-au-Prince , told the BBC he had witnessed extensive damage on his five-mile walk through the city to reach his daughter . 
There 's no way that people can get in touch with their family and friends `` I saw a lot of people crying for help , a lot of buildings collapsed , a lot of car damage , a lot of people without help , people bleeding . '' 
He said he had seen a cinema , a supermarket , a cybercafe and an apartment building , all of which had crumbled in the quake . 
Mr Pedre said he could feel aftershocks every 15 to 20 minutes , lasting from three to five seconds each . 
The darkness , he said , was compounding the fear and worry people were feeling . 
`` There is no electricity , all the phone networks are down , so there 's no way that people can get in touch with their family and friends , '' he said . 
He said he had not seen any emergency services , adding that while people in the neighborhood were trying to help each other , they did not know `` where to go or where to start '' . 
Within minutes of the quake , a huge plume of dust and smoke was seen rising from the capital . 
Mike Godfrey , a contractor for the US Agency for International Development , told CNN it looked like `` a blanket that completely covered the city and obscured it for about 20 minutes '' . 
