Journalist in Haiti , Ansel Herz , spoke to the BBC 's Matt Frei Haitian President Rene Preval has said thousands of people are feared dead following a huge quake which has devastated the country 's capital . 
Mr Preval said the UN mission chief in Haiti was among the dead , but the UN can not confirm this . 
It said 14 other UN staff had died and 56 were injured . 
The 7.0-magnitude quake , Haiti 's worst in two centuries , struck on Tuesday . 
Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive told US network CNN he believed more than 100,000 people had died . 
The Red Cross says up to three million people are affected . 
The capital 's Catholic archbishop , Monsignor Joseph Serge Miot , is also among those killed . 
In his first interview since the earthquake , President Preval told the Miami Herald newspaper in the US he feared thousands of his people had died . 
Describing the scene in the capital as `` unimaginable '' , he said : `` Parliament has collapsed . 
The tax office has collapsed . 
The tax office has collapsed . 
Hospitals have collapsed `` There are a lot of schools that have a lot of dead people in them . '' 
Mr Preval later said that Hedi Annabi , the Tunisian head of the UN stabilisation mission in Haiti -LRB- Minustah -RRB- , had died after the UN HQ building was destroyed . 
The UN said it could not confirm the news but that Mr Annabi had been in the building at the time and was likely to be under the rubble , along with many others . 
The main prison in Port-au-Prince has also collapsed , with a UN humanitarian spokeswoman saying there had been reports of escaped inmates . 
A number of nations , including the US , UK and Venezuela , are gearing up to send aid . 
Speaking in Washington , US President Barack Obama vowed `` unwavering support '' for Haiti after what he called a `` cruel and incomprehensible '' disaster . 
He said he had ordered `` a swift , co-ordinated and aggressive effort to save lives '' and that the first US rescue teams would arrive later on Wednesday . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced that she was cutting short a trip to the Pacific in order to return to Washington because of the earthquake . 
A US Navy aircraft carrier is expected to reach Haiti in a couple of days and a number of smaller vessels are already in the area , US defense officials said . 
Rajiv Shah , of the US Agency for International Development -LRB- USAID -RRB- , said US teams were on their way to Haiti with specialised rescue equipment and that some efforts were already under way on the ground . 
The quake , which struck about 15km -LRB- 10 miles -RRB- south-west of Port-au-Prince , was quickly followed by two aftershocks of 5.9 and 5.5 magnitude . 
The first tremor had hit at 1653 local time -LRB- 2153 GMT -RRB- on Tuesday , the US Geological Survey said . 
Phone lines to the country failed shortly afterwards . 
Ban Ki-moon : ` We are facing a major humanitarian emergency ' UN officials said at least 14 people had died when the UN 's five-storey headquarters and two smaller buildings in Port-au-Prince collapsed . 
Around 100 were still thought to be missing , many feared to be under the rubble . 
Ten Brazilians , three Jordanians and one Haitian had been confirmed killed , a senior UN official said , adding that the number was likely to rise . 
Stressing a major international relief effort would be needed , UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon said the UN would immediately release $ 10m -LRB- # 6.15 m -RRB- from its emergency response fund . 
He said aerial reconnaissance showed Port-au-Prince had been `` devastated '' by the quake , although other areas were largely unaffected . 
The airport in Port-au-Prince is operational despite the collapse of the control tower , the UN said , allowing aid to start arriving soon . 
The Brazilian army , which has the biggest UN contingent in Haiti , has said a large number of its peacekeepers are missing . 
China has indicated in reports in state media that eight of its peacekeepers are dead , with another 10 unaccounted for . 
Objects were falling from shelves , there was debris crashing all around . 
I clung on to the babies and shielded them as best I could There were some reports of looting overnight . 
Haiti is the poorest country in the western hemisphere and has suffered a number of recent disasters , including four hurricanes and storms in 2008 that killed hundreds . 
With communications destroyed by the earthquake , it is not yet possible to confirm the extent of the destruction , although there were reports on Wednesday of many bodies piled in the streets . 
People in the capital were lifting sheets on bodies to try to identify loved ones . 
Gary Duffy , BBC News , Sao Paulo Given Brazil 's central role in leading the military side of the UN peacekeeping mission in Haiti the earthquake has caused a lot of concern and shock here . 
The authorities here say 11 soldiers have died and there have been several injuries , and there are fears this number could rise . 
It has also been confirmed that Zilda Arns , a prominent Brazilian aid worker and paediatrician , has been killed . 
She was a sister of the retired Cardinal Paulo Arns , a major figure in the Catholic Church here . 
Some soldiers have managed to make contact to reassure relatives , but given the damage to infrastructure at Brazilian bases , communication is proving difficult , even for the government . 
Damage has also been reported in the towns of Jacmel and Carrefour , near Port-au-Prince . 
Guido Cornale , a representative of the UN children 's agency Unicef , in Jacmel , said it estimated more than a fifth of buildings there had been destroyed . 
The Red Cross is dispatching a relief team from Geneva and the UN 's World Food Programme is flying in two planes with emergency food aid . 
The Inter-American Development Bank said it was immediately approving a $ 200,000 grant for emergency aid . 
The head of the International Monetary Fund -LRB- IMF -RRB- said it would co-ordinate with other international agencies to offer help as swiftly as possible . 
The World Bank also said it was sending a team to assess the damage and plan recovery . 
It said its offices in Port-au-Prince had been destroyed but that most staff were accounted for . 
The UK said it was mobilising help and was `` ready to provide whatever humanitarian assistance may be required '' . 
Population of 10 million people Most live on less than $ 2 a day Democratic rule restored in 2006 Economy in ruins and unemployment is chronic UN peacekeepers deployed - foreign aid seen as vital Massive deforestation has left just 2 % forest Storms and hurricanes in 2008 left almost 800 dead Canada , Australia , France and a number of Latin American nations have also said they are mobilising their aid response . 
Pope Benedict XVI has called for a generous response to the `` tragic situation '' in Haiti . 
Emmet Murphy , who works for a non-governmental organization in Haiti , told the BBC : `` I was driving through the mountains on my way home to Jacmel when the car started to shake . 
It was like a very strong wind was blowing and I nearly lost control of the car . 
`` I drove further and found the road totally blocked by a massive landslide on the road . 
I just knew that if I had reached that spot five minutes earlier , I would have been killed . '' 
Blogger Troy Livesay , in Port-au-Prince , wrote : `` Thousands of people are currently trapped . 
To guess at a number would be like guessing at raindrops in the ocean . 
Precious lives hang in the balance . 
`` When pulled from the rubble there is no place to take them for care . 
I can not imagine what the next few weeks and months will be like . '' 
