President Barack Obama , struggling to get on top of the worst oil spill in U.S. history , vowed an overhaul of U.S. laws and regulations needed to prevent a repeat of the April 20 rig explosion that killed 11 people and triggered the spill . 
A mile below the ocean surface , BP began a new strategy to tackle the six-week-old drama , using underwater robots to cut away extraneous pipes before trying to contain the leaking oil and channel it to a ship on the surface . 
After meeting co-chairs of a commission that will investigate the accident , Obama raised the prospect of criminal prosecutions . 
`` If our laws were broken leading to this death and destruction , my solemn pledge is that we will bring those responsible to justice on behalf of the victims of this catastrophe and the people of the Gulf region , '' Obama said . 
U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said in New Orleans that the U.S. government has launched a criminal probe and that federal agencies , including the FBI , are participating . 
`` We will not rest until justice is done , '' Holder told reporters . 
The Justice Department will look for violations of the Clean Water Act , the Endangered Species Act , the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 , which can be used to hold violators liable for cleanup costs and reimbursement for government efforts . 
The oil giant 's shares in London closed down 13 percent on Tuesday , at 430 pence , after falling by as much as 17 percent . 
In New York , BP 's American Depositary Receipts lost nearly 15 percent to close at $ 36.52 . 
The shares were hit hard by weekend news that its latest attempt to plug its blown-out seabed well had not worked , sparking fears oil could leak into the Gulf until August . 
BP shares have lost more than a third of their value , or about 46 billion pounds -LRB- $ 67 billion -RRB- , since the leak started . 
The cost of dealing with the crisis now totals $ 990 million , and is rising . 
Shares of other companies with stakes in the well were also down between 10 and 19 percent , including Anadarko , Transocean , Cameron and Halliburton . 
At the same time , the cost of protecting the debt of what was once Britain 's biggest company against default rose sharply . 
The five-year BP credit default swap widened by 71 basis points to 173 basis points , CDS monitor Markit said . 
The cost to protect Anadarko , Transocean and Halliburton debt also soared . 
Analysts were increasingly gloomy about BP as an investment , with one issuing a sell order and saying he thinks the company will be broken by the crisis . 
A poll by CNBC , a Wall Street news channel watched by many savvy U.S. investors , said that 63 percent of those surveyed say BP will be fine in a year , while 25 percent believe the company will be under bankruptcy protection and 12 percent think BP would go under . 
But the White House said BP had the resources to cover the financial costs of the disaster . 
`` You 've got a company with the type of market capitalization that can and will fully pay for the damage caused by the disaster they are responsible for , '' spokesman Robert Gibbs said when asked at a briefing if the Obama administration was concerned the spill could ruin BP financially . 
In the next attempt to contain the leak , robotic equipment will use giant shears and a diamond saw to cut a pipe 35 feet above the wellhead that will allow BP to sit a dome on top of it and funnel oil to a tanker on the surface . 
`` We are intent on minimizing the flow of the oil into the Gulf and we 've begun a series of operations to ensure just that , '' BP managing director Bob Dudley told CNN . 
It could take up to 72 hours to get the containment device operational , said Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen , the top U.S. official overseeing the cleanup . 
If this attempt fails , it is possible that up to 19,000 barrels of oil -LRB- 800,000 gallons\/3 million liters -RRB- a day will leak into the Gulf until relief wells , due in August , are completed . 
The leak is a financial and public relations nightmare for BP and its problems are just beginning . 
Holder , the U.S. attorney general , and top Justice Department officials met state and federal prosecutors from Louisiana , Alabama and Mississippi and afterward announced that the criminal probe was under way . 
`` We have begun both a criminal as well as a civil investigation as is our obligation under the law , '' Holder told reporters . 
`` Our environmental laws are very clear . '' 
OBAMA VOWS LAWS , REGULATION OVERHAUL Obama , who is fighting accusations that he has not reacted swiftly enough to a disaster that threatens Louisiana 's multibillion-dollar seafood industry , sat down with the heads of a commission looking into the leak -- former Senator Bob Graham and former Environmental Protection Agency chief William Reilly . 
`` If the laws on our books are insufficient to prevent such a spill , the laws must change . 
If oversight was inadequate to enforce these laws , oversight has to be reformed , '' Obama said . 
The commission will be similar to those that examined two previous unprecedented U.S. catastrophes -- the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger in 1986 and the Three Mile Island nuclear accident in 1979 . 
The fate of BP 's shares weighed on investors but was of little concern to residents of Louisiana 's coast , who have suffered crippling losses because of the closure of some Gulf waters to fishing . 
`` I really do n't care much about it , '' Kimberly Mertz , who works at a marina in rural Venice , Louisiana , said of the share price . 
`` We want to get everything cleaned up . '' 
The slick has spread over 100 miles of Louisiana 's coast , but Mississippi and Alabama have escaped so far with only scattered tar balls and oil debris reaching their coasts . 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said moderate southerly and southwesterly winds this week may start moving oil closer to the Mississippi and Alabama coasts . 
The forecast was a reminder that oil from the unchecked spill , broken up and carried by winds and ocean currents , could threaten tourist attraction Florida , and Cuba and Mexico . 
Commercial boats recruited to the oil spill response were being deployed to increase monitoring of the Alabama coastline , and skimming vessels were responding to confirmed reports of oil . 
Beach support teams were also being mobilized in anticipation of oil coming ashore . 
Raising the stakes still further , Tuesday was the official start of the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season , which forecasters predict may be the most intense since 2005 . 
That year Hurricane Katrina ravaged the region and disrupted offshore oil and gas output . 
Experts fear a big storm could drive more oil ashore and force BP and the U.S. government to suspend cleanup efforts . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Instead , I read hundreds of blogs blaming Obama for this disaster and `` not acting quickly enough . '' 
I suppose that people want him to personally swim to the site and fix it . 
Then , they would be happy . 
Why would anyone think he is not . 
But , think about his predicament , too . 
He had to spend a year fixing our economy and healthcare system . 
He had to rely on the fact that deregulation has led to corruption , and at any moment , another one of our great , greedy , messy constructs can collapse . 
Like banking , healthcare , etc. collapsed . 
So , Americans are bereft in a land of greed , and desperate to blame anyone except those who are truly to blame . 
If the government talks about regulating , everyone screams `` BIG GOVERNMENT '' or `` SOCIALISM !! '' . 
But if the Government does n't maintain a fleet of deep-water ROVs , oil men on-staff , drill rig on standby , etc. then people complain that the government has n't taken over the spill response . 
You ca n't have it both ways people . 
Several other oil companies and independent oil consultants have been asked and they all said this is exactly what should be done . 
Every thing they are trying carries increased risk of making the problem \* worse \* . 
Cutting off the BOP in an attempt to install a shut-off valve is a huge risk : the BOP may be partially closed and thus cutting it off may release more oil , or worse -- cause catastrophic failure of the cement casings , in which case expect as much oil leaked per day as we have been getting per week up until now . 
In that light , it makes perfect sense to try less risky things first . 
I also find it amusing that people have such short memories : The Bush administration is responsible for the mess the MMS has been in and the lack of oversight of drilling operations . 
With the economy , two wars , et al I do n't know how people expect 8 years of de-regulation to be magically un-done and all the messes cleaned up overnight . 
It takes years to change the direction and culture of any large organization . 
Nationalize BP 's property inside the U.S. , seize its assets in U.S. banks , declare martial law on its property and begin liquidating it to pay for this fiasco . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
