NEW ORLEANS | Tue Jun 1 , 2010 4:24 pm EDT NEW ORLEANS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The U.S. government has launched a widely expected criminal and civil investigation into BP Plc 's -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said on Tuesday , ratcheting up the pressure on the beleaguered British oil company . 
`` We have begun both a criminal as well as a civil investigation as is our obligation under the law , '' Holder told reporters after meeting with state and federal prosecutors in New Orleans . 
`` Our environmental laws are very clear . '' 
Federal agencies , including the FBI , are participating in the probe and `` if we find evidence of illegal behavior , we will be forceful in our response , '' he said , adding that prosecutors had a `` sufficient basis '' to start a criminal probe . 
After taking a tour of the oil spill , Holder said he saw `` oil for miles and miles , oil that we know has already affected plant and animal life among the coast . '' 
The Justice Department has already demanded that the companies involved in the spill , including BP , Transocean Ltd RIGN . 
N -RRB- and Halliburton Co -LRB- HAL . 
N -RRB- , preserve records related to the accident . 
The Justice Department will examine the companies ' actions for violations under the Clean Water Act , the Endangered Species Act , the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 , which can be used to hold them liable for cleanup costs and reimbursement for government efforts . 
Additionally , the Justice Department could pursue other traditional charges if they find the companies made false statements or obstructed the investigation . 
`` As our review expands in the days ahead , we will be meticulous , we will be comprehensive , and we will be aggressive , '' Holder told reporters . 
`` We will not rest until justice is done . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
This crime should be prosecuted much more vigourouly than cutting corners that resulted in the initial accident . 
For example , they intend to cut off the constricted part of the pipe , which will increase the spill . 
This part is fine , except the new LMRP collector appears to be designed to fail . 
The pipe to carry the oil to the surface is only 6 ? 
diameter , and there is no way that is big enough . 
Probably the biggest crime is witholding information necessary to stop the spill . 
People who hide information should be targeted . 
Anybody who comes clean and who make good faith efforts to be transparent and help to get to a solution should get a break . 
As long as no political contributors or allies are involved . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
