Does BP 's now-familiar yellow-and-green sunflower logo need an update ? 
Joe Daley thinks so . 
As the founder of a website that acts as a clearinghouse for logo designers around the world , Daley reckons the British oil giant 's corporate icon should reflect the spreading oil spi ll in the Gulf of Mexico . 
So Daley 's launched an online contest to find an appropriate replacement logo . 
These kinds of logo competitions are nothing new ; that 's how the website works to match designers with businesses , with the businesses paying the prize to the winning design . 
Daley himself put up the $ 200 in prize money for the BP logo redesign contest -- BP has nothing to do with it -- to raise awareness of the spill . 
The idea evolved after he was chatting online with several designers about the BP oil spill , and a couple of them asked , `` What spill ? '' 
`` That 's when I decided to get it out in a more creative way , '' Daley said by telephone from Columbus , Ohio . 
BP 's conduct before and after the April 20 Deepwater Horizon blowout prompted the move , Daley said . 
`` I 've been in business for 12 years , and I know mistakes happen ... but with the violations they 've had and not having a backup plan ... I 'm not very forgiving . '' 
He offered some basic guidelines for designers , listing the `` top three things to communicate through our logo design : # 1 Oil spill disaster -- Toxic ; # 2 Death of wildlife ; # 3 Incompetence . '' 
`` The World . '' 
The designers -- some 6,000 use the site , Daley said -- came through with some vivid ideas , putting red devil horns on the sunflower , reshaping the logo to mimic a biohazard icon and adding dripping black oil to the image . 
The competition closes on June 12 at 10 p.m. EDT . 
Logo designers and the general public can vote to pick the winner . 
Picture credit : All images from logomyway.com We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I 've covered the Winter Olympics in Calgary and Salt Lake City , a couple wars , the State Department , White House , Pentagon , several long trials and a presidential sex scandal . 
Since 2006 , I 've been reporting on the environment and climate change . 
