Does BP 's now-familiar yellow-and-green sunflower logo need an update ? 
Joe Daley thinks so . 
As the founder of a website that acts as a clearinghouse for logo designers around the world , Daley reckons the British oil giant 's corporate icon should reflect the spreading oil spi ll in the Gulf of Mexico . 
So Daley 's launched an online contest to find an appropriate replacement logo . 
These kinds of logo competitions are nothing new ; that 's how the website works to match designers with businesses , with the businesses paying the prize to the winning design . 
Daley himself put up the $ 200 in prize money for the BP logo redesign contest -- BP has nothing to do with it -- to raise awareness of the spill . 
The idea evolved after he was chatting online with several designers about the BP oil spill , and a couple of them asked , `` What spill ? '' 
`` That 's when I decided to get it out in a more creative way , '' Daley said by telephone from Columbus , Ohio . 
BP 's conduct before and after the April 20 Deepwater Horizon blowout prompted the move , Daley said . 
`` I 've been in business for 12 years , and I know mistakes happen ... but with the violations they 've had and not having a backup plan ... I 'm not very forgiving . '' 
Seals swimming along the Gulf Coast ? 
These creatures normally live in the Arctic Ocean , not the Gulf of Mexico , but they 're listed as `` sensitive biological resources '' that could be affected by an oil spill in the area in a document filed by BP last June with the U.S. Minerals Management Service . 
More than a month after BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig blew out and sank on April 20 , the British oil giant 's regional spill response plan drew some severe criticism from the watchdog group Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility . 
One problem with BP 's nearly 600-page spill response plan ? 
`` It was utterly useless in the event of a spill , '' Jeff Ruch , PEER 's executive director , said by telephone . 
His group , which acts as a kind of safe haven for government whistle-blowers , detailed what it called `` outright inanities '' in BP 's filing and the government 's approval of it . 
A handful of oily sand grabbed from a Louisiana wetland brought back some strong memories for Earl Kingik . 
As a traditional hunter and whaler in Alaska 's Arctic , it reminded him of the Exxon Valdez spill . 
As he and other tribal leaders toured the U.S. Gulf Coast for signs of the BP oil spill , they worried that what 's happening now in Louisiana could happen if offshore drilling proceeds off the Alaskan coast . 
`` There 's no way to clean up an oil spill in the Arctic , '' said Kingik , an Inupiat tribal member from Point Hope , Alaska . 
Compared to Louisiana , where the waters are relatively calm and cleanup equipment and experts are nearby , the Arctic Ocean is a hostile place for oil and gas exploration . 
The Arctic leaders made their pilgrimage to the Gulf Coast as part of a campaign to block planned exploratory drilling by Shell Oil in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas . 
-- Jean-Michel Cousteau is an environmentalist , documentary producer , president of Ocean Futures Society and the son of ocean explorer Jacques-Yves Cousteau . 
He has produced over 70 films , including the documentary series Ocean Adventures in 2006 . 
Any views expressed here are his own . 
-- In the midst of desperate attempts to stem the flow of oil and the agony of waiting to understand its effects , we are left with simple questions like what exactly is happening to the waters of the Gulf of Mexico ? 
And how quickly can we move from dependence on oil to a sustainable , renewable energy policy ? 
May 14 , 2010 09:52 UTC - Kees Willemse is professor of offshore engineering at Delft University . 
The opinions expressed are his own . 
- Last month s explosion at the Deepwater Horizon rig continues to result in the leakage of an estimated 200,000 gallons -LRB- 910,000 litres -RRB- of oil into the Gulf of Mexico each day . 
In supermarket aisles , when a bottle of oil smashes on the floor , a bag of sawdust or kitty litter is hauled out to soak up the mess . 
To rescue a favorite silk tie from a dribble of gravy , douse it with corn starch and hope for the best . 
May 11 , 2010 20:24 UTC With the spotlight shining on the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , and on the executives sizzling in the hot seat on Capitol Hill , environmental advocates are looking north . 
May 10 , 2010 20:07 UTC With BP 's spilled oil shimmering off the U.S. Gulf Coast , and a re-tooled bill to curb climate change expected to be unveiled this week in the U.S. Senate , what could be more appropriate than a bouquet of new environmental polls ? 
Conducted on behalf of groups that want less fossil fuel use , the polls show hefty majorities favoring legislation to limit emissions of climate-warming carbon dioxide . 
In the kind of harmonic convergence that sometimes happens inside the Capital Beltway , a new poll released on Monday by the Clean Energy Works campaign showed `` overwhelming public support for comprehensive clean energy legislation , '' with 61 percent of 2010 voters saying they want to limit pollution , invest in clean energy and make energy companies pay for emitting the carbon that contributes to climate change . 
A healthy majority -- 54 percent -- of respondents said they 'd be more likely to re-elect a senator who votes for the bill . 
Jean-Michel Cousteau , environmentalist , documentary producer and the son of ocean explorer Jacques-Yves Cousteau , urges a moratorium on offshore oil drilling as a result of the catastrophic oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico . 
In this video blog on the Ocean Futures Society website , he points to the spill and ongoing leak as fuel for the argument to embrace renewable energy and end dependence on fossil fuels as our primary energy source . 
