WASHINGTON | Tue Jun 1 , 2010 3:00 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - With oil still flowing uncontrollably into the Gulf of Mexico , the Obama administration is cracking the whip on the offshore drilling industry . 
BP Plc 's latest attempt to plug its ruptured underwater well failed last week , raising concerns that the Gulf oil spill will continue unabated until August . 
The disaster will likely reshape the role government plays in overseeing oil and natural gas exploration and production off the U.S. coastlines . 
Already , the Interior Department has instituted a six-month moratorium on deepwater exploratory drilling and called for potentially costly new safety measures . 
This is likely just the start of increased federal scrutiny , with Attorney General Eric Holder visiting the Gulf Tuesday and lawmakers exploring their options to prevent similar catastrophes . 
Following is a look at some of the possible actions and new laws and regulations that may result from the spill . 
Depending on the outcome of federal investigations , BP and other companies involved in the Gulf oil spill could face criminal prosecution . 
The U.S. Justice Department will neither confirm nor deny that it is looking into pressing criminal charges against BP . 
But some lawmakers have called for the department to open an investigation into whether BP made false and misleading statements to the federal government regarding its ability to respond to oil spills in the Gulf of Mexico . 
In a worst-case scenario , criminal charges could lead the Interior Department to strip BP of its ability to operate its U.S. offshore oil fields . 
The company would then be forced to have other companies operate its leases . 
The Environmental Protection Agency could also potentially block BP from doing business with the U.S. government including securing lucrative contracts to supply fuel to the U.S. military . 
Some 33 exploratory rigs will have to cease operations at the first safe opportunity and stay out of action for the duration of the ban . 
During the ban , a presidential commission will be investigating the causes of the Gulf accident and issuing recommendations to avert another tragedy . 
It is unclear how soon deepwater exploration will be able to start again after the ban , if ever . 
It is all but certain that any new drilling will be done under intense scrutiny and with extensive technological and environmental requirements , however . 
Some lawmakers from coastal states have also called for a complete halt to offshore drilling in any new areas , saying the risk is just too great for coastal economies . 
The Obama administration has called off upcoming lease sales in the Gulf of Mexico and off the Virginia coast . 
Also , planned exploratory drilling in the Arctic this summer has been put on hold . 
Congress is not in session this week , but lawmakers were busy last Friday attempting to raise fees on oil companies . 
The U.S. House of Representatives passed legislation that would increase the fee the industry pays to support the federal Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund to 34 cents a barrel from 8 cents a barrel . 
Lawmakers are still debating how much to raise the amount of money BP would be required to dole out for economic losses caused by the spill from the current cap of $ 75 million . 
Some lawmakers have called for a $ 10 billion cap , while others have said there should be no cap on damages companies face . 
Republican Senators David Vitter and Jeff Session have introduced a bill that would raise the cap to $ 150 million or damages equal to the last four quarters of the responsible company 's profits , whichever is greater . 
While it is unclear exactly how much the cap will be lifted , it is almost certain that BP and other oil companies drilling offshore will be responsible for covering much more than $ 75 million in economic losses in the future . 
Democratic Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey has introduced legislation that would impose an annual fee of $ 10 for every acre leased for offshore drilling to raise money for clean energy transportation technology . 
Lautenberg said the fee could raise $ 1.8 billion a year . 
The additional fees and liability risks could hurt smaller oil and natural gas operators offshore that may not be able to handle the costs . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Instead of spending a measly $ 500,000 , this feature was not installed . 
If it takes laws to make people do something that should be common sense , so be it . 
As far as the cost , better before than after . 
And for all you drill fanatics , remember , all that oil is lost and not available for you to stick in your Hummers . 
Mineral Manaagement Services in Chaos ! 
For too long MMS has been cozying up to industrial energy developers , like Cape Wind . 
Removing Elizabeth Birnbaum , former Director of MMS , sends a message that the lax oversight of for-profit developers seeking to spoil our most precious natural environments can not continue . 
Lets Get Rid of Interior Secretary Ken Salazar Lawmakers are examining the leadership of the Minerals Management Service , a bureau of the Department of the Interior . 
The Interior Department is charged with enforcing environmental and safety rules for energy exploration . 
Never mind the symantecs about the fees that should be levied against BP and its associates . 
We are gonna have bigger problems at the pumps with this mess . 
Say hello to a 50 percent increase in fuel purchases now . 
Thanks BP for your BS and for taking more money out of my pocket to fix your mess . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
