Tue Jun 1 , 2010 1:33 pm EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Millions of gallons -LRB- liters -RRB- of oil have poured into the Gulf of Mexico since an April 20 blast on the Deepwater Horizon rig triggered a huge spill , soiling 100 miles of coastline , threatening some of the United States ' richest fisheries and endangering a fragile ecosystem . 
Below is a timeline of the spill and its impact : April 20 , 2010 - Explosion and fire on Transocean Ltd 's drilling rig Deepwater Horizon licensed to BP ; 11 workers are killed . 
The rig was drilling in BP 's Macondo project 42 miles southeast of Venice , Louisiana , beneath about 5,000 feet of water and 13,000 feet under the seabed . 
April 22 - The Deepwater Horizon rig , valued at more than $ 560 million , sinks and a five mile long oil slick is seen . 
April 25 - The Coast Guard says remote underwater cameras detect the well is leaking 1,000 barrels of crude oil per day . 
It approves a plan to have remote underwater vehicles activate a blowout preventer and stop leak . 
Efforts to activate the blowout preventer fail . 
April 28 - The Coast Guard says the flow of oil is 5,000 barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- -- five times greater than first estimated . 
A controlled burn is held on the giant oil slick . 
April 29 - Obama pledges `` every single available resource , '' including the U.S. military , to contain the spreading spill . 
-- Obama also says BP is responsible for the cleanup . 
Louisiana declares state of emergency due to the threat to the state 's natural resources . 
April 30 - An Obama aide says no drilling will be allowed in new areas , as the president had recently proposed , until the cause of the Deepwater Horizon accident is known . 
-- BP Chairman Tony Hayward says the company takes full responsibility for the spill and would pay all legitimate claims and the cost of the cleanup . 
May 2 - Obama visits the Gulf Coast to see cleanup efforts first hand . 
U.S. officials close areas affected by the spill to fishing for an initial period of 10 days . 
BP starts to drill a relief well alongside the failed well , a process that could take two to three months to complete . 
May 5 - A barge begins towing a 98-ton containment chamber to the site of the leak . 
BP says one of the three leaks has been shut off by capping a valve , but that would not cut the amount of oil gushing out . 
May 6 - Oil washes ashore on the Chandeleur Islands off the Louisiana coast , uninhabited barrier islands that are part of the Breton National Wildlife Refuge . 
May 7 - BP tries to lower a containment dome over the leak , but the 100-tonne device was rendered useless by a slush of frozen hydrocarbons that clogged it . 
-- A fishing ban for federal waters off the Gulf is modified , expanded and extended to May 17 . 
May 9 - BP says it might try to plug the undersea leak by pumping materials such as shredded up tires and golf balls into the well at high pressure , a method called a `` junk shot . '' 
May 11\/12 - Executives from BP , Transocean and Halliburton appear at congressional hearings in Washington . 
Senate Energy committee chairman Jeff Bingaman says that it appeared that the explosion on the rig was due to a `` cascade of errors , technical , human and regulatory . 
The executives blame each other 's companies . 
May 14 - Obama slams companies involved in the spill , criticizing them for a `` ridiculous spectacle '' of publicly trading blame over the accident in his sternest comments yet . 
May 16 - BP succeeds in inserting a tube into the leaking well and capturing some oil and gas . 
May 18 - The U.S. nearly doubles a no-fishing zone in waters affected by the oil , extending it to 19 percent of U.S. waters in the Gulf . 
May 19 - The first heavy oil from the spill sloshes ashore in fragile Louisiana marshlands and part of the mess enters a powerful current that could carry it to Florida and beyond . 
May 26 - A `` top kill '' maneuver starts involving pumping heavy fluids and other material into the well shaft to stifle the flow , then sealing it with cement . 
May 28 - Obama tours the Louisiana Gulf coast on his second visit - `` I am the president and the buck stops with me , '' he said . 
-- BP CEO Tony Hayward flies over the Gulf . 
BP says that the cost of the disaster so far is $ 930 million . 
May 29 - BP says the complex `` top kill '' maneuver to plug the well has failed , crushing hopes for a quick end to the largest oil spill in U.S. history already in its 40th day . 
May 31 - The U.S. government and BP are warning that the blown-out oil well may not be stopped until August as the company prepares a new attempt to capture leaking crude . 
June 1 - BP shares plunge 17 percent in London trading , wiping $ 23 billion off its market value , on news its latest attempt to plug the well has failed . 
-LRB- Reporting by Erwin Seba and Ros Krasny : Additional writing and editing by David Cutler , London Editorial Reference Unit -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The TV show `` Issues '' on Headline News channel is saying they will have the some revealing news regarding this pathetic oil spill tonight on the show . 
They are truley pathetic . 
It is almost as if they are trying to not fix it . 
Weeks ago I submitted suggestions on the BP site . 
They asked for suggestion form the public , engineers , etc. . 
It had to just be a publicity stunt . 
Thet are still trying the same old failed attempts . 
My second suggestion to them is still better than any they tried . 
Take a 16 inch or larger flexible pipe surrounded at the bottom 50 feet with several inflatable high pressure bags\/balloons . 
Have the robots insert the pipe into the damaged well hole . 
The pipe is open to help the pressure go up the pipe and not push the pipr out . 
When the pipe is inserted deep enough to cover the inflatable balloons , fill them with the proper viscosity fluid to withstand the atmospheric pressure . 
This will fill the gap around the pipe and prevent oil from escaping . 
If they can put all the junk and smaller pipes into the hole they can put this pipe in the hole as well . 
The oil will flow into the pipe to the ships and barges waiting for the oil . 
They should have and could have done this weeks ago . 
What are they thinking ? 
Anybody that uses a car to get from point A to point B shares the blame for the oil spill . 
BP would not be in this risky business if we had not created the demand for it . 
So the spill is OUR problem , as many of us have recognized from the outset . 
Even those that do not drive still get their goods and services from those that do . 
But before we get too far ahead with finger-pointing , we ought to first plug the well . 
Since conventional ideas have not worked , anybody s thoughts are as good as another s . 
No idea is foolish , if it could somehow work . 
So share your thoughts with the rests of us . 
We re in this together . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
