Key events in Syria uprising , one year on A coalition of 200 aid and rights groups has called on Russia and China to support United Nations ' attempts to end the violence in Syria . 
Their appeal marks one year since the first protests against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad . 
Syrians had survived the crackdown with `` outstanding courage '' , the group said , but more than 8,000 had died . 
The UN says it will send a humanitarian mission to Syria this weekend to assess the situation . 
Its representatives will be part of a delegation led by the Syrian government . 
They will also be accompanied by staff from the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation . 
They will visit a number of towns including Homs , Hama and Deraa to gather information and see living conditions for themselves . 
In a statement , UN humanitarian chief Valerie Amos stressed the importance of `` unhindered access to identify urgent needs and provide emergency care and basic supplies '' . 
`` There is no time to waste , '' she said . 
The BBC 's Jonathan Head says thousands of Syrian refugees are arriving in Hatay in Turkey At the political level , Russia and China have both blocked UN Security Council resolutions on Syria . 
They have objected to international action which they say would bring about a forced regime change in Syria . 
On Wednesday , the Syrian authorities began shelling the southern city of Deraa - the birthplace of the protests - after retaking Idlib , on the Turkish border in the north-west , earlier this week . 
Turkey says it has seen a sharp increase in the flow of refugees across its border in recent days . 
`` The number of Syrian refugees currently staying in Turkey boomed by 1,000 in a single day and climbed to 14,700 total , '' foreign ministry spokesperson Selcuk Unal told reporters in Ankara , adding that he expected the numbers to continue rising . 
Fergal Keane reports on how Syria 's violence is affecting the country 's children . 
Some may find his report distressing . 
Among the latest group was a general who had defected from the army , joining the six already in Turkey , said Mr Unal . 
Meanwhile , thousands of people have joined a pro-government rally in the Syrian capital , Damascus , to denounce the `` year-old conspiracy '' against the regime . 
Mr Assad has always insisted his troops are fighting `` armed gangs '' who are seeking to destabilise Syria . 
In a statement , the 200 aid groups from 27 countries - including Human Rights Watch , Christian Aid , Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies , Civicus and International Federation of Human Rights - called on the Security Council to unite in passing a resolution condemning the Syrian government 's use of violence , torture and arbitrary detention against civilians . 
`` For a full year , the death toll in Syria has escalated to the horrifying total of more than 8,000 dead , including hundreds of children , '' said Ziad Abdel Tawab , deputy director of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights . 
`` Is n't it time for the world to unite behind effective steps to stop this now ? '' 
Souher Belhassen , president of the International Federation for Human Rights -LRB- FIDH -RRB- , said Syrians had `` survived with outstanding courage one year of systematic and widespread crimes and bloodshed as the world stood by and watched '' . 
`` The international community must unite and help Syrians bring an end to the horror . '' 
The BBC 's Jon Donnison says video purporting to show security forces looting homes has emerged They said the international community must give its full support to Kofi Annan , the former UN secretary general who is acting as the UN and Arab League 's envoy to Syria . 
Mr Annan visited Syria last week to deliver a proposed peace plan to Mr Assad , and is to brief the UN Security Council on his mission on Friday . 
The plan includes demands for an immediate ceasefire by both sides , access for humanitarian aid , and the beginning of political dialogue . 
A spokesman said he had received a response from Mr Assad but had questions about it and `` and was seeking answers '' . 
Syrian foreign ministry spokesman Jihad al-Maqdisi told the BBC that Mr Assad 's response had been positive because he wanted Mr Annan 's mission to succeed . 
Bahrain added further pressure , announcing on Thursday it was closing its embassy in Damascus and withdrawing all staff from Syria because of deteriorating conditions . 
A number of countries , including the US , UK , Saudi Arabia , Netherlands and Italy have already closed or suspended their embassies . 
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said at least 20 people , including seven army defectors , were killed on Wednesday as the government began shelling Deraa . 
A day before , opposition activists said government forces had taken control of the north-western city of Idlib , after days of clashes with rebel fighters . 
Security forces were reportedly carrying out house-to-house searches in the area , which has been a stronghold of the Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- , the main armed rebel group . 
Tom Porteous of Human Rights Watch said there were reports that 114 people had died in the Idlib in the past four days . 
Footage showing the scale of protests in Syria started emerging in March last year Reports are difficult to verify because of tight restrictions on independent media operating in Syria . 
The violence comes two weeks after troops backed by tanks entered the shattered Baba Amr district of Homs , which had been under bombardment for almost a month , leaving an estimated 700 people dead . 
French foreign minister Alain Juppe insisted that the answer to crisis was not to arm the opposition . 
`` If we give arms to a certain faction of the Syrian opposition , we will create the conditions for a civil war ... and that could become an even bigger catastrophe than we have now , '' he said . 
The first protest in Syria took place on the streets of Damascus , on 15 March 2011 , amid the wave of political unrest across the Middle East and North Africa . 
A few days later , there were clashes in Deraa , as crowds protested against the arrest and alleged torture of a group of schoolchildren who had written anti-government slogans on a wall . 
The army was called into Deraa to restore order by the end of the month , but the unrest had already spread to towns and cities across the country . 
As the army began firing on civilians , the initial calls for more political freedom escalated into calls for the removal of Mr Assad and his government . 
The Syrian government has been trying to suppress an uprising inspired by events in Tunisia , Egypt and Libya . 
The UN says thousands have been killed in the crackdown , and that many more have been detained and displaced . 
The Syrian government says hundreds of security forces personnel have also died combating `` armed terrorist gangs '' . 
The family of President Bashar al-Assad has been in power since his father , Hafez , took over in a coup in 1970 . 
The country underwent some liberalisation after Bashar became president in 2000 , but the pace of change soon slowed , if not reversed . 
Critics are imprisoned , domestic media are tightly controlled , and economic policies often benefit the elite . 
The country 's human rights record is among the worst in the world . 
Syria is a country of 21 million people with a Sunni Muslim majority -LRB- 74 % -RRB- and significant minorities of Alawites - the Shia heterodox sect to which Mr Assad belongs - and Christians . 
Mr Assad promotes a secular identity for the country , but he has concentrated power in the hands of family and other Alawites . 
Protests have generally been biggest in Sunni-dominated areas . 
Under the sanctions imposed by the Arab League , US and EU , Syria 's two most vital sectors , tourism and oil , have ground to a halt in recent months . 
The IMF says Syria 's economy contracted by 2 % in 2011 , while the value of the Syrian pound has crashed . 
Unemployment is high , electricity cuts trouble Damascus , and critical products like heating oil and staples like milk powder are becoming scarce . 
Pro-democracy protests erupted in March 2011 after the arrest and torture of a group of teenagers who had painted revolutionary slogans on walls at their school in the southern city of Deraa . 
Security forces opened fire during a march against the arrests , killing four . 
The next day , the authorities shot at mourners at the victims ' funerals , killing another person . 
People began demanding the overthrow of Mr Assad . 
The government has tried to deal with the situation with a combination of minor concessions and force . 
President Assad ended the 48-year-long state of emergency and introduced a new constitution offering multi-party elections . 
But at the same time , the authorities have continued to use violence against unarmed protesters , and some cities , like Homs , have suffered weeks of intense bombardment . 
The opposition is deeply divided . 
Several groups formed a coalition , the Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- , but it is dominated by the Sunni community and exiled dissidents . 
The SNC disagrees with the National Co-ordination Committee -LRB- NCC -RRB- on the questions of talks with the government and foreign intervention , and has found it difficult to work with the Free Syrian Army - army defectors seeking to topple Mr Assad by force . 
International pressure on the Syrian government has been intensifying . 
It has been suspended from the Arab League , while the EU and the US have imposed sanctions . 
However , there has been no agreement on a UN Security Council resolution calling for an end to violence . 
Although military intervention has been ruled out by Western nations , there are increasing calls to arm the opposition . 
Correspondents say a peaceful solution seems unlikely . 
Syria 's leadership seems intent on crushing resistance and most of the opposition will only accept an end to the regime . 
Some believe the expected collapse of Syria 's currency and an inability to pay salaries may be the leadership 's downfall . 
There are fears , though , that the resulting chaos would be long-lasting and create a wider conflict . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
