BP cuts dividend and capex to pay for oil spill LONDON | Wed Jun 16 , 2010 4:59 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Oil giant BP said it would not pay three quarters of dividends , significantly reduce its investment program and sell $ 10 billion of assets to fund a planned $ 20 billion fund to pay for its Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The commitments , outlined in a statement on Wednesday , are harsher penalties than most investors had expected and follow BP chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg 's meeting with President Obama on Wednesday . 
BP said it would cancel the previously declared first-quarter dividend scheduled for payment on June 21 , and said no interim dividends will be declared for the second and third quarters of 2010 . 
The payouts had been expected to be about $ 2.6 billion per quarter , in line with recent quarters . 
Investors had expected the suspension of BP 's dividend , or payment in shares for a couple of quarters , and had not expected BP to be forced to sell assets and cut investment by 10 percent in 2010 and 2011 -- moves that will curb BP 's growth . 
When quizzed by analysts on a conference call about what BP had received in return for such major concessions , Chief Financial Officer Byron Grote said the agreement reflected the rising anger toward BP . '' 
-LRB- It -RRB- will certainly allow us to progress our business more effectively than would have otherwise been the case , '' he said . 
The decisions to cut investment and sell assets come despite the fact BP is committed to putting only $ 5 billion this year into the new fund , which will be administered by a body independent from BP . 
The company said it would generate over $ 30 billion from operations this year , while it also has massive credit lines . 
In 2011 and beyond , BP will make payments into the fund of $ 1.25 billion per quarter , until the fund amounts to $ 20 billion . 
Grote said the $ 20 billion was not a cap on BP 's liability , but that he expected it would cover the bulk of claims . 
Until $ 20 billion has been added to the fund , BP 's commitments will be assured by the setting aside of U.S. assets with a value of $ 20 billion , the company said . 
U.S.-listed BP shares finished 46 cents higher , or 1.5 percent , at $ 31.85 on the New York Stock Exchange . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Bergin ; Editing by Doina Chiacu , Gary Hill -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
That 's what I call a big profit speeding ticket . 
... but , but the POLLS said Obama was doing a bad job on the spill and it was pretty much all his fault ! 
The guy tells the nation that BP will pay big into an independent trust fund , 12 hours later BP is paying big into an independent trust fund . 
Like a Babe Ruth called homerun , in other words . 
What is needed for the survival of BP and a focused cleanup effort is a cap on its liabilities . 
This will save a lot of legal fees as the lawyers start piling on with class action suits totaling hundreds of billions of dollars . 
The third part escrow account will see lots of fraud and waste , but it is better than billions going to lawyers . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
