Wed Jun 16 , 2010 2:12 pm EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Millions of gallons\/liters of oil have poured into the Gulf of Mexico since an April 20 blast on the Deepwater Horizon rig triggered the huge spill . 
Below is a timeline of the spill and its impact . 
April 20 , 2010 - Explosion and fire on Transocean Ltd 's drilling rig Deepwater Horizon licensed to BP ; 11 workers are killed . 
The rig was drilling in BP 's Macondo project 42 miles southeast of Venice , Louisiana , beneath about 5,000 feet of water and 13,000 feet under the seabed . 
April 22 - The Deepwater Horizon rig , valued at more than $ 560 million , sinks and a 5-mile-long oil slick forms . 
April 25 - Efforts to activate the well 's blowout preventer fail . 
April 29 - U.S. President Barack Obama pledges `` every single available resource , '' including the U.S. military , to contain the spreading spill and says BP is responsible for the cleanup . 
April 30 - An Obama aide says no drilling will be allowed in new areas , as the president had recently proposed , until the cause of the Deepwater Horizon accident is known . 
-- BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward says the company takes full responsibility and will pay all legitimate claims and the cost of the cleanup . 
May 2 - Obama visits the Gulf Coast . 
U.S. officials close areas affected by the spill to fishing for 10 days . 
BP starts drilling a relief well alongside the failed well , a process that may take two to three months to complete . 
May 7 - An attempt to place a containment dome over the spewing well fails when the device is rendered useless by frozen hydrocarbons that clogged it . 
May 9 - BP says it might try to plug the undersea leak by pumping materials such as shredded tires and golf balls into the well at high pressure , a method called a `` junk shot . '' 
May 11\/12 - Executives from BP , Transocean and Halliburton appear at congressional hearings in Washington . 
The executives blame each other 's companies . 
May 14 - Obama slams companies involved in the spill , criticizing them for a `` ridiculous spectacle '' of publicly trading blame over the accident in his sternest comments yet . 
May 16 - BP inserts a tube into the leaking riser pile of the well and captures some oil and gas . 
May 19 - The first heavy oil from the spill hits fragile Louisiana marshlands . 
Part of the slick enters a powerful current that could carry it to the Florida Keys and beyond . 
May 26 - A `` top kill '' maneuver starts , involving pumping drilling mud and other material into the well shaft to try to stifle the flow . 
May 28 - Obama tours the Louisiana coast , saying , `` I am the president and the buck stops with me . '' 
-- BP CEO Tony Hayward flies over the Gulf . 
May 29 - BP says the complex `` top kill '' maneuver to plug the well has failed , crushing hopes for a quick end to the largest oil spill in U.S. history on its 40th day . 
June 1 - BP shares plunge 17 percent in London trading , wiping $ 23 billion off its market value , on news the latest attempt to plug the well has failed . 
-- U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder says the Justice Department has launched a criminal and civil investigation into the rig explosion and the spill . 
June 2 - BP tries another capping strategy but has difficulty cutting off a leaking riser pipe . 
-- U.S. authorities expand fishing restrictions to cover 37 percent of U.S. federal waters in the Gulf . 
June 4 - Obama , on his third trip to the region , warns BP against skimping on compensation to residents and businesses . 
June 7 - BP , which says it has now spent $ 1.25 billion on the spill , sees shares gain on news of the progress in containing the leak . 
June 8 - Obama says he wants to know `` whose ass to kick '' over the spill , adding to the pressure on BP . 
-- U.S. weather forecasters give their first confirmation that some of the oil leaking has lingered beneath the surface rather than rising to the top . 
June 9 - U.S. Interior Secretary Ken Salazar says BP must pay the salaries of thousands of workers laid off by a moratorium on drilling , at a congressional hearing . 
June 10 - The White House says that Obama has invited BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg to the White House on June 16 to discuss the spill . 
-- In his first comments , Prime Minister David Cameron says Britain is ready to help BP deal with the spill . 
-- U.S. scientists double their estimates of the amount of oil gushing from the well , saying between 20,000 and 40,000 barrels -LRB- 840,000 and 1.7 million gallons\/3 .2 million and 6.4 million liters -RRB- of oil flowed from the well before June 3 . 
June 11 - Supportive comments from Britain lift BP 's shares in London gaining 6.4 percent . 
However the rise does not mend damage done to BP shares -- the company is worth 70 billion pounds -LRB- $ 102 billion -RRB- against over 120 billion pounds in April . 
June 14 - Obama , on his fourth trip to the Gulf , says he will press BP executives at a White House meeting on June 16 to deal `` justly , fairly and promptly '' with damage claims . 
-- Under intense pressure , BP unveils a new plan to vastly boost the amount of oil it is siphoning off . 
-- Two U.S. lawmakers release a letter to BP CEO Hayward saying : `` It appears that BP repeatedly chose risky procedures in order to reduce costs and save time and made minimal efforts to contain the added risk . '' 
June 15 - Lawmakers summon top executives from Exxon Mobil , Chevron , ConocoPhillips and Royal Dutch Shell and BP -- in what is likely to be a heated showdown on the safety of drilling in the deep waters off America 's coasts . 
-- Obama said in his first televised speech from the Oval Office in the White House : `` But make no mistake : we will fight this spill with everything we 've got for as long it takes . 
We will make BP pay for the damage their company has caused . 
And we will do whatever 's necessary to help the Gulf Coast and its people recover from this tragedy . '' 
