Credit : Reuters\/Pete Souza\/The White House\/Handout WASHINGTON | Wed Jun 16 , 2010 7:59 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Under intense pressure from President Barack Obama , BP Plc agreed on Wednesday to set up a $ 20 billion fund for damage claims from its huge Gulf of Mexico oil spill and suspended dividend payments to its shareholders . 
The deal gave Obama his most tangible success since the crisis began 58 days ago and came after weeks of criticism of his handling of the disaster . 
It also eased U.S. pressure on BP , whose share price has withered amid uncertainty over the spill 's cost to the British energy giant . 
Obama announced the agreement after White House officials held four hours of talks with BP executives , who emerged to offer an apology to the American people for the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
`` I do thank you for the patience that you have during this difficult time , '' BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg said . 
`` I hear comments sometimes that large oil companies are greedy companies who do n't care . 
But that is not the case in BP . 
We care about the small people . '' 
Svanberg promised to make sure damage claims are handled swiftly and fairly . 
Chief Executive Tony Hayward , the public face of BP 's response to the disaster , will appear on Thursday at a congressional hearing where he will face intense scrutiny over events leading up to the spill and BP 's cleanup of the mess . 
An April 20 explosion on an offshore rig leased by BP killed 11 workers and ruptured a deep-sea well . 
The ensuing spill has fouled 120 miles of U.S. coastline , imperiled multibillion-dollar fishing and tourism industries and killed birds , sea turtles and dolphins . 
While Obama stressed the agreement would not cap BP 's total liabilities , Wall Street appeared to cheer the small dose of clarity the deal provided , driving up the company 's share price by 1.5 percent in New York . 
Under the agreement , BP committed to pay $ 20 billion into an independently managed fund over four years , suspend dividend payments for the rest of the year and pay $ 100 million to workers idled by the six-month moratorium on deep-sea drilling that the Obama administration imposed after the spill . 
The $ 20 billion figure is roughly equal to BP 's average annual profits over the past four years . 
`` We will continue to hold BP and all other responsible parties accountable , '' Obama said at the White House . 
`` And I 'm absolutely confident BP will be able to meet its obligations to the Gulf Coast and to the American people . '' 
The fund will be administered by Kenneth Feinberg , the Obama administration official who oversaw compensation for executives at companies that received federal bailout funds . 
Obama had pressed BP to set up a fund administered by a third party after hearing first-hand complaints from Gulf Coast residents that BP 's claims process was too complicated and the company was paying out too little money . 
With thousands of Gulf Coast commercial fishermen largely idled by the spill , Louisiana shrimper Clifton Bartholomew , 21 , wondered whether $ 20 billion would be enough . 
`` If you add it all up together -- everybody in shrimping , fishing , the whole industry -- by the time this is all gone I think they 'll need more than $ 20 billion , '' Bartholomew said . 
BP said in a statement it would cut three quarters of dividends , significantly reduce its investment program and sell $ 10 billion of assets to create the fund . 
The commitments are harsher penalties than most investors had hoped for . 
They had not expected BP to be forced to sell assets and cut investment -- moves that would curb its growth . 
BP said it would cancel the first-quarter dividend due for payment on June 21 and would not declare interim dividends for the second and third quarters of 2010 . 
The payouts were expected to be about $ 2.6 billion per quarter , in line with recent quarters . 
Obama stressed BP was `` a strong and viable company , and it is in all of our interests that it remain so . '' 
The oil giant represents a large part of investment portfolios in Britain . 
Obama and British Prime Minister David Cameron talked about the issues around the spill last weekend . 
BP 's shares gyrated in volatile New York trading , dropping as much as 5 percent before swinging to positive territory on news of the agreement on the fund , known as an escrow account . 
`` It 's a step in the right direction for BP but unfortunately I can not say the same for Tony Hayward because it is going to get tougher for him , '' said Fadel Gheit , managing director of oil and gas research at investment firm Oppenheimer & Co in New York `` Tomorrow he 's going to be in the hot seat under glaring lights and tremendous animosity and criticism '' at the hearing . 
The BP chief executive will tell lawmakers the entire oil and natural gas industry needs to be better prepared for deepwater accidents , according to his prepared testimony . 
That is an apparent response to attempts by rival oil companies to distance themselves from BP 's disaster at a hearing on Tuesday . 
As BP stock saw some relief , shares in Anadarko fell 3.69 percent and Transocean lost 3.09 percent in New York . 
Anadarko is part owner of the blown-out well and Transocean owned the rig that blew up . 
Back in the Gulf , BP said it started a second system to siphon oil from the leak on Wednesday , a day after a team of U.S. scientists raised their high-end estimate of the amount of crude oil flowing from the well by 50 percent to between 35,000 and 60,000 barrels per day . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I think we need stand behind Mr. Obama . 
Jun 15 , 2010 8:45 pm EDT -- Report as abuse The oil company presidents would say anything to save their companies from being seized by the government . 
They might balk at taking their pants off in front of live television , but that is all . 
With enough congressional insistence , they would comply . 
The POTUS got to use his skills of mass hypnosis on everyone who watched his speech . 
You will believe he is competent and not responsible ... . 
No alternative energy source gives as many portable Joules per pound as oil . 
And we are running out of them . 
Society as a whole must profoundly change . 
But voters do n't want to hear that . 
We must return to 1900 -- but with 26 times as many people . 
Let 's send everyone in Congress who ever voted for deepsea drilling down to the Gulf Coast to get their hands even dirtier and clean up their mess . 
And the navy needs to arrest Tony Hayward BP CEO . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
