Tuesday 8 February 2005 00.02 GMT The head of the UN oil-for-food program in Iraq and a senior UN official who dealt with contracts for the program have been suspended following an independent investigation that accused them of misconduct , a UN spokesman said yesterday . 
Benon Sevan , who was in charge of the $ 64bn -LRB- # 34.5 bn -RRB- humanitarian program , and Joseph Stephanides , who heads the UN security council affairs division , were informed on Friday that they had been suspended with pay , UN spokesman Fred Eckhard said . 
Mr Sevan and Mr Stephanides were told they would receive a letter this week `` laying out the charges against them '' , which will allow them to defend themselves before UN disciplinary bodies in what will likely be a lengthy appeals process , he said . 
`` Suspension is the beginning of a disciplinary process , '' Mr Eckhard said . 
Mr Sevan ran the oil-for-food program from 1996 until it ended in November 2003 and retired from the UN last year but remains on the payroll for $ 1 a year to help with the investigation . 
Mr Stephanides is scheduled to retire in about five months . 
An investigation led by the former US Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker accused Mr Sevan in an interim report released last week of a `` grave conflict of interest '' , saying his conduct in soliciting oil deals from Iraq for a friend 's company was `` ethically improper and seriously undermined the integrity of the UN . '' 
Mr Volcker did not say that Mr Sevan received kickbacks , but expressed concern about the source of $ 160,000 -LRB- # 86,000 -RRB- in cash which Mr Sevan said he received from his aunt in Cyprus from 1999-2003 . 
The report questioned this `` unexplained wealth '' . 
Mr Volcker said he is still investigating `` the scope and extent of benefits '' that Mr Sevan received from his requests that a small Swiss-based oil company , African Middle East Petroleum , known as Amep , be given a chance to buy Iraqi oil . 
The company , run by a nephew of the former UN secretary general Boutros Boutros-Ghali , made a total profit of $ 1.5 m. Mr Sevan 's lawyer , Eric Lewis , accused Mr Volcker 's committee of trying to `` scapegoat '' him . 
In an attempt to curry favor and end sanctions , Saddam Hussein gave former government officials , activists , journalists and UN officials vouchers for Iraqi oil that could then be resold at a profit . 
Mr Volcker 's report found `` convincing and uncontested evidence '' that selection of the three UN contractors for the oil-for-food program did not conform to established financial and competitive bidding rules . 
Mr Annan has said that if any of Mr Volcker 's findings lead to criminal charges , he would cooperate with national law enforcement authorities and lift diplomatic immunity . 
