Tue Apr 28 , 2009 9:03 pm BST -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Weather experts are studying swine flu to see if climate could influence its spread and severity . 
Determining the impact of cold , heat , dryness and humidity on the H1N1 strain -- which has killed up to 149 people in Mexico and had milder effects elsewhere -- could illuminate the countries and regions most vulnerable to infection . 
Climate information may also provide clues into whether the virus is likely to return year after year on a seasonal basis . 
Following are details about seasonality of regular flu , and the weather and other factors affecting its patterns , according to data from the World Health Organization , World Meteorological Organization , and leading scientists : Flu incidence peaks in the winter season in temperate parts of the world , generally described as areas outside the tropics . 
Cold and dry conditions help the virus survive outside the body , meaning that droplet particles take longer to evaporate and remain airborne for more extended periods in winter . 
Influenza outbreaks do occur in the tropics , though less frequently than in areas with less heat and humidity , and without the seasonality seen in areas with wintry weather . 
Poor laboratory and health data , especially from Africa and Latin America , have made it difficult for international experts to track viral transmission in tropical regions . 
School cycles have also been shown to affect the seasonality of flu . 
Winter school breaks tend to reduce flu transmission to children by as much as 25 percent , mainly because they provide fewer opportunities for the virus to spread among large groups . 
The precise strain of virus circulating , which can change from flu season to flu season , can also affect how virulent it is and how many people may fall ill in a given outbreak . 
The levels of immunity in the population , vaccination programs , hygiene practices and other practices also play a role . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
