Holiday maker Max Summerskill talks on his mobile phone after his holiday flight to the Mexican resort of Cancun was canceled at Manchester Airport in Manchester , northern England , April 28 , 2009 . 
TAIPEI | Tue Apr 28 , 2009 6:06 am BST TAIPEI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Global airlines could face an even bumpier landing than during the 2003 SARS crisis if a new swine flu outbreak becomes a pandemic , hitting an industry that is already reeling from the global economic downturn . 
Airline stocks in Asia continued a sell-off on Tuesday on concerns about the outbreak that began in Mexico , with Cathay Pacific -LRB- 0293 . 
HK -RRB- falling 1.7 percent in Hong Kong after dropping 8 percent the previous day . 
In Taiwan , China Airlines -LRB- 2610 . 
TW -RRB- and Eva Airways -LRB- 2618 . 
TW -RRB- fell 4 percent and 7 percent , respectively , after dropping 7 percent in the previous session in one of the markets hardest hit by the SARS outbreak six years ago . 
`` Airlines are already in a weakened position with the global crisis sapping demand for corporate travel , '' said Stone Lin , an airline analyst at Yuanta Securities in Taiwan . 
`` The summer months of July-September are typically the peak season for most airlines , with most bookings beginning right now . 
With sentiment so weak , and worsened by the swine flu issue , it 's unlikely anyone is going to go rushing to book holidays or corporate travel , which means the second half of this year wo n't be pretty for most airlines , '' he said . 
The outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome -LRB- SARS -RRB- in 2003 , centred in Asia , provides a chilling example of what could happen if swine flu follows a similar course . 
During the SARS outbreak , which began in China and quickly spread to Hong Kong , Taiwan and Singapore , global airline traffic halved . 
Airline stocks responded in kind , with carriers such as Cathay , Japan Airlines 9205 . 
T and Korean Airlines -LRB- 003490 . 
KS -RRB- tumbling 25 percent or more . 
Ratings agency Standard & Poor 's also warned of potential disruption to the airline industry depending on how the current outbreak unfolds . 
`` Though swine flu has not yet caused health problems on a similar scale , we believe airlines are at risk of suffering reduced traffic because of government-imposed quarantines and travellers ' fears , '' S&P credit analyst Philip Baggaley said in a note . 
A spokeswoman for Cathay Pacific declined to comment on how the crisis might impact earnings , but said the airline was reminding colleagues to monitor the situation . 
Most analysts said it was still too early to say how big the risk could be to airlines . 
`` The overall situation is weaker now ... because there are two headwinds the airline industry is facing : one is the global recession and now this outbreak of swine flu , '' said Daphne Roth , analyst at ABN Amro private bank . 
But she added the current situation is also different from SARS as information about the illness was coming out in a much more timely and transparent manner . 
A swine flu crisis could have less impact on Asian airlines than SARS since it originated and is currently concentrated in North America , said Viwat Techapoonphol , strategist at Tisco Securities . 
`` The SARS outbreak was here in Asia and badly hit the tourism industry at that time because governments worldwide issued warnings to avoid coming to Asia . 
This time round , swine flu is far away in Mexico and , relatively , the impact to Asia should be smaller than with SARS , '' he said . 
