LONDON | Tue Apr 28 , 2009 9:03 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Testing whether a person has swine flu is not easy and it can take days to confirm that suspected cases are actually caused by the virus , a health expert said on Tuesday . 
The World Health Organization has confirmed 79 cases of a virus it said has spread from Mexico -- where it has killed up to 149 people -- into the United States , Canada , New Zealand and Europe , raising fears of a pandemic . 
But officials suspect more than 1,600 people may have the infection -- a disparity explained in part because there is no quick test , said Andrew Easton , a virologist at the University of Warwick in Britain . 
`` Many countries now will have several labs to carry this out , '' he told Reuters in a telephone interview . 
`` You ca n't do this in the field . '' 
WHO officials only report cases that have been confirmed by their own staffers , in their own labs , at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta and a few other places . 
Mexico , for instance , ships samples to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta or Winnipeg in Canada for testing . 
While testing for seasonal flu is relatively simple , doing the same for H1N1 is far more complicated and none of the three techniques are widely available . 
One way to confirm swine flu is with a test that involves growing a virus culture in a lab and then sequencing its genetic material . 
Testing increases of antibodies and a technique called real-time PCR are the other approaches . 
The PCR technique -- which researcher Easton called the most efficient -- uses a device to amplify copies of genes so researchers can easily compare a sample taken from a sick person to the genetic material of the potentially pandemic infection . 
`` You start with a small number of copies of the virus genes and the technique multiplies them up in a test tube to give them many hundreds of thousands of copies of the virus genes which are easy to measure , '' Easton said . 
The first step for doctors and health officials is often collecting a sample at a local clinic or hospital and then sending it on to a more well-equipped lab for analysis . 
This can produce some of the biggest delays . 
Next researchers must purify the sample to get rid of natural compounds that may interfere with a reading -- something that also takes time , Easton said . 
`` Once you know the genetic makeup of the virus , the machine can tell whether the -LRB- genetic -RRB- sequence is that of the suspected infection , '' Easton said . 
`` If everything was optimized and there were plenty of people around to handle the result you could easily get a result that day . '' 
The PCR device itself can within a few hours compare the genetic makeup of the sample with that of a pandemic virus , Easton said . 
But a challenge for researchers is designing a test that health officials can conduct in the field , he added . 
`` It is technology that is stopping us from doing that at the moment , '' Easton said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Michael Kahn ; Editing by Maggie Fox -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
