LONDON | Tue Apr 28 , 2009 6:58 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Manufacturers have taken the first preparatory steps in developing a vaccine against a new strain of flu that has killed up to 149 people in Mexico and threatens to become a pandemic . 
But the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- said it would only call for large-scale production of such a pandemic vaccine if it strongly believed the world was on the edge of an unstoppable global outbreak of flu . 
Switzerland 's Novartis AG said on Tuesday it had received the genetic code of the new virus strain , enabling it to start work on evaluating production , and it hoped to receive the actual virus in its laboratories `` in the near future . '' 
Still , it is likely to take between five and six months before a vaccine is commercially available , according to the The delay is not for want of trying . 
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has already taken a sample of the H1N1 virus causing the disease , produced a vaccine virus strain and is growing it up , marking the first stage of the production process . 
These samples , which can then be distributed to companies , must be grown in specially produced chicken eggs in a cumbersome system that experts agree is outdated . 
New and more efficient technologies based on cell cultures are , however , still a few years away . 
While the race is on to prepare a pandemic vaccine , health authorities and companies still have to make the tricky decision of when , or indeed whether , to switch capacity from producing seasonal vaccines to making the new shot . 
`` If you go to pandemic flu production , people wo n't get normal flu shots -- it is a huge consideration , '' said WHO spokesman Gregory Hartl . 
At least 20 companies , in addition to Novartis , make flu vaccines , including Sanofi-Aventis , GlaxoSmithKline , Baxter International , Australia 's CSL and nasal spray maker MedImmune , now part of AstraZeneca . 
They are currently geared to producing season flu shots , which vaccine specialists say will not stop the new form of swine flu spreading around the world , although people who have been immunized may end up with milder symptoms . 
So-called swine flu is a variant of the H1N1 form of the human influenza virus , but tests show the H1N1 component of the current seasonal flu vaccine does not protect against the new strain . 
A big challenge facing manufacturers will be making sufficient quantities of vaccine from a limited supply of active ingredient , or antigen . 
One option to extend supply is to use an additive , known as an adjuvant , to increase the body 's immune response and reduce the amount of antigen needed in each shot . 
Several companies are working on this approach . 
Glaxo , in particular , said it believed its novel adjuvant technology could make a significant contribution to antigen sparing . 
The British company previously developed a vaccine against the H5N1 strain of bird flu -- originally thought to pose the biggest pandemic threat -- using a special adjuvant that allowed an extremely low dose of active ingredient to be used . 
Credit Suisse analysts said companies with the know-how to make pandemic flu vaccines stood to benefit from additional sales , adding there could also be an increase in seasonal flu vaccine demand as disease awareness increases . 
