Oil spill : BP ` may suspend dividend payout ' Board of energy giant to discuss withholding dividend as efforts to cap ruptured well put strain on US-British relations Saturday 12 June 2010 13.47 BST Thick oil from the BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill floats on the surface of the water near Port Sulphur in Louisiana . 
Photograph : Saul Loeb\/AFP\/Getty Images BP could suspend its dividend payout to shareholders over the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , the energy giant has confirmed . 
The company said its board would meet on Monday to consider withholding the latest tranche of a # 7bn annual payout . 
The move comes as David Cameron and Barack Obama prepare to discuss the crisis this afternoon . 
A BP spokesman admitted there had been `` a lot of political pressure '' on the company , and said that suspending the dividend was `` an option that 's up for discussion '' . 
`` No decision has been made on it , we are looking at options , '' he said . 
`` There 's a board meeting on Monday , but they are not necessarily going to take a decision on it then . '' 
Scientists have said that the amount of oil gushing out of the ruptured well , which bores a mile deep into the seabed , is far higher than previously estimated . 
Up to 40,000 barrels a day , over a period of weeks , could have escaped before containment efforts were implemented , the US Geological Survey calculated . 
The US president was due to phone Cameron at 4pm -LRB- UK time -RRB- , before taking his fourth trip to the Gulf coast to assess the response to the spill and meet affected residents on Monday and Tuesday , the White House said . 
There have been claims that Obama 's hard line on BP is jeopardising both its share price and British pensions . 
Cameron has been under pressure from senior figures , such as the London mayor , Boris Johnson , to defend BP and stand up to his US counterpart . 
Cameron yesterday told the BP chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg , that it was `` in everyone 's interests that BP continues to be a financially strong and stable company '' . 
But the prime minister acknowledged Obama 's anger , adding that he too was `` frustrated and concerned about the environmental damage caused by the leak '' . 
Svanberg has been summoned to the White House for talks with Obama on Wednesday . 
The deputy prime minister , Nick Clegg , said yesterday that he would not allow the row to become a '' tit-for-tat political diplomatic spat '' . 
