WRAPUP 11-BP says test shuts off oil leak from Gulf well \* Obama calls the development a `` positive sign '' \* BP likely to move back to oil siphoning after test \* BP shares jump after initial test results \* Apache moves ahead on possible deal for BP properties -LRB- Adds Coast Guard comment , paragraph 6 , other details -RRB- HOUSTON , July 15 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- -LRB- BP . 
N -RRB- said on Thursday it stopped the flow of oil into the Gulf of Mexico from its deep-sea well for the first time since it ruptured in April , prompting hope that the leak can be plugged for good . 
BP conducted a test in which it closed valves and vents on a tight-sealing containment cap installed atop its the well earlier this week . 
BP said results early in the test showed the cap had completely contained the flow of oil . 
-LRB- ID : nN15196767 -RRB- `` It 's a great sight but it 's far from the finish line , '' Doug Suttles , a senior BP executive , told reporters . 
President Barack Obama , who has seen his U.S. public approval ratings drop as the crisis dragged on , called it a `` positive sign '' but noted that the latest effort was still in the testing phase . 
BP 's huge oil spill has caused an economic and environmental disaster along the U.S. Gulf Coast . 
The British energy giant 's U.S. shares initially jumped 10 percent on the news and posted strong gains for the day . 
The Coast Guard said BP likely will release the flow of oil again after the test is done -- siphoning it to ships on the ocean surface in an improved system able to handle up to 80,000 barrels a day until a relief well seals the well permanently . 
As the company pushed ahead on the spill-control effort , U.S. energy company Apache Corp -LRB- APA . 
N -RRB- was moving forward on a possible $ 10 billion deal for some BP properties , including major assets in Alaska , CNBC reported . 
The test , which could last up to 48 hours , gauges pressure in the well -- which extends 2.5 miles -LRB- 4 km -RRB- under the seabed -- to assess its condition . 
Officials said it will show whether the cap can safely shut off the flow from the well if oil-capture vessels at the surface must disconnect . 
The Coast Guard calls the containment cap at best a temporary fix to the leak while BP finishes two relief wells it is drilling . 
BP intends for a relief well to intersect the blown-out well and permanently seal it next month . 
The test is intended to determine whether the structure of the lengthy well is damaged or intact . 
Retired Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen , the U.S. government 's point man on the spill , compared the test to placing one 's thumb over the end of a garden hose -- if the pressure does not increase that means there is a leak somewhere . 
Regarding the BP well , a build-up of pressure would signal that the well is intact , which would make it easier to seal it with the relief wells . 
The cap is a crucial step toward a multi-vessel oil-capture system that is hurricane-ready and can collect up to 80,000 barrels per day . 
That should be more than enough to capture the whole well output , as estimates put the spill rate between 35,000 barrels -LRB- 1.47 million gallons\/5 .56 million liters -RRB- and 60,000 barrels -LRB- 2.5 million gallons\/9 .5 million liters -RRB- a day . 
There appeared to be fresh hope in Gulf Coast communities reeling from the spill . 
`` It 's a great thing , it 's a wonderful thing , '' said Jerome DeGree in Larose , Louisiana when he heard that BP had at least temporarily stopped the flow . 
`` This has been hurting this whole area , '' the shallow-water oil driller said . 
`` I could n't buy my shrimp , I could n't buy my oysters , I could n't take my boat out . '' 
Reports that Apache was seeking $ 6 billion to $ 7 billion for the purchase helped boost BP 's U.S. shares from midday . 
The shares then rose further on the initial test results and ended up 7.6 percent at $ 38.92 . 
`` It 's been one of those headline things we 've heard for 87 days , lots of people waiting for some good news , '' said John Massey , portfolio manager at Sunamerica Asset Management in Jersey City , New Jersey . 
Analysts surveyed by Reuters Insider predict that BP will spend between $ 63 billion to $ 100 billion over the next 15 years in fines , cleanup costs and legal costs . 
BP 's shares have been ravaged since the well rupture , with $ 100 billion in market value being knocked off at one stage , before a three-week rally sparked by takeover talk , speculation about investment by a sovereign wealth fund and hopes that the well would be capped . 
The news that BP had finally stopped the leak -- at least during the test -- was a bit of good news for the British company , which has seen its share value plummet and reputation battered since the April rig explosion that killed 11 workers and led to the spill of millions of gallons of oil . 
BP also faced new measures in the U.S. Congress . 
Lawmakers are mulling a range of new laws that could require tougher safety regulations on offshore drilling or bar companies like BP from new offshore exploration leases . 
-LRB- ID : nN15210454 -RRB- The U.S. government , which has vowed to make BP pay for fixing the well and all cleanup efforts , told the oil giant that it was responsible for paying all royalties on the oil it is collecting from the ruptured well . 
-LRB- ID : nN15220646 -RRB- Currently , energy companies pay the government a royalty rate of up to 18.75 percent of the value of the oil and gas drilled in offshore tracts . 
Through its containment systems , BP has collected or burned more than 800,000 barrels of oil . 
The Gulf spill has soiled hundreds of miles -LRB- km -RRB- of shoreline , shut down about a third of Gulf fisheries and hurt tourism and fishing in all five U.S. Gulf states . 
It has also created problems for Obama as the government works to respond to the crisis while area residents struggle financially . 
In an issue unrelated to the spill , but illustrating the pressure BP faces in the United States , the company confirmed on Thursday that it had lobbied the British government to speed up a prisoner transfer agreement with Libya in late 2007 . 
-LRB- For a fact box on BP in Libya , see -LRB- ID : nLDE66E0ZO -RRB- -RRB- In August 2009 , Britain released a Libyan convicted of blowing up a U.S. plane , angering the United States . 
Many of the 270 dead in the 1988 Lockerbie bombing were American . 
-LRB- ID : nWLA8411 -RRB- The U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee said it would hold a hearing on the issue on July 29 . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Hopefully it is much more !! I did n't realize how much tax the government rakes in off petroleum products . 
At the pump it total 's near 70 % ... . 
and the oil company s still make billions ???? The U.S. government , which has vowed to make BP pay for fixing the well and all cleanup efforts , told the oil giant that it was responsible for paying all royalties on the oil it is collecting from the ruptured well . 
Currently , energy companies pay the government a royalty rate of up to 18.75 percent of the value of the oil and gas drilled in offshore tracts . 
President wants every red penniy it can get out of BP . 
Like they do n't know they have to pay the tax . 
We all know we have to PAY . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
