By Nic Robertson , CNN Senior International Correspondent Nic Robertson has been covering the unrest in Egypt for CNN Robertson and his crew have a scary encounter in the dark , unruly streets of Alexandria Robertson : Streets at night belong to the strong , a sort of semi-self-regulating anarchy rules Robertson and crew told journalists are to blame for portraying Egypt in a bad light Editor 's Note : Nic Robertson has been covering the unrest in Egypt for CNN . 
This is his account of a frightening encounter he and his crew had with a menacing crowd on the increasingly chaotic streets of Alexandria . 
Alexandria , Egypt -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The longest walk is when you do n't know where it will end . 
The longest minute is when you are worried about what 's coming . 
In Alexandria , both are in easy reach . 
Two hundred yards , that 's all that separated us from thousands of chanting demonstrators . 
They 'd been marching all afternoon listening to calls of solidarity . 
Now it was night , rain was falling and stragglers were leaving toward us . 
As we walked toward them , the dark , gaping , cavernous sidestreets were oozing menacing , stick-wielding men . 
Makeshift power lines sagged between the aging apartment blocks . 
CNN ordered not to film Egypt protests A trip outside of Cairo 's Tahrir square Americans getting out of Egypt First they were calling us , then grabbing , demanding passports . 
The men with the sticks were swarming us . 
The men escorting us were telling us to be calm not to worry . 
Our passports were taken , inspected and handed back . 
That 's when the confusion began . 
Who were we , why were there . 
Within the past few days , state media has raised paranoia to fever pitch . 
Always wary of outsiders ' intentions , the government is succeeding in dividing protesters . 
Not just for and against the government but over the very nature and portrayal of the uprising . 
They are trying every means to break unity . 
We 'd come with a group organizing the anti-Mubarak protest we wanted to cover . 
We were driven on the dark streets past checkpoints manned partly by soccer-playing boys , partly by soldiers and partly by what looked like the same stick-wielding , marauding men crowding around us now . 
More of them were closing in now . 
The tiny gaggle around us was swelling and seething . 
Everyone passing by was drawn to the drama that was becoming our inquisition . 
Everyone wanted a say , everyone looking to get involved , take sides , take charge , make a decision . 
We should have an official government paper , an angry man in the black leather jacket was shouting . 
It was becoming chaotic . 
Everyone had an opinion . 
Division and disorder were rampant , people pushing and shoving , our guides apologizing . 
No one person in charge . 
The police are gone , the army guard their bases and government property . 
The streets at night belong to the strong , a sort of semi-self-regulating anarchy rules . 
As suddenly as he stopped us , the man in the leather jacket let us go . 
Hands placed on our backs , we were pushed onward toward the demonstrators . 
He had given in to the crowd , been pushed down , persuaded we had a right to cover the protest . 
For a few moments , we were free . 
Then we heard his voice again , shouting behind us . 
This time he had others with him , leather-covered sticks embedded with brass nailheads in their hands . 
Now he was determined . 
Now the angry in the crowd outnumbered the apologetic . 
Now the minute began and so did the walk . 
He told us we were being taken away to `` another place . '' 
The shouting was reaching fever pitch , people grappling with one another , we were being spun around . 
My cameraman , Todd Baxter , and I were being separated from our producer , Saad Abedine , and Alexandria fixer Mohammed . 
The hands were pushing us the other way now . 
We were spies , the man in the leather jacket was shouting . 
Impossible to know where we were being taken . 
He kept marching us down the street , his henchmen at his heel . 
We tried to slow and move to our car at the roadside . 
To my dismay and concern , our driver was gone . 
That was my hope blown , any chance of a run for it gone . 
And still no idea where we were being taken . 
Our unintended escort was telling us we were to blame for portraying Egypt in a bad light . 
We were bringing the image of the country down . 
It 's a fuzzy logic that defies the obvious . 
What 's happening is willed by Egyptians on their own countrymen . 
He was n't listening . 
No punches were being laid , but the menace was clear . 
The walk ended at the army base . 
The crowd circling , still pushing , shoving , shouting . 
The soldiers cut through the chaos and took us in . 
It was as night turning to day . 
They were polite , organized , calm and courteous . 
They took a cursory glance at our passports and camera , let us wait behind their heavy gate until the crowd moved on . 
It 's chaos out there , and they know it . 
