2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Hospira , the only U.S. manufacturer of sodium thiopental , an anesthetic used as part of the lethal three-drug cocktail , announced last month that it would stop making the product , saying it never intended it to be used to kill people . 
But the FDA continues to allow states to import `` bulk amounts '' of the drug for use in lethal injection without vetting it to ensure it meets regulatory standards , the lawsuit states . 
The five most popular stories on CNN.com in the past 24 hours , according to NewsPulse . 
Teen 's alleged police beating caught on tape : Houston 's mayor and police department were on the defensive Friday , two days after graphic video came out showing several police repeatedly kicking and beating a teen . 
Chick-fil-A controversy shines light on restaurant 's Christian DNA : The ongoing Chick-fil-A flap -- which has gay rights groups blasting the restaurant chain for donating food to an anti-gay marriage group -- may be a fleeting controversy for a privately held company that is more accustomed to fiercely loyal patrons and generally positive press coverage . 
Arlington burial refused for U.S. ally : The family of a man who fought alongside U.S. troops in Vietnam have been told their relative will not be allowed to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery . 
FULL STORY AT&T fires back in Verizon iPhone ad bout : A complicated love triangle is playing out on television , not on soap operas , but in commercials from AT&T and Verizon Wireless about Apple 's iPhone . 
Egypt 's government meets opposition : Apparent fissures in Egypt 's regime surfaced Saturday as key members of the embattled ruling party , including President Hosni Mubarak 's once heir-apparent son , resigned their party leadership posts and the vice president began talks with opposition leaders . 
-LRB- Update 3:00 a.m. in Cairo , 8:00 p.m. ET -RRB- New glimpses emerged Saturday into the sensitive diplomatic strategy the Obama administration is using to help bring about a transition in which Mubarak himself helps to dismantle his own power structure . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , speaking at the Munich Security Conference , urged support for the man Mubarak named to carry out that transition , Vice President Omar Suleiman . 
`` There are forces in at work in any society , '' Clinton said , `` in particular in one that is facing these kinds of challenges , who will try to derail or overtake the process to pursue their own specific agenda , which is why I think it 's important to support the transition process announced by the Egyptian government actually headed by now-Vice President Omar Suleiman . '' 
-LRB- Update 1:15 a.m. in Cairo , 6:15 p.m. ET -RRB- U.S. President Barack Obama emphasized the importance of an `` orderly , peaceful transition '' to a government that is `` responsive to the aspirations of the Egyptian people . '' 
In phone calls with foreign leaders Saturday , Obama also urged `` credible , inclusive negotiations between the government and the opposition , '' according to the White House . 
-LRB- Update 12:30 a.m. in Cairo , 5:30 p.m. ET -RRB- U.S. Vice President Joe Biden spoke with Suleiman by phone Saturday and asked about negotiations Suleiman had with several opposition leaders and intellectuals about Egypt 's future , the White House said . 
`` He stressed the need for a concrete reform agenda , a clear timeline , and immediate steps that demonstrate to the public and the opposition that the Egyptian government is committed to reform , '' according to the White House . 
Biden also called for the immediate release of journalists and activists who have been detained without cause , the White House said . 
-LRB- Update 11:45 p.m. in Cairo , 4:45 p.m. ET -RRB- It 's just after midnight in Cairo and anti-Mubarak protesters are still standing their ground in Tahrir Square in defiance of a government curfew for the 12th night in a row , CNN 's Ivan Watson reports . 
-LRB- Update 11:45 p.m. in Cairo , 4:45 p.m. ET -RRB- Israeli President Shimon Peres defended the Egyptian president , saying , `` In spite of all the attacks against President Mubarak , I know him for many years , throughout his presidency and I accredit him as one of the persons who saved many lives by preventing war in the Middle East , who saved lives of Egyptians , of Arabs , of Israelis , by not allowing to renew a war . '' 
-LRB- Update 10:45 p.m. in Cairo , 3:45 p.m. ET -RRB- Anti-government rallies outside of Egypt continued Saturday in major cities worldwide , including New York , Washington , Atlanta , Paris , France , and the West Bank . 
In Washington , iReporter Inga Lukaviciute captured video of a group of loud but peaceful protesters carrying signs and Egyptians flags as they marched from the Egyptian embassy to the White House chanting anti-Mubarak slogans . 
Check out a complete timeline of the unrest in Egypt . 
It 's been almost two weeks since 20,000 protesters spilled into the streets of Cairo in an unprecedented display of anti-government rage , inspired in part by revolts in Tunisia that forced the collapse of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali 's 23-year rule . 
Organizers of the January 25 protests that triggered the unrest chose that day - Police Day - to highlight the role of police corruption in addition to frustrations over the rising cost of living and failed economic policies . 
But all those concerns were distilled into one overriding demand : the resignation of President Hosni Mubarak , who has survived would-be assassins and illness , crushed a rising Islamist radical movement and maintained the peace with neighboring Israel that got his predecessor killed to rule Egypt for three decades . 
-LRB- More on Mubarak 's reign -RRB- Initially , it appeared that Mubarak had no intention of abandoning his post . 
Over time , he has taken steps that appear to some as gradual steps toward relinquishing power , and to others , mere gestures . 
Below we chart the major events in the apparent tide of transition : Mother Nature smiled Saturday on ice-weary metro Dallas residents and Super Bowl visitors , providing sunny skies and snow-melting temperatures in the lower 50s . 
After four days of often-miserable driving conditions and closed schools and offices , millions were out and about , shaking off cabin fever and stocking up for the nation 's annual ode to football , food and fun advertising . 
`` We are so thankful , '' said Tiara Ellis Richard , media relations coordinator for the Arlington Police Department and a member of a joint public safety task force established for the Super Bowl . 
Sunday will be cloudy and chillier , with a chance of a rain and snow mix by Sunday evening 's kickoff , but it should n't be that big a deal , CNN forecasters said . 
Very light accumulations of snow are possible on grass and elevated surfaces . 
The lawyer representing two U.S. hikers jailed in Iran has been denied a request to visit his clients on the eve of their trial for allegedly trespassing into the country , he told CNN on Saturday . 
`` I asked to see them before the trial , but the judge told me I could n't , '' said Masoud Shafii . 
The judge has granted Shafii permission to visit Shane Bauer and Josh Fattal for a few hours on Sunday prior to the start of the trial , Shafii said . 
Bauer , 28 , Fattal , 28 , and Sarah Shourd , 32 , were detained July 31 , 2009 , after they allegedly strayed across an unmarked border into Iran while hiking in Iraq 's Kurdistan region . 
Prosecutors in Iran have charged them with spying and trespassing . 
Last September , Iranian authorities released Shourd , on bail because of a medical condition . 
Shourd has not responded to a court summons this week to return and stand trial on Sunday , Shafii said . 
Iranian authorities said she will be tried in absentia if she does n't appear in court . 
Human rights groups have condemned their arrests and their lengthy wait for a trial in Iran 's notorious Evin prison . 
A magnitude 5.6 earthquake struck Chile at 1:11 p.m. -LRB- 11:11 a.m. ET -RRB- Saturday , the U.S. Geological Survey reported . 
The quake , centered about 90 kilometers -LRB- 55 miles -RRB- south-southwest of Concepcion , was 13.7 kilometers -LRB- 8.5 miles -RRB- below the surface , the USGS said . 
A magnitude 7.1 quake struck 100 miles south of Concepcion on January 2 , and a magnitude 8.8 quake struck near the city a year ago , killing hundreds . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
