BP says ` static kill ' to stop oil leak was successful BP pumped mud into the well for eight hours during the procedure BP says the `` static kill '' of its ruptured Gulf of Mexico oil well has worked , a big step towards sealing it . 
In the procedure , special drilling fluid known as mud is pumped into the well , forcing the oil back down . 
BP said well pressure was being controlled by the pressure of the mud , which was `` the desired outcome '' . 
Meanwhile , a government report due to be published today is expected to say that only 26 % of the leaked oil poses any further danger to the environment . 
About three-quarters of the escaped oil has already evaporated , dispersed , been captured or otherwise eliminated , according to a new analysis by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- Noaa -RRB- , reported in the New York Times . 
BP began pumping mud into the well from vessels on the surface at 2000 GMT on Tuesday , in order to counter the pressure from the oil pushing out of the reservoir below the seabed . 
BP spokeswoman Sheila Williams said the drilling mud was currently holding the oil down . 
`` The well appears to have reached a static condition - a significant milestone , '' she said . 
`` The well is now being monitored , per the procedure , to ensure the well remains static . 
Further pumping of mud may or may not be required depending on the results observed during monitoring . '' 
The well ruptured after an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig in April which killed 11 workers . 
The flow ended on 15 July , when BP closed a new cap it had put on the well . 
It could eventually seal the mouth of the well with cement . 
The US government says the well leaked 4.9 million barrels of oil before being capped last month , with only 800,000 barrels being captured . 
But it is expected to announce on Wednesday that only 26 % of the oil released was still in the water or onshore in a form that possibly could cause new problems . 
Most of that oil is either a light sheen at the surface or in a dispersed form below the surface , and federal scientists believe both forms are breaking down rapidly , the New York Times reports . 
Fears that a huge underwater accumulation of oil might eventually surface and pollute beaches are therefore unfounded , the report suggests . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
