Syria crisis : Iraq 's Falah Fayadh ` positive ' on talks Pressure is mounting on the Syrian president to end nine months of violence An Iraqi delegation led by National Security adviser Falah al-Fayadh says it has held `` positive '' talks in Syria aimed at ending the violence there . 
Mr Fayadh was trying to broker a deal based on Arab League proposals , and said he would update the group at a meeting in Cairo on Wednesday . 
Meanwhile , Syria 's main opposition group held a conference in Tunisia . 
The Syrian National Council is trying to present itself as a government-in-waiting set to replace Bashar al-Assad . 
Pressure is mounting on the Syrian president to end the violence that the UN says has taken more than 5,000 lives since March . 
Widespread anti-government protests encouraged by the Arab Spring triggered a harsh crackdown that has brought regional and international condemnation . 
But after months of bloodshed and no sign of the regime falling , some Syrians have taken up arms in a bid to remove President Assad . 
Security forces killed at least 24 people on Saturday , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said , most of them in the central province of Homs , a center of anti-government protests . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees , a group which organises and documents anti-government protests , said 40 people were killed , including eight former soldiers killed in clashes with the Syrian army . 
It is unlikely the Iraqi delegation - which says it had also been in touch with the opponents of Mr Assad - would visit Damascus without at least the tacit approval of Syria 's strategic neighbor Iran , says the BBC 's Jim Muir in Baghdad . 
Jonathan Head BBC News , Istanbul The opposition in Syria has proved remarkably resilient in the face of the heavy firepower used by the Syrian authorities - but it lacks clear leadership . 
This was supposed to be provided by the Syrian National Council , which was established in Istanbul in September - but the council 's leaders are mostly intellectuals in exile who have limited contact with those organising resistance inside Syria . 
They hope that their first congress this weekend will produce a much clearer agreed strategy . 
Concern over the readiness of the opposition to take over from President Assad is one factor holding some countries back from endorsing international intervention in Syria . 
Fittingly , this congress is being held on the first anniversary of the Arab uprisings , in Tunisia , where they began . 
The Iraqis also appeared to think they had US support for the attempt , adds our correspondent , with Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki and Mr Fayadh having just returned from talks in Washington . 
Iraq may appear an unlikely mediator , as its Shia-led government has largely sided with President Assad , adds our correspondent . 
Baghdad did not vote in favor of a raft of economic sanctions imposed recently by the Arab League . 
Leaving Damascus , Mr Fayadh said : `` I am on my way to Cairo for a meeting with the Arab League after holding positive talks with President Assad . '' 
Qatar 's Prime Minister Sheikh Hamad Bin Jassim Bin Jabr al-Thani , meanwhile , said the 22-member Arab bloc would give Syria until Wednesday 's Cairo meeting to allow in observers or it would consider turning to the UN Security Council for action . 
The league suspended Syria 's membership last month , and then imposed sanctions as it tried to persuade Damascus to accept a peace plan that includes the deployment of hundreds of outside observers . 
Some recent Syrian protests have criticised the Arab bloc for canceling a Syria-focused meeting on Saturday and extending a deadline for Damascus to end the crackdown and agree to the observer mission . 
Earlier this month Damascus said it would allow the mission to enter Syria on a number of conditions - including the lifting of sanctions . 
Some 200 members of the Syrian National Council are meeting in the resort of Gammarth north of Tunis in a bid to further unify the Syrian opposition . 
`` We need to emerge from this congress with a higher level of organization , clearer targets and more momentum , '' said SNC leader Burhan Ghalioun . 
The congress opened on Friday evening and runs until Sunday . 
The formation of the SNC was formally announced in Istanbul , Turkey , in September , but its leaders are mostly exiled intellectuals who have limited contact with those organising resistance inside Syria . 
Earlier this month , the SNC said it had agreed to co-ordinate action with the Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- , largely made up of renegade soldiers . 
The council said the FSA had agreed to reduce attacks on government forces . 
Analysts say the SNC may face a challenge from another opposition grouping , the National Alliance , which was formed in Istanbul on Thursday . 
Foreign correspondents are largely banned from the country , making it difficult to confirm accounts of the unrest . 
President Assad has denied ordering security forces to attack peaceful protesters , and says the violence is being orchestrated by armed gangs . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
