-LRB- By Frank Polich -- Associated Press -RRB- Performance-enhancing drugs , especially in baseball , and performance-enhancing leverage on Wall Street may be akin under the skin . 
I do n't insist that the parallel holds . 
But I certainly suspect it . 
Trends in society , good and bad , seldom appear in just one place . 
Sport is sometimes an area that tips us off to what 's coming . 
Perhaps something as large as a financial crisis shows itself in countless arenas and we each recognize some aspect of it in the places we understand best . 
For me at least , it seems clear that baseball hit several of the same sad landmarks as the financial world , though baseball arrived at each juncture a few years earlier . 
At the risk of an iota of optimism , the national pastime seems to have passed the nadir of its crisis of public trust within the last year . 
If only banks could mend as fast . 
Before the bosses of finance , already rich beyond imagination , took on too much risk and debt , baseball had broken fresh ground on greed , lax rules , indifference to risk and an anything-goes-if-it-makes - a-buck ethos . 
Yet it took the game a decade to slide into a sorry state . 
Starting in the late '80s , steroids made their way into the sport . 
But they were adopted slowly . 
Players , sensibly , viewed the drugs as risky , mysterious , not fully tested . 
By 1991 , steroids were also specifically against baseball 's rules . 
So , if you cared about your health , your ethics or the implications of getting caught , you had ample reason to look at `` juiced '' players and say , `` Not for me . '' 
The strike of '94 changed that . 
When the game came back in '95 after a canceled World Series , a sense of crisis was everywhere . 
Baseball 's hierarchy , in management and the union , made no pretense that they cared what players did to jack up their performance . 
The game 's popularity had to be saved . 
The ad slogan `` Chicks love the long ball '' sent a message . 
A culture , whether in sport or business , changes a click at a time , not all at once . 
By ' 98 , when Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa finished their pursuit and demolition of Roger Maris 's record 61 home runs , the shift in mores was in full swing . 
If you were n't using `` whatever it takes , '' then you were at a competitive disadvantage . 
To be the greatest in the game , always the furious driving force behind seven-time MVP Barry Bonds and seven-time Cy Young Award winner Roger Clemens , was n't the choice clear ? 
At that point , with the whole sport in a tacit agreement to remain silent -LRB- and set a new attendance record almost every year -RRB- , who was going to blow the whistle ? 
The excessive behavior had to run its course until some unpredicted event -- like the FBI busting a drug lab in San Francisco -- sent the secrets and sins spewing out . 
Only then could the long process of blame and recrimination , congressional outrage and public disgust , begin to take shape . 
Finally , attempts at reform , and a new attitude within the sport toward the problem , could emerge . 
Now , even a president has said , `` Wall Street got drunk and we got the hangover . '' 
But the process of inebriation took a long time , just like baseball 's spiral into widespread steroid use . 
Many of the new `` financial products '' -- which could be used to gamble more -- arrived in the '90s . 
But just as ballplayers were initially reluctant to try something as little known and dangerous as steroids , financial markets stuck one toe at a time into derivatives . 
Who knew that new concoctions , all too familiar now , like CDOs and credit default swaps , were on some math whiz 's mind . 
Just as , perhaps , the `` clear '' and the `` cream '' were still just a Balco chemist 's fantasy ? 
Steroids and human growth hormone never really took over baseball until an industry-wide trauma -- including a canceled World Series -- helped create an anything-goes ethos . 
The financial arena may have had a similar watershed crisis -- the popping of the Internet stock bubble . 
