' I just want to survive and go home with all my body parts ' Fears of soldiers on patrol in Mosul as US military death toll in Iraq tops 1,500 Friday 4 March 2005 03.27 GMT The city was quiet but the soldiers sitting and swaying inside the Stryker were animated by their favorite debate : was it better to be five metres or 20 metres from an explosion ? 
The front gunner belonged to the 20-metre school , figuring the greater distance reduced your chances of losing limbs to the blast . 
The two rear gunners scoffed and said that would increase the odds of being hit by shrapnel , which fanned upwards and outwards . 
Five months of patrolling Mosul had furnished evidence for both views and the discussion was as well-worn as the Stryker 's tyres . 
Sergeant David Phillips , 23 , sighed and patted his flak jacket . 
`` I just want to stay alive and go home with all my body parts . '' 
He spoke for 150,000 American soldiers in Iraq . 
Yesterday the number of US military deaths since the March 2003 invasion crept over 1,500 . 
There was no official acknowledgment of the milestone , just curt statements that three soldiers had died in two separate attacks on Wednesday . 
`` Names are being withheld pending notification of next of kin . '' 
The figure includes accidents . 
The daily drip of US casualties passes almost unnoticed now , a footnote to the wider slaughter of Iraqis : five policemen killed in two car bombs yesterday , 13 soldiers killed on Wednesday , a judge on Tuesday , at least 115 police and army recruits and civilians on Monday . 
Some 18,000 civilians are estimated to have died . 
Yesterday 's headlines were about the renewal of Iraq 's state of emergency , fresh attacks on oil pipelines , and deadlock between Shias and Kurds over forming a new government . 
The men of Bravo company , an infantry unit which rides in the armored Stryker vehicles of 321 Battalion in Mosul , did not care that since George Bush 's re-election the artificial limbs and flag-draped coffins of US troops have faded in political significance . 
For them , it was personal . 
`` I do n't tell my mom or my wife that we drive up and down streets getting blown up every day . 
They 'd just worry all the time . 
I tell them we sit in the base and do the odd mission , '' said Sgt Nathan Purdy , who is 23 . 
A week embedded with Bravo company , midway through a year-long stint in an insurgent stronghold , showed a group of men with good morale and determination to catch `` bad guys '' but divided over the war and frustrated by an elusive enemy . 
There was consensus about the reaction when home on leave . 
`` People wanting to buy you drinks , buy you food , wanting to shake your hand , they made you feel a hero , '' said Specialist Matt Sutton , 24 , from Illinois . 
Those from liberal states such as Washington said anti-war activists did not criticise them personally or echo the Vietnam-era chant of baby killer . 
`` The country is behind us . 
They did n't dare , '' said one lieutenant . 
Bravo Company 's quarters are a bombed-out palace in the grounds of Camp Freedom , a sprawl of cabins and concrete shelters . 
Mortars land regularly but tend not to hit anything . 
Lieutenant Colonel Mike Gibler said his battalion 's main objective was rebuilding the Iraqi security forces which `` imploded '' last November after insurgents overran Mosul 's police stations . 
The Iraqi army was improving thanks to joint operations and would soon take half of the responsibility of securing the city . 
Asked about the police force he rolled his eyes , but speculated that there was enough progress for US forces to leave within three years . 
His desk had tomes on Islam and a `` Do n't mess with Texas '' sticker . 
Enlisted men were less sure about progress , complaining they were always on the defensive and waiting to be attacked by insurgents . 
`` They fight like bitches , pop a few shots , then hide , '' said Sgt Ramirez Flores . 
Drive-by shootings have wounded several in the unit but the big fear is roadside bombs which according to the Pentagon accounted for 56 % of all US battle deaths in the first two months of this year . 
They are hidden in rubbish bags , animal carcasses , holes , rubble , cars and carts , turning every object into a potential killer . 
A suicide car bomber rammed and immolated one of the battalion 's Strykers but all the occupants survived , prompting reverence for the eight-wheel , 23-tonne monsters . 
A tip about weapons caches this week led to a midnight mission to dig up a lawn . 
`` Fucking gardeners - what are we doing here ? '' 
`` And tomorrow we 're giving out candy to kids again , '' replied his friend . 
`` We did n't train for this . '' 
