World economic leaders will gather in Washington Saturday for a summit to address the global financial crisis . 
It is no coincidence that Brazil , China , India and other emerging-market nations have not only been invited to the summit but are expected to play meaningful roles . 
The credit crunch , which began in the United States , has quickly spread to the developing world . 
The summit agenda will be dominated by monetary policy coordination and new roles for international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund . 
In his Nov. 3 op-ed , `` Fairness for Emerging Markets , '' Kemal Dervis made the case for `` making massive credit lines available '' to most emerging-market economies . 
But if we are to limit the depth of the looming global recession , trade finance must also be on the agenda . 
Cross-border lending by banks based in developed countries fell at a record pace in the second quarter and continued its decline at an accelerated rate in the third quarter . 
One casualty is the drying up of trade finance , the lifeblood of $ 14 trillion annually in global commerce . 
Wachovia 's recent troubles , for example , have already led to a sharp reduction in short-term trade finance lines to Latin America . 
Other banks are reassessing credit lines for trading with Asia , Africa and Eastern Europe . 
The credit crisis has moved into trade finance as largely a funding problem . 
If bank lines are shut off , it would be devastating for the economies of the developing world . 
It would also have a boomerang effect on the United States and Europe , as key export markets -- and the jobs that go with them -- disappeared . 
Fortunately , there are institutions already built to promote trade finance : export credit agencies . 
The Export-Import Bank of the United States was established by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1934 , in the midst of the Great Depression . 
It is a `` lender of last resort '' that provides credit lines when private financial markets are not lending . 
Last year , the bank authorized more than $ 12 billion in guarantees and insurance to support U.S. exporters . 
Export credit agencies have helped mitigate a financial crisis before . 
In late 1997 , banks were unwilling to provide credit to Asia after currency and equity markets there plunged . 
The U.S. Export-Import Bank confirmed letters of credit issued by 15 South Korean banks to support the purchase of raw materials and spare parts needed by Korean manufacturers . 
In February 1998 , 20 official export credit agencies met in London to encourage each other to remain open and to offer new support to exports to Asia . 
The U.S. Export-Import Bank played its part by initiating a new program for South Korea that month . 
Within nine months , it supported 2,460 transactions worth more than $ 1 billion for U.S. exporters to sell to Korean firms -LRB- up from only $ 40 million the year before -RRB- . 
Similar trade credit programs were launched for Indonesia and Thailand . 
These special short-term lending and trade credit insurance lines played a catalytic role in helping to build confidence in Asia at a critical time -- and helped the region rebound quickly . 
None of the Korean banks defaulted , and the entire Export-Import Bank Korean program cost American taxpayers not one dime . 
In the coming days , the U.S. Export-Import Bank and other export credit agencies should take the lead in getting trade finance flowing again . 
First , the export credit agencies should convene to share information and confirm credit availability for the pivotal months ahead . 
The World Trade Organization has called a special meeting of trade finance players for Wednesday , and the subject will be a major topic of discussion at next Monday 's meeting of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development . 
But Saturday 's summit is the venue to push for decisive action . 
Second , even though the Federal Reserve Bank 's discount window is now available to non-bank institutions , the volume of credit needed suggests it is crucial to find a way for the Export-Import Bank to fund asset-based lenders who support thousands of small suppliers in connection to exports . 
The bank should institute a new and unprecedented , but temporary , program that provides short-term funding to intermediary lenders . 
Third , with credit markets largely closed , traditional financing sources for medium - and long-term commercial export finance are not available . 
The Export-Import Bank must revitalize its direct-lending programs , but in ways that continue to engage the institutional skills and delivery capabilities of commercial lenders . 
It is critical for global prosperity that trade financing -- be it keeping credit lines open , oiling the trade supply chain or direct funding -- remain vibrant during the financial crisis . 
A concerted effort by the U.S. Export-Import Bank and other export credit agencies can make a meaningful difference in how the real economy responds and recovers . 
The writer is chairman of the Caravel Fund and served as president and chief executive of the Export-Import Bank of the United States during the Clinton administration . 
