Shrimp fishing has been restricted in Louisiana because of the spill Roy 's wife , Ladonna , sits with him and begins to cry . 
`` Fishing is his life , without it he does n't know anything else , '' she says . 
`` He 's depressed . 
He 's angry at times . 
He 's not the same . 
It 's hard to see him this way . '' 
Roy and Ladonna have come to the St Bernard Project , a charity in the small town of Chalmette , Louisiana . 
The organization offers free counselling to fishing families who have been affected by the oil spill . 
End Quote Roy Vanderhoff Fisherman The project was set up by Zack Rosenburg and his partner Liz McCartney nearly five years ago . 
After seeing TV pictures of the devastation from Hurricane Katrina , they left their jobs in Washington DC and moved to Louisiana . 
`` We originally started the project to help people rebuild their homes after Katrina , '' says Liz . 
`` But , once we started working on homes , we noticed something : people were alive , but they were n't living . 
`` They were missing this richness in their life . 
And so we decided , if we were going to rebuild people 's homes , we also have to make sure we 're rebuilding their lives . '' 
The idea of creating a mental wellness center was born . 
Just over a year ago , the St Bernard Project began by offering therapy to families still trying to cope with the devastation of the hurricane . 
`` But then the oil spill happened , '' says Liz . 
`` Now we 're seeing lots of families trying to cope with that . '' 
Mostly it is the wives of fishermen who come seeking help . 
On this occasion there is a focus group of women and children at the clinic talking about the impact the oil spill is having on their family lives . 
Yvonne Landry is also married to a fisherman . 
She says her husband is depressed , but would never speak to a psychologist . 
`` I 'd never get him to talk to anybody - no way , '' she says . 
Our goal is to hire men and women to be peer counsellors and go out into the community '' End Quote Liz McCartney St Bernard Project `` I do n't think you 'd get many of the fishermen to come and talk . 
The wives - maybe , but the husbands - I doubt very much . 
`` If they did , it would be in secret . 
They would n't want anybody else to know . '' 
It is for that reason that Liz wants to expand the project 's efforts and take counselling into remote fishing communities . 
`` Our goal is to open up a center out where they are and to hire men and women to be peer counsellors and go out into the community , '' she says . 
`` We want to help people that are struggling realize they are not alone , and to give people a sense of normalcy and dignity , to make sure they are self-sufficient and contributing members of their community once again . '' 
Roy says opening up his heart to people at the St Bernard Project has helped . 
`` I 've never been much of a talker , but at home , I see the way I 'm acting . 
`` I do n't know what to do with myself . 
But talking to different people , it just helps me . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
