US President Barack Obama has strongly criticised BP 's chief executive Tony Hayward over the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
In an interview with NBC , Mr Obama was asked about comments Mr Hayward made in the wake of the disaster , such as `` I want my life back '' and the Gulf is `` a big ocean '' . 
Mr Obama said : `` He would n't be working for me after any of those statements . '' 
He said he had visited the Louisiana coast `` so I know whose ass to kick '' . 
The interview on NBC 's Today show is to be broadcast later on Tuesday . 
Mr Obama used the interview to defend his role in dealing with the crisis . 
Polls suggest that many Americans think he has handled the disaster poorly . 
The president has made three visits to the oil-hit coast since the disaster started in late April , talking to fishermen and oil spill experts . 
`` I was down there a month ago before most of these talking heads were even paying attention to the Gulf , '' Mr Obama told NBC . 
`` I do n't sit around just talking to experts because this is a college seminar , we talk to these folks because they potentially have the best answers - so I know whose ass to kick , '' he said . 
Mr Obama told reporters he was committed to seeing the Gulf region restored to a condition better than it was before the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded and sank on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
The leaking wellhead is currently spewing out between 12,000 and 24,000 barrels of oil per day . 
Some 11,000 barrels of oil are being trapped by a containment cap . 
Meanwhile , police are protecting Mr Hayward 's family at their home in Kent in southern England after they received hate mail and threatening phone calls . 
Maureen Hayward told the Daily Telegraph , a British newspaper , about the growing hostility towards her and their two children . 
BP needs to tell whining Americans to take a hike '' End Quote Bloomberg Matthew Lynn `` Members of my family have had nasty phone calls and we have also had mail from groups , '' she was quoted as saying . 
`` Tony is obviously away and we are miles away from him so it 's upsetting , '' she said . 
There is an `` ongoing police operation '' involving Mr Hayward 's family home , the newspaper quoted local police sources as saying . 
BP - and in particular Mr Hayward - has received widespread criticism over the handling of the spill . 
At one point , Mr Hayward said `` the environmental impact of this disaster is likely to be very , very modest '' . 
The New York Daily News has called him `` the most hated and clueless man in America '' . 
`` DO YOU APPROVE OR DISAPPROVE OF OBAMA 'S RESPONSE TO THE OIL SPILL ? '' 
Tar balls are continuing to wash ashore on beaches and wetlands Adm Allen , the co-ordinator of the clean-up operation , told reporters it would take `` a couple of months '' to clear the oil slick from the surface of the Gulf . 
But he said : `` Long-term issues of restoring environments and habitats will be years . '' 
He said BP needed to do better at getting money to people and businesses affected by the spill . 
He said that while BP had nearly doubled the amount of oil being funnelled from the leaking wellhead since Friday , it was now `` trying to increase that production rate , close the venting valves and move to a greater capacity '' . 
He said BP was hoping to move a second production platform into the area to increase the amount of oil that could be siphoned off . 
Adm Allen added that BP was also preparing a bigger rig to process a greater capacity of oil in severe weather . 
The region 's hurricane season started last week . 
White House spokesman Robert Gibbs warned , however , that collecting oil through the containment cap fixed over the leaking well remained a risky operation . 
BP said on Monday that the cost of its response to the disaster in the Gulf had reached about $ 1.25 bn -LRB- # 860m -RRB- . 
This number does not include $ 360m for a project to build six sand berms to protect Louisiana 's wetlands from the spreading oil , BP has said . 
Oil from the Deepwater Horizon spill has been found on beaches and wetlands along more than 100 miles -LRB- 161 km -RRB- of coast from Louisiana to the Florida Panhandle . 
Attempt to cap oil leak The latest stage in BP 's efforts to contain leaking oil has involved lowering a cap onto the failed blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- valve system on the seabed . 
The cap sits on the BOP 's lower marine riser package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- section . 
First , the damaged riser - the pipe which takes oil from the well - was cut where it nears the seabed using a remotely-operated shear . 
This was completed at 1930 CDT on 1 June -LRB- 0030 GMT 2 June -RRB- . 
The next stage was for a diamond wire cutter to saw through the riser close to the LMRP . 
The blade got stuck and had to be removed but BP eventually cut through the pipe using giant shears manipulated by undersea robots -LRB- ROV -RRB- . 
After removing the pipe , the cap was lowered onto the LMRP enabling the leaking oil and gas to be funnelled to a drill ship on the surface . 
Latest estimates suggest more than half of the leaking oil is now being captured . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
