NEW YORK , Sept. 29 -- Without a federal bailout plan to prop up confidence in the U.S. financial system Monday , stocks fell sharply around the globe , oil sank , gold soared and yields on government debt skidded closer to zero as traders ran from risk and sought safe-haven investments . 
The Dow Jones industrial average tumbled 7 percent , or 777.68 points , eclipsing the record point drop after the Sept. 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks , to close at 10,365.45 . 
The technology-heavy Nasdaq composite index slid 9.14 percent , or 199.61 , to 1983.73 , and the broader Standard & Poor 's 500-stock index lost 8.79 percent , or 106.62 , to close at 1106.39 . 
A rush into safer securities pushed down yields on Treasury debt , while crude oil fell more than $ 10 a barrel on concern that the financial crisis would put a big dent in demand for petroleum products . 
Underlying the panic is a seizing-up of the credit markets that provide companies with financing for expenses such as payroll and inventory . 
Analysts said banks are lending less as they try to conserve cash for their own balance sheets , while nervous investors are forcing companies to pay higher interest rates to borrow in the debt markets . 
`` The credit markets are kind of like the oil for an engine that allows companies to buy something and finance it . 
And if they do n't have the ability to finance that at a reasonable cost , then all of the sudden their profit margins are going to get squeezed and they 're perhaps not going to be able to hold as much inventory , and this is happening around the globe , '' said Jim Hannan , managing director for fixed-income strategy at MTB Investment Advisors in Baltimore . 
`` You need to be able to have credit , and it needs to be at a reasonable price , for the economy to function , '' Hannan said . 
`` If companies ca n't finance future production or expansion plans , at the end of the day , that is going to equate to slower economic growth . '' 
Marc Pado , U.S. market strategist at Cantor Fitzgerald , said the effects of constricted lending already are showing up in the agriculture business , where farmers often are dependent on short-term loans to buy seeds and fertilizer for the next season 's crop . 
`` If the bank says no , they 're not going to plant . 
The fertilizer companies are n't seeing the orders they normally see at this time of year , '' Pado said . 
`` It goes beyond comprehension once you start digging into who uses short-term debt and the impact they have on the next person in line . '' 
In the commercial-paper market , where companies can sell debt maturing in nine months or less , some companies that used to pay less than 3 percent to borrow are now paying double that rate , investors said . 
Debt holders also are demanding richer premiums to offset the risk of holding longer-term corporate debt . 
Caterpillar , the farming and construction equipment maker , last week sold $ 1.3 billion of five - and 10-year notes that were priced to yield at least 3.2 percentage points more than Treasurys with similar maturities . 
That was nearly a full percentage point wider than the spread on previously issued Caterpillar notes , investors said . 
The credit markets have been socked before . 
Lending froze up a decade ago after the failure of the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management , and in the decade before that after the 1987 stock market crash . 
But in both of those instances , the markets loosened after a day or two , said Glenn Migliozzi , chief investment officer at Green Eagle Capital in Lake Forest , Ill. `` The Fed is going to lower rates , '' he said . 
`` They 're going to have to . '' 
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke , along with Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. , had urged Congress to pass legislation that would allow the government to buy bad debt such as mortgage loans from financial firms . 
