The sale of Wachovia 's banking business to Citigroup yesterday marked the second time in five days that a major U.S. bank was forced from existence in part by fleeing depositors , raising serious questions about the stability of other financial firms and the health of the banking system . 
The deal also continues the rapid consolidation of an industry that has long been kept fragmented as a matter of public policy but now is being encouraged by the government to conglomerate . 
In the latest rescue urged by federal regulators , Citigroup agreed to pay $ 2.16 billion for Wachovia , the nation 's third-largest retail and commercial banking franchise . 
Wachovia was fast-growing and widely admired , run by Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. 's former deputy Robert Steel . 
Citigroup is a long-standing colossus of the American financial services industry . 
Citigroup , based in New York , would become the largest bank in the Washington area . 
The deal would protect all deposits at Wachovia , according to a statement from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. , which presided over the companies ' shotgun wedding . 
To consummate the deal , the FDIC promised to limit Citigroup 's losses on a $ 312 billion portfolio of Wachovia 's most troubled loans . 
The government agreed to absorb all losses beyond $ 42 billion , a threshold that could be exceeded based on the performance of similar groups of mortgage loans at other banks . 
In exchange , the government would get a $ 12 billion stake in Citigroup , making it one of the largest shareholders in what would be the nation 's largest bank . 
Sheila C. Bair , chairman of the FDIC , said the government 's involvement was necessary `` to maintain confidence in the banking industry given current financial-market conditions . '' 
Citigroup will join Bank of America and J.P. Morgan Chase in a small group of giants that have emerged from the crisis to dominate American banking . 
The three companies together would hold more than 30 percent of the nation 's deposits . 
They would hold more than 40 percent of bank loans to corporations . 
They would be the issuers of more than 50 percent of the nation 's credit cards . 
And they would each number among the five largest investment banks . 
The banking industry was fragmented by the government during the Great Depression and kept that way for most of a century , to promote competition , reduce prices and keep any one company from becoming too central to the health of the economy . 
Now those efforts have been upturned in the space of a frantic month . 
Federal regulators said that they encouraged the consolidation because the alternative was a systemic collapse and that they will consider the ramifications once the crisis is resolved . 
Critics , however , said that regulators , in attempting to fix the banking system , are repeating the same mistakes they made in allowing the crisis to spin out of control : They are ignoring the long-term interests of consumers and of the economy . 
`` I think we 've learned in this crisis that there 's a connection between making sure that customers are not abused and ensuring that banks can continue to earn profits , '' said John Taylor , chief executive of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition , a consumer advocacy group . 
`` Ignoring those consumer protections is what got us into trouble in the first place . '' 
Some analysts also question how the government will regulate companies with which it is increasingly intertwined . 
The government has helped to decide which banks will acquire fallen rivals . 
It has backstopped some of those deals with federal money , and it now owns a stake in Citigroup . 
