Tuesday , September 30 , 2008 ; 10:10 AM Most Americans see the current financial situation as a `` crisis , '' and there is overwhelming concern that the failure of the House of Representatives to pass the economic recovery package will deepen the problem , according to a new Washington Post-ABC News poll . 
But the poll also revealed significant public concern with the bill Congress rejected yesterday , as few voters said the package did enough to protect `` ordinary Americans , '' and nearly half said it did not go far enough to shore up the nation 's economy . 
Nevertheless , nearly nine in 10 expressed concern that the failure of the bill could lead to a more severe economic decline , including a slim majority calling themselves `` very worried . '' 
High levels of concern cross party lines , but Democrats and Republicans have contrasting views of the urgency of the situation . 
In the poll , 60 percent of Democrats call the economic woes a crisis , compared with 44 percent of Republicans . 
Overall , voters split about evenly on the failed bill -- 45 percent supported it , 47 percent opposed it . 
Among the reasons for the tepid public reception is that there is a roughly even divide about whether government efforts will prevent the financial situation from deteriorating further still . 
And on the particulars , about as many voters said the plan rejected by Congress did `` too much '' to help major financial institutions that got into trouble as said that the bill did `` too little . '' 
Nearly half said the failed plan did not do enough to help the broader economy , and more , 61 percent said there was insufficient assistance for the general public . 
That the bill did not go far enough to aid the public is a view shared by Democrats -LRB- 69 percent -RRB- , independents -LRB- 59 percent -RRB- and Republicans -LRB- 50 percent -RRB- alike . 
Asked to assess responsibility for the legislation 's failure , 44 percent said Republicans were the reason , 21 percent said the Democrats and 17 percent said both sides were responsible . 
On the broader economic problems facing the country , voters spread the blame . 
In an open-ended question , a quarter of all voters said George W. Bush is responsible for the economy 's relatively poor performance , more than any other single cause . 
About a quarter name Congress -LRB- 8 percent -RRB- , the federal government -LRB- 8 percent -RRB- and Democrats and Republicans -LRB- 5 percent each -RRB- together . 
Eighteen percent said Wall Street financial institutions and banks shoulder responsibility , 7 percent blame `` everyone '' and 5 percent highlighted the role of individuals who borrowed too much . 
Partisan filters dominate on this question : Nearly half of all Democrats blame Bush ; that is just 4 percent among Republicans . 
Moreover , no Democrats blamed `` Democrats '' generally ; no Republicans singled out `` Republicans . '' 
Despite the negative assessment of the current financial situation , four in 10 remain optimistic about the state of the national economy over the next year and six in 10 are bullish about their family 's financial situation . 
But pessimism about personal finances has climbed over the past two years and now stands at more than double its level in December 2006 . 
The poll was conducted by telephone yesterday among a random sample of 520 adults and 424 registered voters . 
The margin of sampling error among registered voters is plus or minus five percentage points . 
