By Jorn Madslien Business reporter , BBC News , CBI annual conference Bob Dudley said BP would get more deeply involved in the US UK energy giant BP has outlined a strategy to revive the public 's belief in its ability to operate in a responsible manner . 
`` We will earn back trust in BP and begin to restore the company 's battered reputation , '' chief executive Bob Dudley told business leaders in London . 
His comments came in his first external speech since taking the helm of BP . 
Six months ago , the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded , causing a massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Central to attempts to rebuild BP 's reputation is the story about its efforts following the leak , Mr Dudley believes . 
`` The first thing to say is that we have stopped the leak and made huge progress in cleaning up the spill , '' Mr Dudley said . 
`` Second , our containment and clean-up efforts have gotten results . 
`` Third , we are meeting our commitments as a responsible party of this accident . '' 
Mr Dudley insisted BP was `` committed to learning the lessons from these shattering events at all levels '' . 
Some of the new knowledge would come from `` other hazardous industries , including nuclear and chemicals industries '' , he said . 
I did not become chief executive of BP in order to walk away from the US . 
BP will not be quitting America '' End Quote Bob Dudley BP The lessons learned , which also included new ways of managing third-party contractors , would be applied across the group 's global business , aided by a new safety division that will oversee these efforts . 
Mr Dudley was also eager to stress that BP was `` part of the American community '' , and that rather than pull out of the US , the company would get more deeply involved . 
After all , he said , BP was the largest producer of oil and gas in the US as well as a major employer , with 23,000 people on its payroll . 
`` I did not become chief executive of BP in order to walk away from the US . 
BP will not be quitting America , '' he said . 
BP could soon be back drilling in deep waters off the US coast , after Washington lifted a temporary moratorium , not least because the world will need more oil and gas , he reasoned . 
`` The deep waters are becoming an increasingly important source of energy to fuel the global economy , '' Mr Dudley said . 
`` And we are one of only a handful of companies with the financial and technological strength to undertake development projects in these difficult geographies . '' 
BP 's return may be controversial in the US , where many are still angry about the Gulf accident , but Mr Dudley is eager to reassure the American people . 
`` It can be done safely , '' Mr Dudley said . 
`` A silver lining of the event is the significant and sustained advance in industry preparedness that will now exist going forward , -LRB- including -RRB- the learnings and the equipment and techniques invested by necessity under pressure to contain the oil and stop the well . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
