Family devastated by death of Scottish swine flu victim The prematurely born son of Jacqui Fleming , the mother who died yesterday from swine flu , has also died tonight The Royal Alexandra Hospital in Paisley , Scotland . 
Photograph : David Moir\/Reuters The family of the first British swine flu patient to die said today they were `` absolutely devastated '' as health experts tried to allay public fears about the virulence of the virus . 
Jacqui Fleming , 38 , from Carnwadric in south Glasgow , was named today as the first person outside the Americas to have died since the H1N1 virus first emerged in Mexico more than three months ago . 
Fleming had underlying health problems , and died in intensive care at the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley on Sunday , two weeks after giving birth prematurely to her third child . 
The birth was induced nearly three months early because of her critical condition . 
NHS Greater Glasgow said tonight that her son , named Jack , also died today . 
An NHS spokesman said the baby did not die from swine flu . 
A statement issued on behalf of Ms Fleming 's partner William McCann , said : `` My beautiful son was born on 1st June 2009 , 11 weeks early . 
`` He suffered from a number of complications and despite his brave fight he passed away earlier this evening at the Special Care Baby Unit at the Royal Alexandra Hospital in Paisley . 
`` Coming so soon after the death of his mum , this is an extremely distressing and difficult time for our family and I would ask the media to respect our privacy as we try to cope with the loss of Jacqueline and Jack . '' 
A statement from NHS Greater Glasgow said : `` Earlier this evening , baby Jack , the son of Jacqueline Fleming and her partner William McCann , tragically passed away . '' 
She leaves two other children , one boy aged 18 and another at primary school . 
Her family said : `` Our whole family is absolutely devastated and we are doing everything we can to support Jacqueline 's two sons and her partner . 
`` Jacqueline has been ill in hospital for a number of weeks but nothing can prepare you for such shattering news . '' 
Alex Salmond , the Scottish secretary , and Nicola Sturgeon , the Scottish health secretary , were joined by Ed Balls , the UK government 's children , schools and families secretary , in sending the family condolences . 
A family friend said the death was a tragedy . 
`` I think they are taking it really badly , '' she said . 
`` They hoped she was going to pull through and it was a shock when she died . 
She was a really nice lady , really kind , a quiet woman , just a family person really . '' 
Fleming was one of 10 people in hospital with swine flu in Scotland , where hospitalisation rates are the same as in the United States , the second worst affected country . 
The total UK figure jumped to 1,320 today , with a further 59 cases in England , chiefly in the West Midlands . 
However , Sir Liam Donaldson , the chief medical officer for England and Wales , said the virus was causing very few illnesses compared with normal seasonal flu viruses , although a `` large surge '' in numbers was likely this autumn . 
With more than 30,000 people affected worldwide , the World Health Organisation reported last Friday that only 145 had died . 
Pregnant women were more vulnerable to this particular virus , Donaldson added . 
`` If we look at the pattern of this illness worldwide , generally for most people it has n't been a severe illness , '' he said . 
`` In a bad seasonal flu winter we would get between 400,000 to 500,000 people falling ill with flu . '' 
Professor Hugh Pennington , a bacteriologist at Aberdeen University , said that swine flu deaths were not unexpected . 
`` It does not point to the virus getting nastier . 
All the evidence to date suggests the virus is not changing at all , '' he said . 
`` This is a flu virus , it is in no way different from an ordinary winter flu virus , so if there are enough cases some people will have to be admitted to hospital and some will die . '' 
