Nicola Sturgeon : ` The patients in question are undergoing further tests ' Two people have been admitted to a Scottish hospital after returning from Mexico , where more than 80 people have died after contracting swine flu . 
Scottish Health Secretary Nicola Sturgeon said the patients had both displayed mild flu-like symptoms but were not giving cause for concern . 
Neither of the people involved had traveled in areas affected by swine flu outbreaks . 
The Scottish Government said it was closely monitoring the situation . 
It is understood the two travellers were admitted to Monklands hospital in Airdrie , Lanarkshire , after returning from Mexico on Tuesday . 
Precautionary tests are being conducted on them , with further tests expected over the next few days . 
Ms Sturgeon said there was `` no immediate threat to public health in Scotland '' . 
She added : `` The patients have displayed mild flu-like symptoms and their current condition is not causing concern . 
Monitoring of those who have been in close contact with the two people is also being carried out as an additional precaution . 
The patients have been admitted to Monklands hospital `` The Scottish Government , in conjunction with other administrations in the UK , are closely monitoring the situation and assessing the implications , if any , of this situation for Scotland . 
`` The situation is also being monitored closely and assessed by the international organizations dealing with the prevention and control of infectious diseases . '' 
As a precaution , the Scottish Government resilience room has been opened and is working closely with London to monitor the situation , Ms Sturgeon said . 
Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond chaired a meeting of relevant ministers and officials on Sunday , and Ms Sturgeon has spoken with UK Health Secretary Alan Johnson about the development . 
Ms Sturgeon said : `` The World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- has said UK planning for a flu pandemic is among the most advanced in the world but we can not afford to be complacent . 
`` The Scottish Government takes the threat of a flu pandemic very seriously and have been working with local responders for a number of years to ensure that Scotland is in the best possible position to manage an emergency on such a scale . 
`` The H1N1 swine fever virus is sensitive to the antiviral drugs Tamiflu and Relenza . 
We have significant stockpiles for Scotland . '' 
The WHO has warned that the new strain of the swine flu virus that has killed 81 people in Mexico could become a global pandemic . 
Several other countries have reported suspected cases of infection , including eight students at a New York school who were confirmed to have swine flu . 
There have been no confirmed cases of swine flu in the UK or elsewhere in Europe . 
Dr Jim McMenamin , consultant epidemiologist for Health Protection Scotland , said the two patients were being treated with anti-viral medicine which would prevent the condition becoming worse . 
He said : `` The evidence so far from the United States and Mexico is that the anti-virals , which would normally be used for the treatment of influenza , are effective for this condition . '' 
The doctor said : `` It is early days in our investigation globally about this phenomenon of swine flu . 
We will be kept continually updated by the World Health Organisation . 
`` Currently there is a public health emergency of international concern and we in Scotland have to play our part in any potential case being rapidly identified . '' 
