U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Gaddafi forces fire Scud missile : U.S. official BENGHAZI , Libya | Tue Aug 16 , 2011 5:46 pm IST BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi fired a Scud missile for the first time in the country 's civil war , a U.S. defense official said , after rebel advances left the Libyan leader isolated in his capital . 
Rebels fighting to end Gaddafi 's 41-year rule seized two strategic towns near Tripoli over the past two days , cutting the city off from its supply lines and leaving the Libyan leader with a dwindling set of options if he is to stay in power . 
However , pro-Gaddafi forces were encountering a fight-back in one of those towns , Zawiyah , west of Tripoli . 
A Reuters reporter nearby said he heard a salvo of four Russian-made Grad rockets landing in the town on Tuesday . 
The Scud missile was fired on Sunday morning from a location about 50 miles -LRB- 80 km -RRB- east of Sirte , Gaddafi 's home town , and landed east of the coastal oil town of Brega where rebels are fighting for control , the U.S. official said . 
The missile came down in the desert , injuring no one , said the official , who was speaking on condition of anonymity . 
There was no immediate comment from the government in Tripoli . 
Firing the missile , which poses little military threat because it is so inaccurate , is evidence of the Gaddafi administration 's desperation , said Shashank Joshi , Associate Fellow at Britain 's Royal United Services Institute . 
`` It 's an obvious sign that the regime 's back is to the wall , '' he said . 
In the six months of fighting up to now , Gaddafi 's forces have been using short-range Grad rockets but have not before deployed Scud missiles , which have an estimated range of about 185 miles -LRB- 300 km -RRB- . 
In the rebel headquarters in the eastern city of Benghazi , officials said the Scud firing was a sign Gaddafi would do anything to protect his power . 
`` Gaddafi troops are using his last gun . 
He 's crazy , '' said Mohammad Zawawi , media director for rebel forces . 
`` We 're scared he 'll use chemicals . 
That 's why we 're trying to end this war and we hope to end it with the least number of casualties . '' 
`` We ca n't prevent the scuds but we hope NATO can . 
NATO has the technology to detect them . '' 
Analysts say the rebels ' strategy now is to isolate the capital and hope the government will collapse , but they say it is possible too that Gaddafi will opt to stage a last-ditch fight for the capital . 
In a barely audible telephone call to state television in the early hours of Monday morning , Gaddafi called on his followers to liberate Libya from rebels and their NATO supporters . 
`` Get ready for the fight ... The blood of martyrs is fuel for the battlefield , '' he said . 
He was speaking as rebels made their most dramatic advances in months of fighting , shifting the momentum in a conflict that had been largely static and was testing the patience of NATO powers anxious for a swift outcome . 
Rebel forces in the Western Mountains south of Tripoli surged forward at the weekend to enter Zawiyah . 
The town is about 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli and , crucially , straddles the main highway linking the capital to Tunisia . 
A day later , rebels said they had captured the town of Garyan , which controls the highway leading south from Tripoli and linking it to Sabha , a Gaddafi stronghold deep in the desert . 
`` Gaddafi has been isolated . 
He has been cut off from the outside world , '' a rebel spokesman from the Western Mountains , called Abdulrahman , told Reuters by telephone . 
Early on Tuesday , rebels on the outskirts of Zawiyah said forces loyal to Gaddafi were still on the eastern edge of the town , from where they have been attacking with mortars , Grad rockets and sniper fire . 
Medical workers at one of the town 's hospitals said 20 people , a mixture of rebel fighters and civilians , were killed on Monday , and the death toll for Tuesday had reached one . 
Officials in Tripoli deny Zawiyah is under rebel control , but government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim acknowledged on state television that rebel fighters were in Garyan . 
`` There are still armed gangs inside the city . 
We are able to drive them out , '' he said . 
A U.N. envoy arrived in neighbouring Tunisia , where sources say rebels and representatives of the government have been holed up on the island resort of Djerba for negotiations . 
Tunisia 's official news agency on Tuesday quoted the envoy , Abdel Elah al-Khatib , as saying he knew nothing of any negotiations in Djerba . 
Speaking in Tunis , he said he held informal talks with representatives of Gaddafi 's government and the rebel council . 
The envoy did not say who they were or what they discussed . 
Gaddafi 's spokesman denied Tripoli was in talks about the leader 's departure , saying reports of such negotiations were the product of a `` media war '' being waged against Libya . 
Talks could signal the endgame of a civil war that has drawn in the NATO alliance and emerged as one of the bloodiest confrontations in the wave of unrest sweeping the Arab world . 
Rebels may still lack the manpower for an all-out assault on Tripoli , but are hoping their encirclement of the capital will bring down Gaddafi 's government or inspire an uprising . 
In the past , however , they have frequently failed to hold gains , and a fightback by Gaddafi troops could yet force them back . 
Pro-Gaddafi residents of the capital remain defiant . 
Makhjoub Muftah , a school teacher who has signed up as a gun-toting pro-Gaddafi volunteer , like many others seemed to think a rebel advance into Tripoli was a remote possibility . 
`` I wish they would march into Tripoli . 
I wish , '' he said , daring the rebels . 
`` They will all die . '' 
