-LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Following are the latest political and military developments in the Libyan crisis . 
\* Forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi fired a Scud missile for the first time in Libya 's civil war on Sunday . 
\* NATO said the use of Scud missiles by Gaddafi could harm civilians , but has as much chance of changing the military course of the war as `` throwing dishes against a wall . '' 
\* Rebels fighting to end Gaddafi 's 41-year rule have seized two strategic towns near Tripoli over the past two days , cutting the city off from its supply lines and leaving the Libyan leader with a dwindling set of options if he is to stay in power . 
\* Libya 's rebel National Transitional Council said it was not holding any talks with Gaddafi 's government or with the U.N. special envoy for Libya to resolve the civil war . 
\* NATO said it conducted 127 air sorties on Monday , 49 of them strike sorties to identify and hit targets . 
\* NATO said key targets hit on Monday included : -- three tanks , one armed vehicle and one military vehicle near Zawiyah -- one military storage facility near Al Khums -- four multiple rocket launchers in the vicinity of Brega -- one surface-to-air missile trans\/loader vehicle , two surface-to-air missile systems , one radar and two tanks near Tripoli -- one multiple rocket launcher near Misrata -- one ammunition storage facility in the vicinity of Waddan -- one military facility and two multiple rocket launchers near Zlitan . 
\* Since NATO took command of air strikes on March 31 , its aircraft have conducted 19,011 sorties including 7,223 strike sorties . 
NATO members participating in air strikes include France , Britain , Canada , Denmark , Belgium , Italy and the United States . 
\* Sixteen ships under NATO command are patrolling the central Mediterranean Sea to enforce a U.N. arms embargo . 
On Monday , 19 vessels were hailed to determine destination and cargo . 
Two were boarded , but none were diverted . 
A total of 2,207 vessels have been hailed , 221 boarded and nine diverted since the start of the arms embargo . 
-LRB- Reporting by Justyna Pawlak ; Editing by Alison Williams -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
WHAT A JOKE THIS IS ! 
No wonder Gaddaffi is still in power . 
NATO has spent hundreds of millions on fuel and weaponry for what . 
This civil war will hang over the heads of NATO for years -- ineffectual and wasteful . 
Just think how that money could have been better spent . 
DIPLOMACY where art thou ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
