At Geithner 's Treasury , Key Decisions on Hold Seven weeks after the Treasury Department announced that it was ousting General Motors chief G. Richard Wagoner Jr. in the federal bailout of the company , he is still technically on GM 's payroll . 
Wagoner 's removal has been held up because senior Treasury officials have yet to decide whether he should get the $ 20 million severance package that the company had promised him . 
The delay is one of many hitches that have slowed a host of important policy actions in the four months since Timothy F. Geithner became Treasury secretary . 
While Geithner has taken dramatic steps to address flashpoints in the economy , the work of carrying out those policies has bogged down because critical decisions about how to do so are n't being made , interviews with a broad range of federal officials show . 
Government officials , inside the Treasury and out , say the unresolved issues are piling up in part because of vacancies in the department 's top ranks . 
But some of the officials also cite the Treasury 's ad-hoc management , which is dominated by a small band of Geithner 's counselors who coordinate rescue initiatives but lack formal authority to make decisions . 
Heavy involvement by the White House in Treasury affairs has further muddied the picture of who is responsible for key issues , the officials add . 
One of the department 's signature initiatives , considered vital for getting at the root of the financial crisis , aims at relieving banks of their toxic assets . 
But to those familiar with the program , it remains unclear who will decide some of the practical details , such as whether foreign firms will be allowed to participate in the funds that buy the assets . 
This uncertainty is slowing the rollout of the program , which in any case has proven daunting to design . 
Announced in early February , it may not launch until July , officials say . 
In March , Treasury officials clashed over a $ 15 billion initiative to use money from the federal bailout package to free up credit for small businesses . 
Geithner 's counselors pressed to announce the program quickly , despite protests from the career staff members who said it would not work . 
Unable to raise the issue with Geithner himself , the staff members appealed directly to the White House but were rebuffed , according to sources familiar with the episode . 
President Obama announced the program two months ago , and it is still struggling to get off the ground . 
Officials are looking to overhaul the proposal . 
And in the wake of the public firestorm over bonuses paid by American International Group , senior Treasury officials have been meeting several times a week all spring to review , one by one , the payments to the company 's executives . 
But the time-consuming discussions have never resolved whether any of the executives should get paid . 
Geithner said in interviews that some of the department 's internal difficulties result from the intense pressure on officials to develop a raft of rescue initiatives in a very short time . 
`` We were just putting enormous pressure on these people to put in place and execute this comprehensive set of programs , '' Geithner said . 
`` In a crisis , the most important thing is to show the capacity for credible initiative that is actually going to fix the problem . 
That 's why we are trying to do so much so early . '' 
He added , `` It could get tough at times ... but I think they are doing a great job in that context , and they are working 24 hours a day to put out A-plus policy . '' 
Still , some lawmakers and government officials said Geithner needs to be a stronger manager . 
`` No one knows how to get decisions made , '' said a senior government official familiar with the Treasury 's inner workings . 
`` Major decisions can happen very fast at the top , and then after that there are tons of detail and nuances that have to get worked out without clear chains of command . 
Either the seats are unfilled ... or you have to answer to a half a dozen counselors running around . '' 
