BUCHANAN , Liberia | Sun May 15 , 2011 5:07 pm BST BUCHANAN , Liberia -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Forested nations used to fear tough rules on logging would hurt their valuable timber industries , but for Liberia they could be a way of reviving its sector -- by giving it privileged access to European markets . 
From 2012 , any country that wants to export wood to the European Union will have to be able to prove it was not logged illegally , a regulation that has spurred a spate of deals with timber producing nations to better police their forests . 
The latest to enter into such so-called Voluntary Partnership Agreements -LRB- VPA -RRB- on forest management were Indonesia last week and Liberia on Monday , a move the poor West African state hopes will help revive its logging industry . 
They follow similar deals with Ghana , Cameroon and Congo Republic last year . 
For Liberia -- a country which despite being tiny hosts about half of West Africa 's remaining virgin rainforest and many of its threatened species , according to the European Forest Institute -LRB- EFI -RRB- -- the deal comes amid a surge in demand for Liberian timber after many years of hardly any . 
CEOs of timber companies now regularly fly down to its jungles from European capitals to make big purchases . 
`` Some timber here in Liberia which is very much in demand , so I came down to select them personally , '' said the CEO of Abex Bois Exotiques Pierrer Piequet at a timber field in the forest near the port of Buchanan , as workers loaded logs onto a truck . 
The United Nations imposed sanctions on Liberian timber amid allegations former President Charles Taylor was using the industry to fund wars in the region . 
The ban was lifted in 2006 but logging has been slow to pick up since . 
The buzz of chainsaws and crunch of bulldozers on branches echoes through the hot , humid forests of Liberia 's River Cess country , in a concession operated by local firm Tree and Tree , one of four logging companies with Liberian licenses . 
`` We get many buyers coming here mainly from Europe and Asia . 
There are species such as the Niagon , which is in high demand in Europe , '' the company 's assistant operations manager George Duo told Reuters at the site . 
Liberia still retains 45 percent of its original primary forest , substantially more than other countries in the region , but it also urgently needs development and jobs , after decades of war and economic stagnation . 
Officials hope the VPA will balance the need to sell its wood with the need to conserve its forests for future generations , which means regulating loggers . 
`` The coming into place of the VPA marks an end to illegal logging in the country . 
For too long , we 've suffered from these illegal activities , '' said Vice President Joseph N. Boakai said when he signed for the Liberian government on Monday . 
The VPA Agreement sets out reforms across the timber sector that will enable it to keep selling to Europe when the EU adopts its 2012 regulation on illicit timber . 
Liberia must monitor harvesting and shipping of wood -- and be able to show it was legally sourced to be allowed into Europe , but doing so will give it a secure export market . 
Local logging operators say they back the deal . 
`` We are happy to have a legal framework set up for the country , '' said Ricks Toweh , manager of Tree and Tree , adding that his company had helped draft the legislation . 
`` It is a new beginning for us . '' 
Timber exports once accounted for more than 20 percent of Liberia 's gross domestic product , but the sanctions stopped commercial forestry . 
If the VPA works , then the industry could rebound whilst still preserving West Africa 's biggest rainforest . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
