Conrad Murray decides not to give evidence Defense lawyers for Dr Conrad Murray say they will call no further witnesses Dr Conrad Murray has told a judge he will not testify in his own defense in the trial over Michael Jackson 's death . 
He denies involuntary manslaughter but could face a prison term and the loss of his medical licence if convicted . 
Dr Murray told trial Judge Michael Pastor he had made his decision `` freely and explicitly '' , reports said . 
The decision comes after the defense called its last witness , propofol expert Dr Paul White . 
Closing statements will begin on Thursday . 
`` My decision is I will not testify in this matter , '' Dr Murray said after being asked if he understood the choice to testify or not was his alone . 
Throughout the 22-day trial , both the prosecution and defense have called their own medical experts to take the stand . 
On Tuesday , the prosecution called their own propofol expert , Dr Steven Shafer , as a rebuttal witness to counter arguments put forth by Dr White . 
During earlier testimony , Dr Shafer said the suggestion that Jackson could have drugged himself was `` crazy '' . 
The defense called former patients of Dr Murray as character witnesses , and tried to introduce doubt into the testimony of the prosecution 's witnesses . 
Defense lawyers have argued that Jackson , dealing with insomnia , drugged himself with an additional dose of propofol after Dr Murray left his bedroom . 
They dropped their original contention that Jackson drank the propofol but maintained that he had intravenously administered the fatal dose himself . 
Paramedics were called to Jackson 's California home on 25 June 2009 after he stopped breathing . 
He was pronounced dead two hours later at the UCLA medical center . 
The prosecution alleges Jackson died from an overdose of the anesthetic drug propofol and that Dr Murray was negligent by giving him the drug outside of a hospital setting . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
