2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
NFL apologizes for Super Bowl seat fiasco : Football officials are apologizing to ticket-holding fans who were denied seats at Sunday 's Super Bowl , but that may not be enough to stop lawsuits over the issue from going ahead . 
Investigating the killing of a protester : CNN 's Nic Robertson investigates the shooting death of a protester by police in Alexandria , Egypt . 
Plains , South brace for another winter storm : Snow began falling over Colorado and Kansas on Tuesday as yet another round of winter weather began marching across the United States barely a week after a record-setting winter storm roared across the Midwest . 
Toddler disappears from house full of people : The parents of a Texas toddler are struggling for answers days after their young son mysteriously disappeared from a house full of people . 
A Dallas City Council member is taking heat from animal rights activists and fellow elected officials for giving NFL quarterback Michael Vick - convicted in 2007 of charges relating to dogfighting - a ceremonial key to the city over the weekend . 
Councilman Dwaine Caraway , who also is the city s mayor pro tem , presented the key to Vick after the Philadelphia Eagles star spoke an event geared toward teenagers at Dallas ' Cirque club on Saturday . 
`` I would like to personally present to Michael Vick the key to the city of Dallas , Texas . 
Michael You deserve it . 
We appreciate you , and we love you , '' Caraway told Vick - who plays for one of the Dallas Cowboys ' division rivals - during the presentation , which was posted on YouTube . 
`` Michael Vick is a convicted felon . 
He committed horrible , atrocious crimes , violent crimes , '' Jonnie England , of the Metroplex Animal Coalition , told CNN affiliate WFAA . 
`` He has done nothing to deserve a key to the city of Dallas . '' 
On Monday , Dallas Mayor Tom Leppert distanced himself from the presentation , telling the Dallas Morning News : `` We do n't condone it and clearly didn t approve it . 
It 's unfortunate , and I would rather have not seen the situation . '' 
U.S. stocks posted another day of solid gains Tuesday , with the Dow Jones industrial average climbing for the seventh straight day , as traders cheered news in the consumer sector and looked past China 's latest interest rate hike . 
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 72 points , or 0.6 % ; to 12,233 , the S&P 500 rose 5.2 points , or 0.4 % , to 1,324.6 and the Nasdaq composite advanced 13 points , or 0.5 % , to 2,797 . 
The blue chips were led higher by shares of McDonald 's , which climbed 2.6 % after the fast food giant reported better-than-expected January same-store sales . 
Other consumer discretionary names in the S&P 500 posted solid gains including Urban Outfitters , Family Dollar and JCPenney among others . 
Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com 's news blog This Just In will feature the stories of the missing . 
This is the 17th case , and it airs Tuesday at 9 p.m. ET on HLN . 
Just four months before she was to end her military duty , Nonnie Dotson disappeared while visiting relatives in Littleton , Colorado , in November 2006 . 
Dotson , then a single 33-year-old mother , was an intensive-care nurse at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio , Texas . 
She was on a pre-Thanksgiving holiday when she disappeared . 
She was supposed to meet friends at a smoothie shop about a half-mile from her brother 's home . 
She left the home on the afternoon of November 19 , but she did n't appear at the smoothie shop . 
When her 16-month-old daughter woke up crying the next morning , her family realized that Dotson had n't returned . 
Police said there was no activity on her bank accounts , credit cards or cell phone . 
No suspects have been named . 
Actress Lindsay Lohan will be charged Wednesday with felony grand theft relating to a necklace allegedly taken from a Venice , California , jewelry store last month , a prosecutor said Tuesday . 
Lohan , 24 , will be arraigned on the charge at 1:30 p.m. Wednesday at the Los Angeles Airport Superior Court , Deputy District Attorney John Lynch said . 
The actress `` allegedly walked out of the store with the necklace on January 22 , '' a statement from the district attorney 's office said . 
`` The owner reported the theft to the Los Angeles Police Department , which investigated the allegation and presented evidence to the D.A. 's office last week . '' 
The necklace , which is valued at $ 2,500 , was handed over to police just before they were to execute a search warrant to look for the jewelry in Lohan 's Venice , California , apartment last week . 
Lohan was already on supervised probation stemming from probation violations related to a 2007 drunk driving conviction . 
A transitional government is overseeing sweeping changes in Tunisia after massive demonstrations forced out the country 's longtime president and sparked similar protests across the Middle East . 
Under president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali , the news media was tightly controlled . 
Internet activity was monitored and access to some sites was restricted . 
Police routinely stopped people without cause to check their identity and question them - it was a policy that the government said was needed to prevent terrorists from gaining a foothold in Tunisia . 
Tunisians limited what they spoke about with friends and neighbors for fear that someone might be a police informer . 
Today , internet filters have disappeared and there is unfettered access to all websites . 
Journalists are learning how to create a free press as they transform their newspapers , radio broadcasts and television stations . 
People express their opinions openly in the streets . 
Reforms are taking place in every region of the country , which is home to about 12 million people . 
The question is , will these changes last ? 
Snow began falling over Colorado and Kansas Tuesday as yet another round of winter weather began marching across the United States barely a week after a record-setting winter storm roared across the Midwest . 
A powerful weather system poised over the Rockies is forecast to dump several feet of snow in the Mountain West and up to 10 inches in some parts of Oklahoma , forecasters said . 
Much of Oklahoma is under a winter storm warning , but snow and sleet are predicted as far south as central Texas , with 2 to 4 inches expected to coat the Dallas-Fort Worth area , the National Weather Service said . 
Later in the week , the system is expected to bring rain and snow to many areas of the Deep South before delivering a wintry mix along portions of the East Coast by Thursday . 
With protesters still in the streets of Cairo and newly appointed government officials meeting with some opposition leaders , Egypt faces an uncertain future . 
The outcome will depend largely on the course charted by a transitional government . 
Many other countries have been down the path Egypt finds itself on . 
A popular uprising undermines the authority of a long-standing regime and a period of chaos ensues . 
Transitional governments often take control and their success at ushering in change varies depending on a multitude of factors . 
`` In many of these cases , if the military splits or goes against the ruler and helps to bring in some transition with popular support , it still may take a cycle or more to get to an actual democratic regime or to accomplish real change , '' said Georgia State University political science professor Jennifer McCoy , citing past transitions in Latin American , Eastern Europe and the Philippines . 
There is no guaranteed route to success , McCoy said , and often , while there may be some wholesale changes , the people in positions of authority remain at the top in transitional governments . 
In a case where there is no clear leader or leading group such as in Egypt today that spurred the change , it s very difficult to predict where it s going to go . '' 
Click here for the entire interview : You can also listen to the CNN Radio Reports podcast on Coach Tom Walter donated a kidney to Wake Forest baseball player Kevin Jordan . 
Wake Forest University outfielder Kevin Jordan and coach Tom Walter are recovering after surgery at Emory University in Atlanta , team spokesman Steven Wright said . 
`` Coach Walter told the team about a week ago what he wanted to do and , well , there were just a bunch of stunned faces in the room , '' Wright said . 
`` But the coach did n't really seemed fazed by the surgery . 
I do n't think it was a matter of making the decision so much as it was , ` This is how it has to be , so it is . ' '' 
Jordan has a rare condition that causes abnormal antibodies to attack white blood cells and damage small blood vessels , the newspaper reported . 
Walter reportedly stepped up after learning that none of the athlete 's relatives were a match . 
The coach talked to USA Today before the operation . 
`` When we recruit our guys , we talk about family and making sacrifices for one another , '' he said . 
`` It is something we take very seriously . 
I had the support of my family , Wake Forest and my team . 
To me it was a no-brainer . '' 
Donating a kidney is an incredible act of generosity , but there 's something uniquely remarkable about this case . 
The freshman from Columbus , Georgia , has n't even played a game with Wake Forest yet . 
Jordan , who was the New York Yankees pick in the 19th round of 2010 's amateur draft , had only practiced with his teammates last fall at Wake Forest . 
He started school at Wake Forest last August , and endured hours of dialysis a day while keeping up with the demands of college ball and his school work . 
In recent months , his health began to deteriorate , Wright said . 
Next semester , Jordan will take time off at home to recover from the surgery . 
But the coach has said he plans to be at Wake Forest 's first game against LSU in less than two weeks . 
`` He might not be catching fly balls , '' said Wright . 
`` But Coach Walter will be with his team . '' 
Assange has not been charged with a crime , but Swedish prosecutors want to question him in connection with sexual misconduct allegations related to separate incidents last August . 
Assange denies the accusations , and his attorneys are fighting his extradition on procedural and human-rights grounds . 
Once the wounds from surgery are healed , the photography professor , whose back-of-the-head camera sends an image every minute to his website , said he wants to implant a lighter device in his skull . 
I m determined to continue with it , he told the Chronicle blog . 
The 15-year-old soccer phenom joins the New England Revolution , a Major League team , for practice this month , capping a whirlwind ride that will allow him to skip college and most of high school . 
Fagundez , who will train against players twice his age on the first team , said that he is ready . 
I think it would be a fight for me and a challenge , Fagundez told the Boston Globe newspaper . 
But I think I would do good . 
Even if I m on the floor 100 times , I ll still get up , and I ll keep fighting . 
The 27-year-old on Wednesday will become the youngest-ever black woman to be named a Member of the British Order by Queen Elizabeth , according to the Guardian newspaper . 
As a senior policy officer at Race on the Agenda . 
Last year she founded the Girls Against Gangs project , supporting women affected by gang violence . 
`` I am grateful and feel very privileged to be receiving the MBE award , '' Fermin told the Guardian . 
`` It has been fantastic to see the impact my work has had on policy affecting girls ' and women 's issues and I am excited about what the future will hold , '' she told the Guardian . 
The 19-year-old senior from Krop High School in Florida 's Miami-Dade County helped lead his teammates to the basketball playoffs this year . 
Yet because he is a Bahamian native who came to the U.S. three years ago and transferred to Krop just this academic year , the Florida High School Athletic Association has decided to drop the team from playoff contention and may strip them of their victories this season altogether . 
Maria Rodriguez of the Florida Immigration Coalition will argue before a District Judge Tuesday that the ban is a federal violation . 
A Florida high schools athletics official said the case is not about academics , but basketball . 
The educational part sitting in the classroom , doing homework is a right , M. Denarvise Thornton Jr. , associate executive director of the Florida High School Athletic Association , said to the Miami Herald newspaper . 
This being an extracurricular activity , it -LRB- playing basketball for the school -RRB- is a privilege . '' 
CNN 's Nicole Dow , Sara Pratley and Alicia Stewart contributed to this report . 
Will Assange be extradited ? 
-- WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange returns to court in London . 
He 's fighting extradition to Sweden , where he 's wanted for questioning in a sex crimes investigation . 
The 39-year-old Australian has repeatedly said he is innocent and is confident he will be exonerated . 
He has not been charged with a crime . 
Assange 's lawyers have said Swedish prosecutors are attempting to discredit him because of his work with WikiLeaks , which published reams of classified government intelligence last year . 
The attorneys speculated that if Assange were extradited , Sweden could hand him to the U.S. , which could charge him with espionage , leading to his confinement in Guantanamo Bay prison and his execution . 
The proceeding in London should wrap up today . 
-- There have been no reports of gunfire in Cairo , Egypt , today , but Middle East expert Fouad Ajami cautions that that is no indication protesters are safe . 
He says this is the most dangerous phase of the conflict for protesters because many of their identities are known to security services . 
If President Hosni Mubarak 's administration survives , people speaking against Mubarak could face severe consequences , he says . 
Ajami is a professor of Middle East studies at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University . 
Meanwhile , the White House 's position toward Egypt appears to be changing , and details are surfacing of abuse that journalists have suffered while trying to cover the protests . 
See CNN.com 's full coverage of the crisis . 
Toyota report due -- A report is expected today about the government 's 10-month investigation into sudden acceleration problems in Toyota cars and trucks . 
The Department of Transportation and scientists from NASA conducted the study at the request of Congress , following a string of consumer claims that Toyota cars and SUVs accelerated out of control . 
The Cleveland Cavaliers lost a record 25th straight game Monday night , falling to the Dallas Mavericks 99-96 . 
The loss -- an NBA record -- eclipsed the franchise 's 24-game losing streak that spanned two seasons and ended in 1982 . 
On Monday , the Cavs had a chance to tie the game in the final seconds , but Jamario Moon and Antawn Jamison both elected to pass the ball rather than take one last heave at the basket . 
`` J-Moon just really was n't aware , '' Cleveland coach Byron Scott said , according to The -LRB- Cleveland -RRB- Plain Dealer . 
`` That 's the bottom line . 
Because he had really a pretty good look . '' 
Scott , encouraged by his team 's effort of late , said a win is coming , sooner or later . 
`` We 've just got to keep playing like that , and it 's going to happen , '' Scott told the Plain Dealer . 
`` It 's going to happen real soon . '' 
The Cavs have not won in the new year . 
Their last victory was December 18 against the New York Knicks . 
Ongoing coverage - Crisis in Egypt 11:00 am ET - Afghanistan briefing - Two U.S. Army colonels brief reporters from Afghanistan on current operations in the war-torn country . 
-LRB- Update 11:33 a.m. Cairo , 4:33 a.m. ET -RRB- As protests in Egypt entered a third week Tuesday , the scene in Cairo 's Tahrir Square might appear relatively calm . 
Cameras no longer captured images of Molotov cocktails and chunks of concrete flying through the air . 
But some say more danger could come . 
-LRB- Update 8:53 p.m. Cairo , 1:53 p.m. ET -RRB- Google executive Wael Ghonim has been released in Egypt , the company announced . 
`` Huge relief - Wael Ghonim has been released . 
Our love to him and his family , '' the company tweeted shortly after 8 p.m. in Cairo -LRB- 1 p.m. ET -RRB- . 
Ghonim 's Twitter account , which had not had a posting since he went missing January 28 , carried a tweet around the same time . 
`` Freedom is a bless -LRB- sic -RRB- that deserves fighting for it , '' the tweet said , ending with the hashtag '' . 
Jan25 , '' a reference to the Egypt protests . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
