By Huguette Labelle , Special to CNN Huguette Labelle : Vibrant civil society keeps governmental corruption at bay When people take to the streets , corruption often their top grievance , Labelle says Research shows given the chance , people will stand up to corruption , she writes Labelle : Access to information , whistleblower protection , anti-fraud laws needed Editor 's note : Huguette Labelle is the chair of Transparency International , a global civil society organization that fights corruption . 
-LRB- CNN -RRB- -- When people take to the streets to protest against their governments , the list of grievances is usually long and complex , but corruption is always at the top . 
We see this now in the wave of protests spreading across Tunisia and Egypt . 
We saw it in Ivory Coast where stolen elections threaten a return to civil war . 
We saw it in Haiti where years of corruption have taken their toll . 
And the list can go on around the world . 
But to be free of corruption , people need leaders who act with integrity and transparency ; leaders who are responsive to the needs of all citizens so that the management of public goods benefits everyone not just the elites . 
Independent oversight institutions and a vibrant civil society play a key role in holding governments to account . 
In many parts of the world , both are lacking . 
The protests we are witnessing now are in countries where democracy is weak or nonexistent and civil society has a muted voice . 
People fear repression if they speak out . 
Anti-corruption and other activists are limited by legal restrictions and , as we have seen , often subjected to government harassment and intimidation . 
Not surprisingly , on January 27 , when 2,200 Arab academics , politicians and activists from more than 20 Arab countries issued the Casablanca Call to protect human rights and democracy , they demanded civil society organizations be allowed `` to perform their advocacy roles freely and effectively . '' 
So far , 148 countries have ratified the U.N. Convention Against Corruption , which outlines a comprehensive anti-corruption framework . 
Journalists in Egypt reveal plight White House shifting tone on Egypt Egyptian opposition leader slams regime This includes a commitment to implement access to information and whistleblower-protection legislation . 
It also requires laws to prevent money laundering and mechanisms to identify and return stolen assets . 
Unfortunately , in many countries it is largely disregarded . 
In November , the Group of 20 said it would lead by example and called on all its members to implement the U.N. Convention Against Corruption as part of its Anti-Corruption Action Plan . 
At Transparency International , we welcomed this strong statement and are following its implementation across the globe . 
That is a role that civil society can and should play . 
Independent assessment of government provides an important check on power . 
It is a foundation stone of a strong democracy . 
Clearly , it would be nave to assume that just giving people a greater say in government will end official corruption overnight , but it is an important , necessary starting point . 
Our latest research shows that given the chance , ordinary people will stand up to corruption . 
Two-thirds of the 91,000 people questioned in 86 countries for our 2010 Global Corruption Barometer said they would support their friends or colleagues if they fought against corruption . 
Today , people see freedom from corruption as a basic human right . 
They are right to do so . 
No one should have to live under a regime where corruption is endemic . 
For Tunisian fruit vendor Mohamed Bouazizi , corruption defeated hope , and he set himself alight , becoming the catalyst to the protests that are holding the world 's attention . 
The image of his family throwing coins at the local government office gate , money he was allegedly asked to pay as a bribe , is a poignant reminder that corruption kills . 
What followed took the world by surprise . 
It should not have . 
Nor should the scenes of people filling the streets to protest against their governments , demanding greater accountability and an end to corruption . 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Huguette Labelle . 
