2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Cameras no longer captured images of Molotov cocktails and chunks of concrete flying through the air . 
But some say more danger could come . 
-LRB- Update 8:53 p.m. Cairo , 1:53 p.m. ET -RRB- Google executive Wael Ghonim has been released in Egypt , the company announced . 
`` Huge relief - Wael Ghonim has been released . 
Our love to him and his family , '' the company tweeted shortly after 8 p.m. in Cairo -LRB- 1 p.m. ET -RRB- . 
Ghonim 's Twitter account , which had not had a posting since he went missing January 28 , carried a tweet around the same time . 
`` Freedom is a bless -LRB- sic -RRB- that deserves fighting for it , '' the tweet said , ending with the hashtag '' . 
Jan25 , '' a reference to the Egypt protests . 
Pls stop using my name my poor grandmother has been dead for 5 years and we loved her very much I do n't know why you write terrible things about her . 
Well Cesar your grandma called us and said she was horni she ordered us to dig her out so she could suc some dic she also gave instruction to pls fuk her up the az every week so stop crying and help us dig that btch out Cesar pls tell your grandmother to stop calling from the cementery now she is asking for black diks we do n't know what to do no black wants to fuk her she is very cheap she says she can only pay with blowjbs but we need money , today she said if could dig out your grandfather because he likes to watch when she 's being fukd and he has money in his pockets so we are going to dig him out but you have to pay us for this sht they smell lke crap Pls stop stop stop with my grandmother she suffered very much and my mother is sick she ca n't walk pls do n't insult them they are very nice people my father I know he is cuir but we do n't care Cesar the doctors are very concerned about your grandmas azz bones since they are all cracked now she says to use her mouth but people say that sometimes she revives and can bite your dik so its going to cost you more to feed that btch we think the bones in her mouth can wthstand another month or two of heavy duty blows -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
