Obama Says Economic Crisis Comes First President Obama declared last night in his first prime-time news conference that the task of saving and creating jobs is more important than cultivating the bipartisan cooperation he promised to bring to Washington , and he pressed his case for the massive economic stimulus plan working its way through Congress . 
Warning that inaction could `` turn a crisis into a catastrophe , '' Obama rejected criticism from Republicans about the legislation 's effect on the federal deficit , noting that government debt had ballooned on his predecessor 's watch . 
Although he called for lawmakers to break out of their `` ideological rigidity , '' he was unapologetic as he pushed a package with a cost of more than $ 800 billion that has so far drawn only nominal Republican support . 
`` I ca n't afford to see Congress play the usual political games . 
What we have to do right now is deliver for the American people , '' Obama said just hours after the legislation narrowly cleared a key procedural hurdle in the Senate , where it is likely to gain final passage today . 
The bill will then become the subject of potentially contentious negotiations between House and Senate leaders . 
It is unclear whether it will reach the president 's desk before a scheduled congressional recess next week . 
Obama repeatedly stressed the need for swift and aggressive action on the economy , pitting his plan against those who he said would `` do nothing '' to assist a desperate public . 
`` So , you know , we can differ on some of the particulars , but again , the question I think that the American people are asking is : Do you just want government to do nothing , or do you want it to do something ? 
If you want it to do something , then we can have a conversation , '' he said . 
`` But doing nothing -- that 's not an option , from my perspective . '' 
Obama defended the role of government in the recovery process , saying that `` with the private sector so weakened by this recession , the federal government is the only entity left with the resources to jolt our economy back to life . '' 
The president fielded 13 questions from reporters in his first wide-ranging session since he took office , touching briefly on foreign policy , his long-range agenda and sports . 
But the economy dominated the event . 
Asked about the next allotment of money to aid troubled banks , he said he is dissatisfied with the way the first $ 350 billion was spent . 
`` We did n't get as big a bang for the buck as we should have '' from the Troubled Assets Relief Program , Obama said . 
`` My immediate task is making sure that the second half of that money -- $ 350 billion -- is spent properly . '' 
That allocation process will begin today , when Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner is slated to detail the administration 's strategy for releasing the remaining bailout money . 
Obama stepped to the podium in the East Room of the White House at 8:01 p.m. , opening with prepared remarks on the economy that set the tone for the night . 
Somber and focused , he alternated between defending some specific provisions of the legislation and discussing its broad framework , repeatedly arguing that the public would prefer even a flawed government response over inaction . 
He said he thought an economic recovery could begin to set in by 2010 but warned that 2009 will continue to be a `` difficult year . '' 
He did not crack any jokes , aside from a playful greeting of veteran reporter Helen Thomas , and ended the appearance promptly at 9 p.m. Still , the president conveyed a firm tone . 
Asked whether he risked appearing to be too much of an alarmist about the economic peril facing the United States , possibly undermining public confidence in the system , he became almost defensive . 
`` No , no , no , no , '' he said . 
`` I think that what I 've said is what other economists have said across the political spectrum , which is that if you delay acting on an economy of this severity , then you potentially create a negative spiral that becomes much more difficult for us to get out of . '' 
He compared the situation to that of Japan in the 1990s , saying the Japanese , failing to act quickly enough , suffered a `` lost decade . '' 
`` This is not your ordinary , run-of-the-mill recession , '' he said . 
In a brief foray into foreign policy , Obama said with regard to Iran that the administration `` will be looking for openings that can be created where we can start sitting across the table , face-to-face diplomatic overtures '' with the Islamic republic . 
He said that `` there 's been a lot of mistrust built up over the years , so it 's not going to happen overnight '' and that `` even as we engage in this direct diplomacy , we are very clear about certain deep concerns '' about Iranian links to militant groups and possible pursuit of a nuclear weapon . 
In stark contrast to former president George W. Bush , Obama did not say that the United States would refuse to tolerate a nuclear-armed Iran . 
Instead , he all but invited Iran to signal that it , too , is interested in talks . 
`` Now it 's time for Iran to send some signals that it wants to act differently , as well , and recognize that , even as it has some rights as a member of the international community , with those rights come responsibilities , '' he said . 
The news conference ended a day of action on the stimulus package : Obama traveled to Elkhart , Ind. , to promote the legislation as it made its way toward the Senate floor , clearing a procedural hurdle by a vote of 61 to 36 that set the stage for final passage today . 
Only three Republicans -- moderate Sens. Susan Collins and Olympia J. Snowe of Maine and Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania -- supported the legislation . 
In the House , no Republicans voted for the $ 819 billion version of the stimulus package that passed on Jan. 28 . 
