China has urged Mexico to handle the matter `` objectively and calmly '' China has denied it is discriminating against Mexican citizens in moves to stem the spread of swine flu . 
More than 100 people , including many Mexicans , have been quarantined in mainland China since the virus was found in a Mexican man in Hong Kong . 
Mexican officials said their citizens were being unfairly confined . 
No-one else has displayed any symptoms . 
China 's foreign ministry said the move was `` a purely medical quarantine issue '' and not an act of discrimination . 
Mexico should `` give full understanding to the measures adopted by China and handle this matter objectively and calmly '' , said a statement on the ministry 's website . 
The Mexican authorities say they are sending a plane to China to bring back those nationals who wish to return . 
Mexico has now confirmed 25 fatalities from the virus , but officials said it appeared that the outbreak could be levelling off . 
The a 25-year-old man diagnosed with H1N1 flew from Mexico to Shanghai to Hong Kong . 
After the positive test , China decided to track down everyone on his flight and put them into quarantine . 
It also isolated everyone in the traveller 's hotel in Hong Kong . 
Mexican officials say more than 70 Mexican citizens in China have been isolated . 
It is not yet clear whether or not these people had any contact with the infected traveller . 
About 50 are being held in quarantine in Shanghai in two five-star hotels , with 10 in Beijing . 
Mexican nationals are also being held in the city of Wenzhou . 
The BBC 's James Reynolds in Beijing says China 's actions are dramatic but the government may be trying to prove a point to its own people . 
In 2003 , the Communist Party was widely criticised for covering up the outbreak of the respiratory disease Sars . 
So , this time the government may want to show that it is capable of taking early , effective action - even if it leads to a bit of a row with a foreign government , our correspondent says . 
There are reports of international flyers being tested for the virus A spokeswoman at the Mexican Embassy in Beijing said the quarantined Mexicans were being treated well , but added the country 's ambassador to China had not been allowed to see those in Beijing 's Guomenlu Hotel . 
Ambassador Jorge Guajardo said many of them had no connection with the Shanghai-Hong Kong flight which carried the infected Mexican man . 
`` We are objecting to the fact that they are holding Mexicans in isolation for fear that they might have the flu virus , even though they have no signs of having the flu virus , '' he said . 
On Saturday Foreign Minister Patricia Espinosa criticised China , along with Peru , Argentina , Cuba and Ecuador , for cutting flights to Mexico . 
She also urged Mexicans to avoid travel to China , accusing its government of discrimination for the quarantine measures . 
