How can we avoid a swine flu pandemic ? 
The World Health Organization says countries must not lower their guard in the response to the swine flu outbreak . 
What are your concerns about the virus ? 
Almost 900 cases had been confirmed across five continents , the WHO said , and authorities have to remain vigilant . 
Viruses increased and decreased in activity , it said , and it was too early to tell whether the outbreak had peaked where it emerged in Mexico . 
Meanwhile in the UK , from 5 May all households are to receive leaflets giving information about the virus and advice on how to prevent its spread as five schools across the country remain shut after pupils fell ill . 
In Britain , the number of confirmed cases of the H1N1 virus has risen to 27 . 
What precautions are you taking to prevent the spread of swine flu ? 
How have your government and media reacted to the outbreak ? 
How concerned are you ? 
Are you in Mexico ? 
Are streets and beaches deserted ? 
Send your pictures to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to +447725100100 . 
If you have a large file you can upload here . 
This debate is now closed . 
If the virus only produces mild symptoms why is so much effort being put into containing it ? 
Surely it would be better for most people to have this mild version rather than the catch it during wave two when we are told the virus will be much worse ? 
The first British couple affected by the swine flu caught it when on their honeymoon in Cancun , how is that possible when there has not been a single case of swine flu in Cancun ? 
Besides , by their own words they presented normal flu symptoms and magically they were told it was swine flu . 
Every year 36,000 people do die in the US only for seasonal influenza ... so what 's the real deal here ?! Make everyone who has it stays at home until they get better ! 
And wash your hands to stop it spreading . 
Also , it would just be gross anyway if you did n't wash your hands . 
Here in Wisconsin we have 3 confirmed cases -LRB- no deaths -RRB- of H1N1 flu and the governor has declared a state wide health emergency . 
Many closed schools and general panic and hysteria on the TV and radio . 
Meanwhile 2 people die daily of HIV in the state and in Washington DC the death toll is about 41 people daily . 
This , apparently , constitutes nothing . 
Get some perspective for goodness sake . 
This is a mild flu and would have gone unnoticed but for the Mexican health ministers hysterical over playing the case and WHO cynically using it as an opportunity to test their preparedness for a real emergency . 
Why not provide a universal call number such as 944 so that a suspect is seen by a Health Organization at once and given Tamiflu if required ? 
George Wu , Chula Vista , U.S. . 
It would seem that some think its nothing to be worried about , and they 're right , concerned would be a better word . 
But for those who think this is scaremongering , I wonder if these same people would be the people who would want heads to roll if nothing had be done to halt it . 
I 'm not from a clinical background , but I do know that a pandemic has been expected for quite some time , in fact it 's long overdue . 
The bottom line is , we should let our guard down until we know for certain its not going to be a pandemic . 
None - as there is nothing I can do about it . 
I already use a handkerchief , tissues , etc. . 
This has never stopped me getting flu & probably not stopped me from passing it on . 
The high death toll in 1918 was a consequence of 4 years of war and resulting stress , poor health care and diet . 
While sympathising with those who have died , most who catch the virus live . 
There will not be 20 million or more deaths this time . 
We are overreacting to a false threat . 
I returned from Cancun on the 17th April just before all the panic happened . 
I am perfectly healthy and went on holiday as I needed some sunshine to recover from a series of colds over the winter . 
We probably take more virus into Mexico than we bring out . 
Cortez and his army brought Mexico the cold virus first . 
I 'm soon going to repatriate to the USA . 
While some countries are over-reacting to this swine flu epidemic there is no hiding the fact this virus will spread irrespective of draconian airport procedures , quarantining measures or culling pigs . 
It is important for these various governments to act responsibly and disseminate accurate information to their citizens instead of creating panic and clear cases of discrimination against Mexican citizens . 
