Analysis : Iran sees ally Syria surrounded by U.S. , Arab `` wolves '' TEHRAN | Mon Aug 15 , 2011 5:59 am EDT TEHRAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Beset by civil unrest at home and lambasted by the West and his Arab neighbors for his violent crackdown on dissent , Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad can count on one firm ally : Iran . 
In a country that knows a thing or two about diplomatic isolation , Iran 's politicians and media describe the Damascus government as an outpost of resistance to Israel that has been set upon by Washington and its lackeys in the region . 
While several Gulf Arab countries have withdrawn their ambassadors in protest at the violence , and countries once close to Damascus , Russia and Turkey , have turned harshly critical , Iran is the only big country still backing Syria , arguing anything else would spell disaster . 
`` In regard to Syria we are confronted with two choices . 
The first is for us to place Syria in the mouth of a wolf named America and change conditions in a way that NATO would attack Syria , '' said Alaeddin Boroujerdi , head of the Iranian parliament 's foreign affairs committee . 
`` That would mean we would have a tragedy added to our other tragedies in the world of Islam . '' 
`` The second choice would be for us to contribute to the termination of the clashes in Syria , '' Boroujerdi said . 
`` The interests of the Muslim people command that we mobilize ourselves to support Syria as a center of Palestinian resistance . '' 
A senior cleric pressed the message home . 
`` It is the duty of all Muslims to help stabilize Syria against the destructive plots of America and Israel , '' said Grand Ayatollah Naser Makarem Shirazi . 
Iran also used troops to put down mass protests following the disputed 2009 presidential election . 
Iranian leaders also described those demonstrations as a Western plot . 
Iran had hoped the Arab Spring , something Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei dubbed the `` Islamic Awakening , '' would spell the end of U.S.-backed autocracies and usher in an era of Muslim unity to face-down the West and Israel . 
Khamenei used the June anniversary of the death of Iran 's revolutionary leader , Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini , to tell the nation : `` Our stance is clear : wherever a movement is Islamic , popular and anti-American , we support it . '' 
Without mentioning Syria by name , he continued : `` If somewhere a movement is provoked by America and Zionists , we will not support it . 
Wherever America and the Zionists enter the scene to topple a regime and occupy a country , we are on the opposite side . '' 
Mohammad Marandi , an associate professor at the University of Tehran , said Iran 's support for Syria was based on a shared interest in helping resistance to Israel -- both countries support Hamas and Hezbollah -- and that continuing to back Assad while he reforms Syria 's one-party system was imperative . 
`` Iran has always believed that Syria should not be weakened , because the Israeli regime will certainly take advantage of any weakness , '' Marandi told Reuters . 
`` In any case , real reforms can only be carried out in a peaceful environment . 
The Western and pro-Western Arab media campaign against Syria is intended to destabilize the country and to prevent Syria from implementing reforms that will keep Syria strong and an anti-Israeli government in power . '' 
He played down media reports of Iran increasing aid to Syria . 
`` I have not heard of any extraordinary aid delivery , except in the Western media or media outlets owned by despotic Arab regimes . '' 
While civil unrest in Syria has not gone unreported in Iran , it has received far less attention than uprisings in other parts of the region , particularly Bahrain where Saudi Arabia helped a Sunni monarchy put down protests led by majority Shi'ites . 
In recent days , as Western media , though banned from working in Syria , have reported a growing death toll , Iranian television has focused more attention on unrest in Britain that some Iranian journalists have described as a `` civil war . '' 
With Gulf Arab countries turning against Assad , and Turkey , a bridge between the Middle East and the West , taking a tougher stance , Iranian newspapers reflect Tehran 's growing isolation . 
After distancing his country from Israel and moving closer to the Muslim world since coming to power in 2003 , Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan surprised some in Iran with his volte face . 
`` In Syria , the state is pointing guns at its own people ... Turkey 's message to Assad is very clear : stop all kinds of violence and bloodshed . '' 
The hardline Qods daily said Turkey , instead of showing support for Syria and Iran , had capitulated to U.S. pressure . 
`` If Recep Tayyip Erdogan 's government does not change its political behavior toward Syria , Turkey will be the main loser of the Syrian events if Damascus gets out of the current crisis , '' it wrote in a recent editorial . 
The papers reserved their harshest words for Iran 's Gulf Arab neighbors , particularly Saudi Arabia , whose relations with the mostly non-Arab Iran have become increasingly strained in recent months . 
`` Stabbing each other 's backs has now become a custom among Arab countries , like the way they previously betrayed Palestine , Libya , Iraq and Sudan . 
The current betrayal of Syria should come as no surprise , '' Siyasat-e Ruz daily said in an editorial . 
`` They are still under this illusion that convergence with America can help them preserve their establishment and restore their lost status in the region , '' the conservative paper said . 
They have turned into puppets for the goals of the West . '' 
Reformist daily Arman said Saudi Arabia and Bahrain appeared to be drawing the battle lines for a future regional conflict . 
`` They want to psychologically prepare the atmosphere so that if there is a conflict with Syria and Iran supports it they are standing on the opposite side and against Iran , '' Arman said . 
`` All the countries that want to settle a score with Iran would be happy if Iran entered such a conflict and then , in the name of the international community , they would harm Iran . '' 
The paper noted the urgent need for Assad to make good on his promised political reforms but with a death toll there which it put at 2,000 , `` it seems late for Bashar al-Assad to get out of this critical situation . '' 
The reformist daily concluded that it might soon be time for Tehran to rethink its staunch support for Assad . 
`` If the Syria situation continues then it 's time for Iran to think about its long term interests , '' it concluded , saying unconditional support for Assad might leave Iran supporting a government `` that has been thrown out of power ... That can have no benefits for itself or Iran . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The last will be Iran most likely . 
The propaganda machine is whipped up to get us to hate and fear Iran . 
But who should we really fear . 
That little weak country or the power who is producing the war propaganda ... . 
where to start with this one . 
How about with UN conspiracy , for an organization that hasnt done anything productive in decades , I doubt they could form any sort of conspiracy . 
Now for the IMF loans and the US , the IMF is a european based group , so no your answer is still stupid . 
No as for the `` independent countries '' , they were largely brought down because the government was independent from the people who should have been able to select it . 
Oddly enough you probably do n't have a democracy in a country that goes 4 decades without a regime change . 
What we should really be afraid of is at the ballot box ur opinion is worth as much as a well thought out one . 
So , what I take away from this article is that Iran considers Syrians to be sheep . 
This is not the case . 
It is interesting to see Iran change their opinion of an `` ally '' at the worst possible time . 
Iran is always working for the benefit of Iran . 
We are always working for the benefit of our country . 
All countries do the same thing . 
I would like to see the benefit for the United States in Iraq or Afganistan , but can not . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
