Guard ` cleaned up ' after Michael Jackson drug death Alberto Alvarez , left , testified that Dr Murray had said the singer `` had a bad reaction '' A bodyguard to Michael Jackson has testified the singer 's doctor ordered him to clean up medical paraphernalia in the moments after he died . 
And a paramedic said Dr Conrad Murray did not mention he had given Jackson propofol , an anesthetic found to have caused the singer 's death . 
The testimony came at a preliminary hearing for Dr Murray , who has pleaded not guilty to involuntary manslaughter . 
Prosecutors say his negligence led to Jackson 's death aged 50 in June 2009 . 
At the preliminary hearing in a Los Angeles courtroom , a judge is to decide whether prosecutors have enough evidence to try Dr Murray , a cardiologist . 
It is expected to last several days . 
Dr Murray faces up to four years in prison if convicted . 
Prosecutors contend Dr Murray 's treatment of the singer - including administering several doses of sedatives and a dose of propofol in the hours before he died - deviated from medical practice sufficiently to constitute a crime . 
They also say Dr Murray improperly concealed his use of propofol , a surgical anesthetic typically used in a clinical setting . 
On Wednesday , bodyguard Alberto Alvarez testified that Dr Murray had summoned him to the singer 's bedroom , telling him something had gone wrong and ordering him to clean up medicine vials and intravenous bags , then afterward to call paramedics . 
Mr Alvarez said Jackson lay on the bed , his eyes and mouth open , connected to an IV tube and a urinary catheter . 
`` I said , ` Dr Murray , what happened ? ' 
And he said , ` He had a reaction . 
He had a bad reaction , '' ' Mr Alvarez recalled . 
Also on Wednesday , paramedic Richard Senneff said Dr Murray did not mention he had administered propofol , but said he was treating the singer for dehydration . 
He said Jackson had looked so pale and gaunt he mistook him for a hospice patient , and did not initially recognize him as the world famous pop music star . 
The Los Angeles County coroner 's office has ruled the singer died from an overdose of the surgical anesthetic propofol , found in his body along with a cocktail of other sedatives . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
