The UN special envoy , Kofi Annan , has told the Security Council that Syria is still witnessing unacceptable levels of violence , despite a ceasefire being in place since 12 April . 
Briefing diplomats in a closed-door session , Mr Annan said he was alarmed about surges in violence in Syrian cities after visits by UN monitors . 
One activist group said 38 people were killed on Tuesday , mostly in Homs . 
The UN wants to increase its observers in Syria from a handful to 300 . 
Mr Annan said the overall situation was `` entirely contrary to the will of the international community '' . 
He said he was `` particularly alarmed '' by reports of government forces firing on protesters in Hama . 
`` If confirmed , this is totally unacceptable and reprehensible , '' he said . 
He also called for the rapid deployment of the observer mission . 
The US permanent representative to the UN , Susan Rice , told a news conference that all Security Council members wanted the observers to be deployed more quickly . 
Ms Rice said that it was hoped 100 observers would be in Syria within a month . 
However , Ms Rice said Syria had refused at least one observer because of his nationality , and had made clear it would not admit UN staff from any country in the `` Friends of Democratic Syria '' group . 
Meanwhile , Chinese state media reported that two Chinese observers had arrived in Syria on Tuesday . 
The BBC 's Laura Trevelyan at the UN says the US and its European allies are likely to question Mr Annan on how the shaky ceasefire can be safely monitored . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully The Security Council remains divided on broader policy towards Syria . 
The Western powers are pushing for tougher action while Damascus 's allies , Russia and China , say Mr Annan 's six-point peace plan , which the Syrian government has agreed to , is sufficient . 
Earlier Mr Annan 's spokesman , Ahmed Fawzi , said satellite imagery showed the Syrian government was failing to withdraw heavy weapons from urban centres . 
He also said there were credible reports that people who met monitors were then approached and sometimes killed by security forces . 
Earlier an activist in Hama told the Associated Press that dissidents had been punished for coming out to greet the visiting UN observers on Sunday , when they chanted `` Long live Syria ! 
Down with Assad ! '' 
Syrian troops reportedly fired shells and automatic weapons in the northern Arbaeen and Mashaa al-Arbaeen districts on Monday . 
Some 40 people were said to have died . 
Another activist , named as Samer , told the BBC there have been government attacks every day and the regime is constantly breaching the ceasefire . 
`` What happens is the observers visit neighborhoods in the city , then once they leave , the shooting and shelling starts again , '' he said . 
The government said security forces `` pursued armed terrorist groups '' which had been attacking and killing citizens in the area . 
Syrian TV also reported a car bomb had exploded in the center of the capital on Tuesday , injuring three people . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees -LRB- LCC -RRB- , an activist network , said 38 people had been killed by security forces across the country on Tuesday , including 16 in the city of Homs and 11 in the suburbs of Damascus . 
The UN says about 9,000 people have died since pro-democracy protests began in March 2011 . 
In February , the Syrian government put the death toll at 3,838 - 2,493 civilians and 1,345 security forces personnel . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
