Syria crisis : France raises use of force Recent footage showed explosions in Douma and tanks on the streets in parts of the country France says the Security Council should consider the use of force in Syria if a UN-backed peace plan fails to stop violence in the country . 
`` We can not allow the -LRB- Damascus -RRB- regime to defy us , '' French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said . 
Violence has continued despite a plan by international envoy Kofi Annan calling on Damascus to withdraw troops and heavy weapons from cities . 
Mr Juppe said 300 UN monitors should be deployed in Syria within two weeks . 
If the peace plan fails , he added , `` we would have to move to a new stage with a Chapter Seven resolution -LRB- which allows for action that could be backed by force -RRB- to stop this tragedy '' . 
Barbara Plett BBC UN correspondent France 's demands reflect frustration with what it sees as the inadequacies of Kofi Annan 's peace plan , and signal an attempt to move to a more aggressive posture . 
But that approach seems to have no chance of success at this point . 
Russia and China continue to oppose anything that looks like outside intervention . 
Russia in particular has invested its diplomatic capital in the Annan plan , so it 's even more unlikely than usual to change course . 
But other Security Council members also believe the plan needs to be given time . 
They broadly accept Kofi Annan 's argument that gradually and permanently basing observers in flashpoint cities could change the dynamic on the ground , as seen in Homs . 
Mr Annan 's peace plan is the only response to the Syria crisis that 's received united council backing , and there 's quiet consensus here that it will be his call as to if and when it fails , not France 's . 
There are concerns that such a resolution would be vetoed by Russia and China - which have blocked previous attempts to impose UN sanctions on Syria . 
The UN has sent a small advance team of observers to Syria . 
Last weekend the Security Council approved the deployment of another 300 . 
Violence was reported on Wednesday in several parts of Syria - including in towns where observers are monitoring a ceasefire agreed earlier this month . 
Activists say about 20 people were killed in total . 
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said security forces had opened fire on a bus in the north-western province of Idlib , killing four . 
In Hama , seven civilians including a two-year-old girl died as the government shelled parts of the town , activists said . 
Two observers were staying in the center , a short distance away . 
In the southern province of Deraa , clashes were reported between armed rebels and government forces in the towns of Bosra al-Sham and Tafas . 
The observatory said at least six people , including soldiers , died . 
Activists also said several people were killed by shelling and sniper fire in the Harasta and Douma suburbs of Damascus , despite UN monitors being in the capital . 
The reports can not be independently verified owing to government restrictions on foreign media . 
The Syrian government says it is fighting armed gangs , and that the terms of the ceasefire allow its forces to respond to attacks . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully Mr Annan told the Security Council on Tuesday that the Syrian military had not withdrawn its forces or heavy weapons from population centres . 
He said he was `` particularly alarmed by reports that government troops entered Hama -LRB- on Monday -RRB- after observers departed , firing automatic weapons and killing a significant number of people '' . 
`` If confirmed , this is totally unacceptable and reprehensible , '' he added . 
Also on Tuesday the US permanent representative to the UN , Susan Rice , told reporters that all Security Council members wanted the observers to be deployed more quickly . 
Ms Rice said that it was hoped 100 observers would be in Syria within a month . 
However , Ms Rice said Syria had refused at least one observer because of his nationality , and had made clear it would not admit UN staff from any country in the `` Friends of Democratic Syria '' group . 
Are you in Syria ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below . 
Send your pictures and videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to 61124 -LRB- UK -RRB- or +447624800100 -LRB- International -RRB- . 
If you have a large file you can upload here . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
