U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article EXCLUSIVE - EU seen tightening Libyan sanctions , include ports LONDON\/BRUSSELS | Thu May 19 , 2011 11:27 pm IST LONDON\/BRUSSELS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The European Union is considering tightening sanctions on the government of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi by blacklisting ports to prevent exports of oil and imports of fuel , Western diplomatic sources told Reuters . 
One source said EU experts have reached an agreement over putting six ports of the OPEC nation -- Tripoli , Zuara , Zawiyah , Al-Khoms , Ras Lanuf and Brega -- on the list and proposals could be submitted to the EU sanctions committee next week . 
Another EU diplomat said `` a number of EU states '' believed it would be a sensible next step , and it was possible it would be discussed by foreign ministers who meet in Brussels on Monday , although it was not formally on the agenda . 
Gaddafi 's government is seeking to raise fuel imports by using a loophole in international sanctions after two months of western air strikes against Libya . 
Civil war has crippled the refining industry and Gaddafi urgently needs fuel imports for his military and to keep civilian vehicles running in the areas he controls . 
`` West Libya 's supply of refined products is still sufficient . 
Western powers want a lot more control over supplies to Libya , '' one source said . 
`` The concern is that a stalemate will ensue in the war . '' 
The discussions will likely take place at the level of the EU sanctions committee next week and could become law by early June if it is successful , he added . 
A third EU diplomat said there was `` relatively strong '' backing for the idea , which was proposed by Britain , but political agreement would be needed from all 27 EU states and it could therefore take more time . 
The discussions may also involve the Libyan state-owned shipping company General National Maritime Transport Company -LRB- GNMTC -RRB- which is not on the sanctions list and has managed to bring at least one fuel cargo into west Libya . 
EU , U.N. and U.S. sanctions against Libya are implemented through a list of companies that are excluded from business , but exports to western Libya or dealings with firms missing from the list are not forbidden . 
Prime Minister David Cameron said earlier this month Britain sees scope for tightening sanctions on oil and oil products against Gaddafi . 
Reuters revealed in April that Libya had received at least one shipment via a ship-to-ship transfer in Tunisia and on Wednesday reported that west Libya is expected to receive a fuel cargo that recently visited Turkish and Georgian ports . 
Both states deny a role in the transaction . 
The idea to target ports follows a similar EU decision in the Ivory Coast in January to pressure the incumbent president Laurent Gbagbo of the cocoa producer to quit after an election he was widely seen to have lost . 
`` The international community tried to sanction ports for the first time earlier this year during the conflict in Ivory Coast and it worked , '' one of the sources said . 
Susannah Cogman , partner in the corporate crime and investigations team of law firm Herbert Smith , saw the proposal as a move towards increasingly targeted sanctions . 
`` This is novel in that it 's using financial sanctions to address specific geographical trade issues . 
That 's unusual , '' she said . 
But she added that these sanctions would be limited to acts , individuals and companies within the EU . 
-LRB- Reporting by Emma Farge and Dmitry Zhdannikov ; additional reporting by Julien Toyer and David Brunnstrom , Editing by Jason Neely -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
