Swine flu causes regular outbreaks in pigs Infection control experts are scrambling to respond to outbreaks of swine flu in Mexico and the US , and suspected cases elsewhere . 
Swine flu is a respiratory disease which infects pigs . 
Caused by influenza type A , there are regular outbreaks among herds of pigs , where the disease causes high levels of illness but is rarely fatal . 
It tends to spread in autumn and winter but can circulate all year round . 
There are many different types of swine flu and like human flu , the infection is constantly changing . 
Can humans catch swine flu ? 
Swine flu does not normally infect humans , although sporadic cases do occur - usually in people who have had close contact with pigs . 
There have also been rare documented cases of humans passing the infection to other humans . 
Human-to-human transmission of swine flu is thought to spread in the same way as seasonal flu - through coughing and sneezing . 
In the latest outbreak it is clear that the disease is being passed from person to person . 
Is this a new type of swine flu ? 
The World Health Organization has confirmed that at least some of the cases are a never-before-seen version of the H1N1 strain of influenza type A. H1N1 is the same strain which causes seasonal outbreaks of flu in humans on a regular basis . 
But this latest version of H1N1 is different : it contains genetic material that is typically found in strains of the virus that affect humans , birds and swine . 
Flu viruses have the ability to swap genetic components with each other , and it seems likely that the new version of H1N1 resulted from a mixing of different versions of the virus , which may usually affect different species , in the same animal host . 
Symptoms of swine flu in humans appear to be similar to those produced by standard , seasonal flu . 
These include fever , cough , sore throat , body aches , chills and fatigue . 
Most cases so far reported around the world appear to be mild , but in Mexico lives have been lost . 
Is it safe to eat pig meat ? 
There is no evidence that swine flu can be transmitted through eating meat from infected animals . 
However , it is essential to cook meat properly . 
A temperature of 70C -LRB- 158F -RRB- would be sure to kill the virus . 
How worried should people be ? 
When any new strain of flu emerges that acquires the ability to pass from person to person , it is monitored very closely in case it has the potential to spark a pandemic . 
1918 : The Spanish flu pandemic remains the most devastating outbreak of modern times . 
Caused by a form of the H1N1 strain of flu , it is estimated that up to 40 % of the world 's population were infected , and more than 50 million people died , with young adults particularly badly affected 1957 : Asian flu killed two million people . 
Caused by a human form of the virus , H2N2 , combining with a mutated strain found in wild ducks . 
The impact of the pandemic was minimized by rapid action by health authorities , who identified the virus , and made vaccine available speedily . 
The elderly were particularly vulnerable 1968 : An outbreak first detected in Hong Kong , and caused by a strain known as H3N2 , killed up to one million people globally , with those over 65 most likely to die The World Health Organization has warned that taken together the Mexican and US cases could potentially trigger a global pandemic , and stress that the situation is serious . 
However , it is stressed that it is still too early to accurately assess the situation fully . 
Currently , they say the world is closer to a flu pandemic than at any point since 1968 - rating the threat at three on a six-point scale . 
Nobody knows the full potential impact of the pandemic , but experts have warned that it could cost millions of lives worldwide . 
The Spanish flu pandemic , which began in 1918 , and was also caused by an H1N1 strain , killed millions of people . 
The fact that all the cases in the US have so far produced mild symptoms is encouraging . 
It suggests that the severity of the Mexican outbreak may be due to an unusual geographically-specific factor - possibly a second unrelated virus circulating in the community - which would be unlikely to come into play in the rest of the world . 
Alternatively , people infected in Mexico may have sought treatment at much later stage than those in other countries . 
It may also be the case that the form of the virus circulating in Mexico is subtly different to that elsewhere - although that will only be confirmed by laboratory analysis . 
There is also hope that , as humans are often exposed to forms of H1N1 through seasonal flu , our immune systems may have something of a head start in fighting infection . 
However , the fact that many of the victims are young does point to something unusual . 
Normal , seasonal flu tends to affect the elderly disproportionately . 
Can the virus be contained ? 
The virus appears already to have started to spread around the world , and most experts believe that containment of the virus in the era of readily available air travel will be extremely difficult . 
What about treatments and vaccines ? 
The US authorities say that two drugs commonly used to treat flu , Tamiflu and Relenza , seem to be effective at treating cases that have occurred there so far . 
However , the drugs must be administered at an early stage to be effective . 
Use of these drugs may also make it less likely that infected people will pass the virus on to others . 
The UK Government already has a stockpile of around 33 million doses of Tamiflu , ordered as a precaution against a pandemic . 
It is unclear how effective currently available flu vaccines would be at offering protection against the new strain , as it is genetically distinct from other flu strains . 
US scientists are already developing a bespoke new vaccine , but it may take some time to perfect it , and manufacture enough supplies to meet what could be huge demand . 
The strain of bird flu which has caused scores of human deaths in South East Asia in recent years is a different strain to that responsible for the current outbreak of swine flu . 
The latest form of swine flu is a new type of the H1N1 strain , while bird , or avian flu , is H5N1 . 
Experts fear H5N1 hold the potential to trigger a pandemic because of its ability to mutate rapidly . 
However , up until now it has remained very much a disease of birds . 
Those humans who have been infected have , without exception , worked closely with birds , and cases of human-to-human transmission are extremely rare - there is no suggestion that H5N1 has gained the ability to pass easily from person to person . 
