Medical Correspondent , Fergus Walsh , finds out what UK scientists are doing to combat swine flu For years now global health experts have been warning that a flu pandemic was overdue - a new strain would emerge to which there was little immunity , causing widespread epidemics . 
The fear has been that a pandemic could cause tens of millions of deaths and official predictions here suggest the death toll in the UK could range between 50,000 and 750,000 . 
This is why there is so much concern about the spread of swine flu , but the plain fact is that no-one knows yet whether this is the virus which will trigger the first pandemic since 1968 . 
One puzzling element is that there have been no deaths outside Mexico . 
So although the virus is spreading internationally , it is not yet a global killer . 
It is possible that a new flu virus might spread worldwide causing mostly mild illness , or that it might mutate at some point and become more or less virulent . 
In the immediate future , two important tasks faced by scientists are to develope rapid diagnostic tests for swine flu and to identify the optimum strain of flu to be used in a vaccine . 
Live samples of swine flu are to arrive in UK labs imminently The National Institute for Medical Research -LRB- NIMR -RRB- , in north London , is one of only five World Health Organization collaborating centres for influenza research . 
In a high level containment lab , UK scientists are getting ready to receive live samples of swine flu , which they intend to analyze in the hope of combating this disease . 
The samples will come from affected patients in California , and possibly Mexico and Spain . 
The scientists at the NIMR will take different virus samples , grow them and infect laboratory ferrets with them . 
Ferrets get flu in a similar way to humans and produce an immune response . 
Scientists will analyze the antibodies found in the ferrets ' blood and see whether the virus is showing signs of antigenic drift - in simple terms whether it is adapting and changing as it passes from person to person . 
Swine flu is an H1N1 virus , but it seems quite distinct from the human H1N1 strain included in the current seasonal , winter vaccine . 
It is unclear whether the seasonal vaccine would give any protection . 
One theory is that while it might not prevent someone getting swine flu , it could lessen its effects . 
For the moment , swine flu is not a cause for alarm in Britain , and it can not be caught from food , although raw pork should be properly cooked . 
