Experts suspect swine flu has killed more than 100 people in Mexico As international concern about swine flu grows , the BBC 's Jill McGivering asks what relevant lessons have been learned in the past 12 years , since the emergence of the new strain of bird flu and the Sars epidemic . 
It is new , but it is also familiar - 12 years ago , a new strain of bird flu emerged in Hong Kong that was seen as the possible start of a deadly flu pandemic . 
Six years ago came the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome -LRB- Sars -RRB- epidemic . 
That too was centred on Asia but caused more than 800 deaths worldwide . 
Since then , there has been massive investment in dealing with a flu-like pandemic . 
Many individual countries learned painful lessons . 
Some , like China , found they needed to be much more transparent and to improve their basic surveillance and reporting systems . 
Scientists are now in a better position to make a vaccine quickly To stop spread , cases need to be identified quickly and effectively . 
Governments needed to accept that information must be shared globally , even if the political instinct was to avoid admitting the scale of the problem . 
The continuing anxiety about a bird flu pandemic has forced bodies like the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- to invest in prevention strategies . 
There have been years of developing strategy and training on how to handle a flu pandemic - and multiple workshops and mock exercises . 
Experts have been sent around the world to assess procedures on the ground and give advice . 
Although the threat in mind was from an H5 or H9 type flu , much of the training has been generic , so it is just as relevant now . 
Scientists say the investment in global research may pay off too . 
More people now recognize that it is better for everyone if they pool information , rather than sit on it They are now in a much better position than they were 10 years ago to make a vaccine quickly , one which is perfectly matched against a particular viral strain . 
Some experts in the field say that with the heightened level of co-operation that now exists , it may be possible to have a vaccine for this form of H1N1 ready to distribute in a matter of months . 
Scientists , as well as politicians , have learned to share information more openly . 
The culture of secrecy and competition that persisted 10 years ago was addressed during the Sars crisis - and largely resolved . 
More people now recognize that it is better for everyone if they pool information , rather than sit on it , and understand that the WHO will keep a stock of any resulting vaccine so they can help poorer countries have access to it . 
Governments who found themselves on the front line of previous crises have become some of the best prepared . 
Indonesia has brought back thermal scanners used for Sars and bird flu And where people have previously experienced a threat , there seems to be more readiness for the public to accept rules and procedures which might limit individual freedoms , but could help to protect them . 
Hong Kong , for example , has kept up the practice of facial thermal imaging , introduced during Sars . 
It automatically screens every new arrival to identify those with high temperatures - a possible flu symptom . 
Governments , especially those in the developing world , have to make tough decisions about how to use their limited resources . 
Is it better to invest in protection against a possible future crisis , like a flu pandemic , which may never happen ? 
Or to focus on meeting more immediate daily health problems ? 
Fundamental questions about this new strain still need to be answered and its progress is very unpredictable . 
But whatever course it takes , most countries which have already experienced bird flu and Sars have emerged from those crises far better equipped to deal with the next one . 
