Monday 21 March 2005 02.47 GMT The BBC last night gave another sign that it is determined to maintain its editorial independence by screening a Panorama program strongly critical of Tony Blair 's manipulation of thin intelligence , on the second anniversary of the invasion of Iraq . 
In the program , Sir Richard Dearlove , the head of MI6 , was reported as having told Mr Blair that Washington had fixed policy on a war against Iraq and was going to fit the intelligence around that policy . 
Despite the humiliation of losing its director general , Greg Dyke , over its allegations concerning David Kelly , the government arms control officer , the film contained powerful condemnation of the government . 
It included interviews with former officials who had al ready broken in public with the government 's Iraq strategy . 
It also quoted extensively from leaked documents first revealed by the Daily Telegraph . 
In the most startling revelation , the program claimed that at a meeting on July 23 2002 , Sir Richard said a war was inevitable , adding that the facts and the intelligence were being fixed round the policy set out by George Bush 's administration . 
The claim was based on several reliable sources , Panorama said . 
It claimed that Sir Richard briefed Mr Blair that the quality of intelligence sourcing for some claims made in the run-up to the publication of the intelligence dossier was developmental , adding : `` The source remains unproven . '' 
Nevertheless , Mr Blair told MPs two weeks later : `` The intelligence picture they paint is one accumulated over the past four years . 
It is extensive , detailed and authoritative . '' 
The program also claimed that British intelligence was unable to convince neutral members of the UN security council , such as Mexico , of the dangers of Iraq 's stockpile of weapons of mass destruction . 
The program quoted Adolfo Zinser , former Mexican ambassador to the UN , referring to a meeting with MI6 . 
Mr Zinser said : `` I asked them : ` Do you have full proof of the existence of these weapons at any one of these particular sites that you are referring to ? 
The MI6 officers told me : `` No. '' Mr Zinser added : `` It was very clear they did n't have proof , they had circumstantial evidence of a funny behavior , of a suspicious behavior . 
But I knew that ... because that was what we were getting from the -LRB- UN -RRB- inspectors . '' 
The program also interviewed Sir Stephen Wall , Mr Blair 's former European adviser , who said of the legal case for war : `` We stretched the legal argument to breaking point , and the fact that we do not have authority does set a dangerous precedent . '' 
Sir Stephen also alleged that No 10 wilfully misrepresented remarks by the French president , Jacques Chirac , on the eve of war to suggest that France would never support a second UN resolution necessary to go to war . 
Will bow out with hour long special with Val Kilmer 
