\* France says Libyan rebel council legitimate reps of people \* Tripoli calls it interference \* EU , NATO begin talks in Brussels to agree common policy -LRB- adds Libyan reaction , European reaction , LNC quote -RRB- PARIS , March 10 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - France recognized the Libyan National Council , a rebel body fighting to oust Muammar Gaddafi , as the legitimate representative of Libya 's people on Thursday , the first country to make the move . 
People near the National Council 's headquarters in Benghazi cheered , honked horns and some fired guns in air to celebrate the news . 
The Libyan government called it a `` damaging intervention in Libya 's internal affairs '' . 
The announcement came as NATO and the European Union begin talks on Thursday on a possible `` no-fly '' zone over Libya after some of the fiercest fighting of the three-week-old uprising against Muammar Gaddafi . 
-LRB- ID : LDE72900H -RRB- `` France recognizes the National Council as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people . 
There will be an exchange of ambassadors between Paris and Benghazi , '' said an official at the Elysee Palace offices of President Nicolas Sarkozy after he met two representatives of the Libyan National Council -LRB- LNC -RRB- . 
Speaking after meeting Sarkozy , Mahmoud Jebril , a member of the LNC , said France would unveil a `` global strategic plan '' to the European Union on Friday to try to resolve the crisis . 
`` The plan would be at a -LRB- European -RRB- level to save the Libyan people from the suffering and massacre being perpetrated against it and to safeguard the future and the country . '' 
Rebel representatives in Benghazi said France was the first country in the world to give them formal diplomatic recognition . 
A French diplomatic source said Paris ' decision was `` a political signal of encouragement '' and that it hoped the European Union would follow suit . '' 
German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle sounded a cautious note . 
`` This will have to wait for consultations held by the EU and the Special Representative of the United Nations . 
Before we undertake such political steps , we must of course know who we 're dealing with . '' 
A Spanish government spokesman told Reuters Spain would join the rest of Europe in a common decision out of meetings today and tomorrow , while Austrian Foreign Minister Michael Spindelegger said the talks with the LNC `` were very welcome . 
A spokesman at Britain 's Foreign Office said members of the Libyan rebel council were `` valid interlocutors '' . 
-LRB- ID : nLDE7291FA -RRB- European Union foreign ministers were meeting in Brussels on Thursday and EU leaders are due to meet there on Friday , in part to discuss Libya . 
NATO defense ministers were also meeting . 
-LRB- ID : nLDE7281SR -RRB- One EU diplomat said the 27-member EU was exploring the possibility of opening a representative office in east Libya but was only in the early stages of developing the idea . 
France , slow like most other countries to respond when the upheaval in North Africa started in Tunisia , a former colony , is seeking to play a more decisive role in events in Libya . 
`` We are totally in sync -LRB- with Germany -RRB- to say that Colonel Gaddafi is discredited , he must go and we must enter in dialogue with new Libyan officials '' French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said . 
An unidentified Libyan foreign ministry official told the official news agency Jana , France 's decision could mean Gaddafi 's government severs ties with Paris . 
-LRB- ID : nLDE7291GC -RRB- -LRB- Reporting by Yann le Guernigou and John Irish in Paris , Tom Pfeiffer in Benghazi , Ilona Wissenbach , Luke Baker and Julien Toyer in Brussels ; Olesya Dmitracova in London ; writing by Brian Love and John Irish ; editing by Philippa Fletcher -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
