GENEVA | Thu Mar 10 , 2011 6:19 am EST GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya has descended into civil war with increasing numbers of wounded civilians arriving in hospitals in eastern cities , the International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- said on Thursday . 
ICRC President Jakob Kellenberger called on Libyan authorities to grant the humanitarian agency access to western areas including the capital Tripoli so as to assess needs . 
He also reminded both Libyan forces and insurgents that under international humanitarian law it is prohibited to target civilians , medical facilities and ambulances . 
`` We have now a non-international armed conflict , or what you would call civil war , '' Kellenberger told a news conference . 
`` We see increasing numbers of wounded arriving at hospitals in the east and we are extremely worried . '' 
The ICRC , one of the few international aid agencies in Libya , has set up a base in rebel-held Benghazi in the east where it is helping to perform war surgery and supply hospitals . 
Kellenberger said he had no overall casualty figures for the country or reports on the western city of Zawiyah , which appeared to change hands twice during the day on Wednesday in a hard-fought battle . 
But he said that fighting had intensified and local doctors had seen a sharp rise in casualties , with at least 22 bodies and 40 wounded in Misrata after recent air strikes . 
Some 55 wounded were treated in Ajdabiyah hospital in the east this week . 
Top Libyan authorities whom he declined to identify had personally told him there was no need for outside help in the areas held by Libyan forces , according to Kellenberger , a former Swiss diplomat . 
`` We do n't know what the humanitarian needs are in areas controlled by Tripoli . 
I was told everything is under control , all hospitals are working perfectly , there is no need for external humanitarian assistance , '' he said . 
`` You can only assist people when you have access . 
Our first priority is to have access to areas controlled by Tripoli . '' 
U.N. agencies remain shut out from Libya for security reasons , but are increasingly alarmed at sketchy reports of mounting casualties and needs in besieged cities , U.N. officials said on Wednesday . 
-LRB- Editing by Jonathan Lynn and Elizabeth Fullerton -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
