Anti-Gaddafi rebels shoot after hearing an incoming aircraft at a checkpoint near the oil facility of Ras Lanuf March 7 , 2011 . 
WASHINGTON | Thu Mar 10 , 2011 6:46 pm EST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - As the Obama administration wrestles over what to do about Libya , the voices on Capitol Hill offer no consensus on military action . 
Influential senators John McCain , a Republican , and John Kerry , a Democrat , have kept up a drumbeat for U.S. military action such as a `` no-fly '' zone to aid the rebels fighting Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
But other senior lawmakers , like Republicans Senator Richard Lugar and Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen , are warning against getting the United States into a Libyan war . 
The Senate 's top Republican , Mitch McConnell , has suggested possibly arming the Libyan rebels , but other leaders in Congress have been more vague . 
Analysts say Congress may be waiting for a clear steer from the commander in chief , President Obama . 
`` It seems very clear there is not a consensus about what to do , and that is natural . 
Any time you have a crisis like this you are going to look for leadership from the executive branch , '' said foreign policy analyst Danielle Pletka of the American Enterprise Institute think-tank in Washington . 
`` My guess is that Obama will not authorize a no-fly zone without clear support from Congress and allies , '' said Henry Nau , political science professor at George Washington University . 
Obama `` has not taken a clear lead in arguing for that with either Congress or NATO . '' 
Ros-Lehtinen , a foreign policy hawk and chairwoman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee , told Reuters the situation in Libya was rapidly evolving . 
`` At this time , I do not believe it is in our national security interest for the U.S. to intervene militarily , '' she said . 
Although she is a big critic of Gaddafi , Ros-Lehtinen also called proposals to arm opposition forces in Libya misguided , saying the U.S. knew very little about them and this could have `` grave consequences for U.S. interests . '' 
Some of Obama 's Democrats , like Senate Intelligence Committee Chairwoman Dianne Feinstein , also say United States should avoid any military involvement in Libya . 
`` We 're in two other wars . 
There are problems in Iraq . 
There 's an expected major spring offensive in Afghanistan , we have problems with Pakistan ... It 's a civil war within the country -LRB- Libya -RRB- , '' Feinstein said outside the Senate . 
`` Even a no-fly zone would technically be an act of war , '' she said . 
Lugar , the top Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , says that any major military action to support anti-Gaddafi forces would require a vote of Congress . 
On Thursday , the top U.S. spy chief told lawmakers Gaddafi 's forces were likely to prevail in the long run against rebels fighting to end his 41-year rule . 
National Intelligence Director James Clapper 's assessment may lead to louder calls in Congress for Obama to take swift military action to help the rebels . 
Kerry , who has advocated taking out runways used by Gaddafi 's forces , told Reuters he feared Washington would look `` feckless '' down the road if it did not try to help the rebels . 
He and McCain have endorsed preparing a no-fly zone , in which the United States and its allies would stop Gaddafi 's aircraft from firing on the rebels . 
Some congressional leaders have issued cautious statements that condemn Gaddafi but do n't endorse or oppose military action for now . 
House Majority Leader Eric Cantor has stressed that any action that the U.S. takes must be in line with broader U.S. interests in the region . 
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said the United Nations and the international community should be committed to `` examining all options - including a no-fly zone - that may be necessary to protect innocent civilians and ensure the democratic aspirations of the Libyan people are heard . '' 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Now that would be real news if there were a consensus . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
