UN peace envoy Kofi Annan has said there is international agreement that a transitional government should be set up in Syria . 
This could include both members of the government and opposition , he said after talks in Geneva . 
But US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Syrian President Bashar al-Assad could not remain in power . 
Meanwhile , activists said a funeral procession in a suburb of Damascus came under mortar attack and 30 people died . 
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights released amateur video footage claiming to show the explosion in Zamalka , a town 10km -LRB- six miles -RRB- east of the Syrian capital . 
There has been no independent confirmation of the incident . 
In Geneva , Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said there were no preconditions to the proposed transition that dictated who should or should not be in the transitional government . 
All parties must recommit to sustained cessation of armed violence and immediately implement UN envoy Kofi Annan 's six-point peace plan Transitional government formed on basis of mutual consent ; can include officials serving under President Assad and opposition members Syrians will determine future of their country ; all groups allowed to join national dialogue process Constitutional order and legal system to be reviewed ; changes subject to popular approval All parties must engage genuinely with Mr Annan to work towards a Syrian-led settlement Saturday 's `` action group '' conference was attended by both Western powers and Russia and China . 
Mr Annan also called for an immediate ceasefire and adherence to the UN 's six-point peace plan . 
He said there should be access to Syria for humanitarian organizations and media . 
Mr Annan said the conference had agreed there should be a `` transitional government body with full executive powers '' . 
`` We are determined to work together urgently and intensively to bring about an end to the violence and human rights abuses , and the launch of a Syrian-led political process , leading to a transition that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people , and enables them independently and democratically to determine their own future , '' he said . 
He warned : `` The action group has pledged action , and they are sending a message of determination and hope , but today 's words must not become tomorrow 's disappointments . 
I hope all in Syria will embrace what has been laid out here and work with us to stop the killing and build a better future '' End Quote Kofi Annan UN and Arab League envoy `` The hard work starts now . 
We must work together to implement what has been agreed . 
We can not do this alone . 
I hope all in Syria will embrace what has been laid out here and work with us to stop the killing and build a better future . '' 
Speaking on behalf of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council - the US , UK , France , Russia and China - British Foreign Secretary William Hague said all five were committed to supporting Mr Annan 's efforts . 
Russia had blocked a provision in Mr Annan 's plan that would have called for Mr Assad to step down to make way for a unity government . 
Mrs Clinton told reporters after Saturday 's talks : `` Assad will still have to go ... given the blood on his hands . '' 
Mr Assad has said he will not accept any solution to his country 's crisis imposed from outside . 
He told Iranian television that it was an `` internal issue '' which had `` nothing to do with foreign countries '' , stressing that no amount of foreign pressure would make his government change its policy on internal security . 
Some 15,800 people have died in the 16-month uprising against the rule of President Assad , activists say . 
In the latest report , the observatory said a mortar bomb had gone off in Zamalka . 
The first video the group released showed a crowd of chanting mourners bearing a shrouded body on a bier along a street . 
There is a sudden , blinding flash and a loud bang with the sound of breaking glass , at which point the recording stops . 
In the second video , dazed people can be seen staggering or running through a cloud of smoke or dust . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
30th June 2012 - 16:05 Good grief , don ` t we ever learn to keep our noses out . 
What would our governments do if we the people demanded the government step down using violence and outside influences demanded regime change ? 
Precisely what Assad is doing now , that ` s what . 
Don ` t try and impose things on other nations that you wouldn ` t want imposed on you . 
It ` s indefensible and hypocritical . 
30th June 2012 - 14:41 Syria is in the unfortunate position of hosting 2 proxy wars ; one between Saudi Arabia and Iran and another between Russia and the US ; as well as a civil war . 
No one with any power or influence is interested in peace until larger regional interests have been thrashed out . 
And that 's a real shame . 
30th June 2012 - 13:35 This is not about freedom or civil rights or what is good for Syria . 
This is about the US\/UK and alias arming a non paid army to destroy a leadership that stands in the way . 
Anyone who believes the US\/UK that this is for the rights of people is gullible , when did the US\/UK worry about the rights of people , even their own people ? 
30th June 2012 - 13:17 Why is it so hard for Russia to understand that the old Syria will cease to exist shortly , wether the UN or Arab League intervene or not . 
No one denies that Russia has the most to lose , so why on earth are they not taking the lead and forming new alliances ? 
I 'd prefer a Russian-backed ` New Syria ' to one backed by the US . 
Wake up Putin , time to grow a pair . 
30th June 2012 - 13:13 As a Syrian , I reject any effort by foreign governments to interfere in our war against the terrorists who are financed by Saudi Arabia and Qatar - especially countries with a colonialist past . 
I am shocked by even the small number of your readers who do n't realize that our president is extremely popular . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
