January 28 , 2011 | By Bryony Jones Members of the Muslim Brotherhood movement shout slogans in Amman , Jordan on Friday after weekly prayers . 
The Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt this week urged its followers to protest after Friday prayers -- the first time in the latest wave of unrest the group has made such a call . 
What is the Muslim Brotherhood ? 
The Muslim Brotherhood is a religious and political group founded on the belief that Islam is not simply a religion , but a way of life . 
It advocates a move away from secularism , and a return to the rules of the Quran as a basis for healthy families , communities , and states . 
The movement officially rejects the use of violent means to secure its goals . 
However , offshoots of the group have been linked to attacks in the past , and critics blame the Brotherhood for sparking troubles elsewhere in the Middle East . 
Many consider it the forerunner of modern militant Islamism . 
The Muslim Brotherhood has been part of the political scene in Egypt for more than 80 years . 
It was formed there by Hassan al-Banna in 1928 . 
Teacher Al-Banna and his followers were initially united by a desire to oust the British from control in Egypt , and to rid their country of what they saw as `` corrupting '' Western influences . 
In its early years , the group concentrated on religion , education and social services , but as its membership grew , it moved into the political sphere , organizing protests against the Egyptian government . 
In the 1940s , an armed wing of the Brotherhood was blamed for a string of violent acts , including the assassination of Egyptian Prime Minister Mahmud Fahmi al-Nuqrashi in 1948 -- shortly after he had ordered the dissolution of the MB . 
Al-Banna himself was assassinated soon afterwards -- his supporters claimed he had been killed on the wishes of the government . 
The movement went underground in the 1950s , and decades of oppression by successive Egyptian rulers led many of the Brotherhood 's members to flee abroad , while others were jailed . 
The MB grew throughout the 1980s as part of a general growth of interest in Islam , and the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 saw a spike in membership . 
Why is it important in Egypt ? 
The Brotherhood is the oldest and largest opposition group in Egypt . 
However , it is illegal under Egyptian law , which bans all parties based on religion . 
Because of this , its members contest elections as independents . 
Until last year 's polls , the party had 88 seats in the country 's legislature . 
But following a decision to boycott the election because of voting irregularities , its parliamentary influence was wiped out . 
The Brotherhood has widespread support among Egypt 's middle classes , and its members control many of the country 's professional organizations . 
How influential is the Brotherhood elsewhere ? 
There are branches of the Muslim Brotherhood in countries across the Middle East and North and East Africa , including Sudan , Syria and Saudi Arabia . 
There is also a branch in the U.S. Its offshoots outside Egypt are markedly more conservative in their views : The Kuwaiti branch is said to oppose the right of women to vote . 
Sayyid Qutb , a member of the Muslim Brotherhood in the 1950s and 1960s , developed the doctrine of jihad , and the radical group Hamas is believed to be an offshoot of the Palestinian Muslim Brotherhood . 
