Tensions rise on surging food prices A Tunisian protester holds bread during a demonstration earlier this week . 
By Annalyn Censky , staff reporterJanuary 28 , 2011 : 5:11 PM ET NEW YORK -LRB- CNNMoney -RRB- -- Food prices have been rising worldwide , as the cost of raw materials and agricultural products surge , contributing to political unrest around the globe . 
In December , international food prices broke an all-time high when they rose 25 % for the year , led by rising costs for staples like rice , wheat , and maize , the United Nations reported . 
The sharp rise in food prices , in particular , has become `` a source of political instability , '' New York University economist Nouriel Roubini , told CNNMoney 's Poppy Harlow , at the World Economic Forum in Davos , Switzerland this week . 
Roubini , nicknamed `` Dr. Doom '' for his famously bearish predictions , said spiking energy and food prices pose one of the greatest global threats -- especially to emerging market economies . 
Why prices are rising : Bad weather in Australia and Russia over the summer severely diminished wheat crops , partially fueling the latest commodities surge . 
Rising incomes in emerging markets like China and India also play a role , analysts at the Eurasia Group say . 
The growing middle class in those countries has prompted a shift from a grain-based diet to one consisting of more meat . 
And a push toward biofuels has also led to rising demand for corn and sugar , pushing up commodity prices . 
Where it 's hitting : The pinch has been felt most in rapidly developing countries like China , India , and Russia , which still have large portions of their population living in poverty . 
Food inflation in China was recently at 9.6 % , while in India it surged a staggering 18 % . 
Countries that depend on imports and do n't grow a lot of their own grains , like many Middle Eastern nations , are also feeling the pain from price pressures . 
The recent turmoil there , with outbreaks of riots and violent clashes with police and military forces , is partially related to surging food prices . 
`` What has happened in Tunisia , is happening right now in Egypt , but also riots in Morocco , Algeria and Pakistan , are related not only to high unemployment rates and to income and wealth inequality , but also to this very sharp rise in food and commodity prices , '' Roubini said . 
In Egypt alone , food prices soared 17 % -- in part because of the worldwide surge in commodities prices but also because of local supply imbalances . 
But that does n't mean citizens there are completely insulated from price pressures . 
About 40 % of Egypt 's citizens live off less than $ 2 a day , so any price increase hurts . 
`` There 's a pretty expensive food subsidy system in Egypt , '' said Richard Fox , head of Middle East and Africa sovereign ratings at Fitch Ratings . 
`` Having said that , definitely high inflation has been squeezing people 's incomes . '' 
Plus there 's a thriving black market that often drives up the prices poor households are paying for foodstuffs , Sabra said . 
Meanwhile the bigger problem lies not in just prices , but in the fact that when citizens are unhappy , they have little opportunity for political recourse . 
`` In the U.S. if you 're unhappy about who you 've deputized , you vote them out in the next election , '' Sabra said . 
`` It does n't work that way in Tunisia or Egypt . '' 
Market indexes are shown in real time , except for the DJIA , which is delayed by two minutes . 
All times are ET . 
Disclaimer LIBOR Warning : Neither BBA Enterprises Limited , nor the BBA LIBOR Contributor Banks , nor Reuters , can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of BBA LIBOR . 
Morningstar : 2013 Morningstar , Inc. . 
Disclaimer The Dow Jones IndexesSM are proprietary to and distributed by Dow Jones & Company , Inc. and have been licensed for use . 
All content of the Dow Jones IndexesSM 2013 is proprietary to Dow Jones & Company , Inc. . 
The market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors . 
FactSet Research Systems Inc. 2013 . 
Most stock quote data provided by BATS . 
