President Barack Obama has requested `` multiple briefings '' on the unfolding crisis in Egypt , where thousands of demonstrators were clashing with security forces , White House spokesman Tommy Vietor said Friday . 
Obama has not called Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak -- the target of the protesters ' anger -- `` but there is daily contact between the U.S. and Egyptian governments through various channels , including the embassies and other organizations in which Obama 's messages and concerns are relayed , '' Vietor said . 
Obama received information on Egypt from National Security Adviser Tom Donilon on Friday and will get other updates later . 
Servers of Egypt 's main internet provider were down early Friday , according to multiple services that check whether servers used by specific sites are active . 
Servers for the Egyptian government 's sites and for the U.S. Embassy in Cairo also appeared to be down . 
But at least one internet service provider , Noor , was still working . 
`` We are closely monitoring the situation and are aware that communication services , including social media , are being blocked , '' U.S. State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said Thursday . 
`` We continue to urge Egyptian authorities to show restraint and allow peaceful protests to occur . '' 
Obama has urged the government and demonstrators to refrain from violence as protests continued . 
`` It is very important that people have mechanisms in order to express legitimate grievances , '' he said . 
Vice President Joe Biden told PBS NewsHour on Thursday that Mubarak should listen to protesters . 
He also said the embattled Egyptian president is no dictator . 
Still , he said `` violence is n't appropriate and people have a right to protest . '' 
On Wednesday , White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said the U.S. administration was `` monitoring quite closely the situation in Egypt and continue to do so , obviously , in Tunisia . '' 
The protests in Egypt started after weeks of similar disturbances sparked a revolution in Tunisia and forced then-president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to flee the country . 
`` This is an important time for the government to demonstrate its responsiveness to the people of Egypt in recognizing those universal rights , '' Gibbs said . 
