Egyptians demonstrate on the streets of Cairo , demanding the resignation of President Hosni Mubarak . 
This is the big one . 
For years , Egyptian demonstrators raged against Hosni Mubarak 's military regime , calling on their fellow citizens to take to the streets and oust the agents of their oppression . 
For years , earnest U.S. officials urged Mubarak to open up Egypt 's political system , crack down on the grand and petty corruption that pervades Egyptian life and deliver economic progress to the masses . 
For years , analysts -- myself included -- dismissed the possibility of real change as long as Mubarak , now approaching his 83rd birthday and his third decade in power , still breathed . 
It seems the Arab street had other plans . 
Inspired by events in Tunisia , a smart , tech-savvy network of young activists seized upon January 25 -- a holiday ironically celebrating the country 's police -- to organize mass rallies demanding Mubarak 's ouster . 
The Egyptian interior minister dismissed them as `` a bunch of incognizant , ineffective young people . '' 
Longtime Egypt watchers tried to keep their hopes low , expecting the same disappointing results as before . 
Now , four days into an uprising in the Arab world 's most populous country , the beating heart of its media culture , and the historical strategic leader of the region , it 's no longer possible to argue that Egypt is a stable country . 
The situation is changing rapidly , but what we know is this : The country is virtually cut off from the outside world . 
Egyptians from across the social and geographical spectrum -- from poor , jobless young men along the Suez Canal to upper-class women in posh Cairo suburbs to workers in the teeming Nile Delta -- are in an uproar . 
The ruling National Democratic Party 's headquarters has been set on fire . 
The army has sent troops and armored vehicles into the streets to enforce a curfew as defiant demonstrators torch police stations and vehicles . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , speaking slowly and carefully to avoid making a mistake at a sensitive moment , urged the Egyptian government Friday to allow its people to protest peacefully . 
But , she added , `` We want to partner with the Egyptian people and their government '' and called on Mubarak to make reforms . 
All week , the U.S. message has been largely consistent : Egypt is a key ally , both sides should refrain from violence and the government should respect the legitimate grievances of the Egyptian people . 
