Obama : I told Mubarak he must deliver on his promises President Barack Obama spoke with Egypt 's president moments after Hosni Mubarak addressed his country , telling the Egyptian that he must make good on his promises and avoid a violent response to the thousands of protesters in the streets . 
With parts of his capital ablaze , Mubarak said he was asking his government to resign and would soon announce a new one , pledging to address the concerns of thousand of Egyptians protesting in Cairo 's streets . 
`` I just spoke to him after his speech , '' Obama said , `` and told him he has a responsibility to give meaning to those words , to take concrete steps and actions that deliver on that promise . 
Violence will not address the grievances of the Egyptian people . 
Suppressing ideas never succeeds in making them go away . 
`` This moment of volatility has to be turned into a moment of promise , '' Obama said . 
The U.S. president repeated his administration 's call for the Egyptian government to restore access to the internet and cell phone service and urged `` concrete steps that advance the rights of the Egyptian people . '' 
Obama 's remarks , delivered from State Dining Room , were the strongest yet from the United States . 
`` There must be reform , '' he said , `` political , social and economic reforms that meet the aspirations of the Egyptian people . 
`` In the absence of these reforms , '' he said , `` grievances have built up over time . 
`` The United States will continue to stand up for the rights of the Egyptian people and work with their government in pursuit of a future that is more just , more free and more hopeful , '' he concluded . 
In his remarks , Mubarak was clear that he had no intentions of stepping down -- yet his resignation is what the protesters are demanding . 
And privately , U.S. officials fear that Mubarak may be in over his head as protests against his 30-year rule showed no signs of ending . 
A senior administration official said the White House saw Mubarak 's address as `` hardly conciliatory and highly disappointing , but what did you expect ? '' 
It 's clear , the official said -- speaking on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the matter -- that Mubarak believes he can ride this out , `` and this time , we 're not so sure that is the right assumption . '' 
Administration officials had hoped Mubarak would promise an immediate and open dialogue , the official said . 
