Egyptian protesters confront riot police during a demonstration in Cairo on Friday . 
For American travelers , this view of Egypt was not what they were counting on . 
Tear gas clouded the air as flames consumed city buildings -- a far cry from a day trip to the Great Pyramids they may have planned . 
Heather -LRB- whose last name is being withheld for her safety -RRB- , 23 , watched chaos erupt on the streets below her Cairo hotel window . 
`` Initially , we were just in awe of all of the people coming across the bridge toward the square , then it started to become more violent , '' she told iReport.com . 
`` There was a constant sound of police firing tear gas canisters , sirens and sounds of people pulling signs and benches from the street to drag over to the police lines . '' 
Her father , George , captured video of protesters storming the Kasr Al Nile Bridge into El Tahir Square , where violence intensified by the hour . 
`` It was frightening to see the police regroup and retreat and to see the protesters throw things at those vehicles , '' she said . 
`` The police have definitely escalated the situation and began by firing tear gas at the protesters . '' 
Heather and George are n't the only tourists stuck inside their hotel rooms . 
An employee at the U.S. State Department said representatives have been `` on the phone with Americans in Egypt all day . '' 
The State Department has issued a travel alert urging tourists to avoid Egypt due to dangerous conditions . 
Those already stranded in the country should n't leave hotels until the situation stabilizes , the alert stated . 
Some airlines are halting flights to Cairo indefinitely . 
Delta Air Lines ' last flight from Cairo is scheduled to depart on Saturday , said spokeswoman Susan Elliot . 
American Airlines and British Airways are allowing customers to change ticket destinations for free until Monday . 
The State Department 's travel warning said the U.S. Embassy may be blocked off for security during demonstrations and cautioned citizens against going to the embassy during the turmoil . 
The alert provides contact numbers for security updates and travel information . 
`` Right now , we can only tell Americans to stay in place , '' a State Department representative said . 
The current travel alert expires on February 28 . 
