President John F. Kennedy once said , `` Those who make peaceful revolution impossible will make violent revolution inevitable . '' 
The recent pro-democracy mass protests around the Arab world -- in places like Tunisia , Yemen and Egypt -- reflect the beginnings of a `` democracy Renaissance , '' launched by the millions of citizens within these countries that have been ruled for decades by ruthless autocrats and soft dictators . 
The recent `` Jasmine Revolution '' in Tunisia began with the desperate act of a young unemployed man who set himself on fire . 
And that passionate fire would ultimately rage against the Tunisian government machine until its long-serving president would be forced into exile two weeks ago . 
The young man was 26-year-old Mohammed Bouazizi , an unemployed fruit stand owner who became distraught when a policewoman confiscated his unlicensed produce stand . 
He died from his burns . 
Following suit , several other unemployed youth around the country tried to commit suicide , and subsequent mass protests would soon topple the 23-year reign of Tunisia 's strongman , 74-year-old Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali . 
Long-standing autocratic rule within the Arab world shows a `` depressingly familiar pattern '' in terms of regional suppression of democracy , notes Egyptian-American writer Mona Eltahawy , in a recent Washington Post opinion piece . 
Libyan leader Moammar Gaddafi , 68 years old , has been in power since 1969 ; Yemen 's Ali Abdullah Saleh -LRB- 64 -RRB- has ruled since 1978 and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak -LRB- 82 -RRB- since 1981 . 
Eltahawy wrote that these dinosaur political figures are `` not so much fathers as grandfathers of their nations , these autocrats clinging to office -- and are increasingly out of touch with their young populaces . '' 
Much larger than Tunisia , the nation of Egypt is home to some 80 million people -- with Mubarak as its not-so-democratic leader since the assassination of Anwar Sadat in 1981 . 
From creating a virtual police state to promoting censorship by placing all media under state control , Hosni Mubarak has spent the better part of 30 years strengthening his autocratic rule , while millions of young Egyptians remain hungry and unemployed . 
Over time , his regime has needlessly tried to silence bloggers , imprisoned prominent pro-democracy activists such as Saad Eddin Ibrahim , and during these most recent mass protests even placed 2005 Nobel Peace Prize co-winner -LRB- and political opposition leader -RRB- Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei under house arrest . 
