By Tarek Osman , Special to CNN Egypt protests represent significant challenge to Mubarak regime , Tarek Osman writes The author says protests expose the divisions in economy and society Osman says rise of middle class means many have a stake in avoiding chaos He says the regime 's opponents are divided and not prepared to lead Editor 's note : Tarek Osman is an Egyptian writer . 
He is the author of `` Egypt on the Brink : From Nasser to Mubarak '' -LRB- Yale University Press , 2011 -RRB- . 
Cairo , Egypt -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- This week tens of thousands swamped the heart of Cairo , Alexandria , and other major Egyptian cities , facing down anti-riot police , to demand cheaper food , better services , and substantial changes to the regime 's modus operandi . 
With five dead , more than 100 injured , and the police resorting to tear gas to disperse the demonstrators , most observers are examining whether the Egyptian regime will be able to contain the situation and suppress the protests without even more significant bloodshed . 
Two factors suggest continued tension and further challenges to the regime . 
First , the Egyptian state 's institutional framework is at its weakest point since the coup\/revolution of 1952 that created the Egyptian republic . 
The delicate balance that the regime has nurtured , between the rise of the liberal capitalists within the ruling National Democratic Party -LRB- NDP -RRB- and the traditional power and influence of the military and security establishment , seems to be under strain . 
The center of gravity and decision-making has shifted from the long-established anchors of stability toward inexperienced new economic and financial players . 
Egypt cracks down on protesters Suez crowds confront riot police Tear gas in the air in Alexandria The ascent of the new capitalists gave rise to the second factor : an unexpected solidarity between the politically active -- who see the influence of the new capitalists as a blurring of the lines between power and wealth -- and the disenfranchised poor , who as a result of successive financial reform measures , face severe economic pains . 
The situation is made more acute by a youth unemployment rate of more than 15 % -LRB- in an 80 million population , 40 % of whom are under 30 years old -RRB- . 
The politically active and the millions of poor Egyptians blame the Hosni Mubarak regime , which has been in power for three decades . 
This is a tenuous political environment , where anguish and anxiety can quickly turn into anger , and with any catalyst , into action . 
But , so far , the situation in Egypt is not combustible . 
Despite the regime 's overall poor record , its major upgrading of the country 's infrastructure , relative success in installing economic liberalization , and cautious foreign policy have fostered an environment in which a few million middle class families managed to secure economic gains . 
The past decade also witnessed a notable rise in entrepreneurialism with hundreds of thousands of Egyptians able to build small enterprises leveraging the growth in economic sectors ranging from food and beverages , to tourism , to information technology , to entertainment . 
The development of the Egyptian real estate industry and the country 's capital markets attracted the life savings of few more millions . 
In today 's Egypt , specifically in Cairo , Alexandria , and the major cities of the Nile Delta , there is a relatively large middle class that has a serious stake in the country 's economic future , realistic ambitions for further economic gains , and which abhors the prospect of chaos in the country . 
Another factor reduces the chances of immediate change in Egypt : the unpreparedness of the regime 's serious political opponents . 
The street 's demonstrations create momentum and could be a catalyst for change . 
But the regime 's rivals vying for power in Egypt remain deeply wanting . 
This is a tenuous political environment , where anguish and anxiety can quickly turn into anger ... The liberal movement continues to be fragmented , from the traditional opposition parties , to students ' movements , to the upper-middle-class intelligentsia , to the new National Association of Change , the vehicle associated with Dr. Mohamed El-Baradei . 
Arguably , the liberal movement benefits from the nationalist , inclusive slogans of the demonstrations which shunned appeals to Islam and Christianity in favor of Egyptianism . 
But the liberal movement so far lacks the institutional structure required to evolve into a viable , immediate alternative to the regime . 
This unpreparedness is a paramount deficiency in a country with colossal economic challenges such as Egypt 's . 
As Egypt heads toward a presidential election in September , two things will shape its political landscape . 
One is the interaction amongst the regime , political Islam , and the liberal movement ; the other is the relationship within the regime itself -- between the military and security establishment on the one hand and Egypt 's economic power centers on the other . 
It is unlikely that the situation in Egypt will descend into chaos . 
The military and security establishment can enforce stability , provided we do not see major unrest within the country 's middle class . 
But these expressions of anger intensify the uncertainty surrounding Egypt 's future -- especially in the period post-Mubarak , who is approaching his mid-80s . 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Tarek Osman . 
