By Bryony Jones for CNN Thai PM Abhisit Vejjajiva said leaders had to balance the rule of law and the legitimate wishes of protesters . 
Abhisit Vejjajiva says if protests are peaceful , no force is necessary Thai PM says he only cracked down when violence broke out Abhisit calls on Mubarak to `` respect the wishes of the people '' -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Thailand 's Prime Minister has called on leaders troubled by civil unrest to exercise restraint , less than a year after a bloody military crackdown on the streets of Bangkok . 
Abhisit Vejjajiva sent in government troops to quell long-running Red Shirt protests in the Thai capital last May . 
Ninety-one people died and hundreds were injured in the street battles that followed . 
But as thousands gathered on the streets of Cairo , Alexandria and Suez to demand an end to Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak 's 30-year-rule , Abhisit -- speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos , Switzerland -- told CNN leaders should respect the wishes of their people . 
Abhisit said as long as demonstrators did not resort to violence , governments had a responsibility to restrict the use of force . 
`` When the protesters were peaceful -LRB- when they -RRB- were exercising their constitutional rights , there was absolutely no need for any kind of force to be used . 
`` Unfortunately in the protests in April and May there was violence -- grenades launched , invading hospitals and so on -- and we had to make sure that order had to be preserved . '' 
He told CNN : `` For us what was important , we needed to enforce the law -LRB- and -RRB- at the same time , we had to exercise the utmost restraint , and try to address whatever legitimate grievances these people on the streets had . '' 
`` I hope that in a number of countries , they will be able to do the same . '' 
Asked to offer advice to Mubarak , the Thai PM said : `` He should just respect the key principles of governance , respect the wishes of the people , and at the same time do his duties . '' 
Thailand 's Red Shirt protesters took to the streets to call for the return of former PM Thaksin Shinawatra , who was ousted in a coup in 2006 . 
As the demonstrations raged , Abhisit 's government imposed a state of emergency , putting the military in charge of security . 
It was lifted in December . 
Abhisit has pledged to hold fresh elections before the end of this year . 
