By Bryony Jones for CNN Ban Ki-moon said political leaders must protect protesters ' human rights and respect their freedom of expression . 
Ban Ki-moon urges political leaders to respect protesters ' human rights , protect their freedom of expression Kofi Annan says unrest shows there is a serious need for change in the region Thousands took to streets of Cairo Friday to call for an end to President Hosni Mubarak 's 30-year-rule -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon has urged embattled leaders in the Middle East and North Africa to listen to the wishes of their own people , as civil unrest spreads across the region . 
Thousands of people took to the streets of Cairo on Friday to call for an end to Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak 's authoritarian 30-year rule . 
The demonstrations came after similar anti-government protests in Tunisia toppled President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali . 
Speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos , Switzerland , Ban told CNN he was concerned at the growing potential for violence , and had called on political leaders to act responsibly . 
Annan : People clamoring for democracy `` Leaders have a ... responsibility to listen more attentively to the challenges and wishes of their own people , '' he said , urging them to `` provide decent jobs and opportunities to engage more constructively in their social and political life -- this is what has been lacking . 
`` I have been urging the authorities , first of all , that freedom of expression , freedom of association should be fully respected , and they should also protect the human rights of those people . '' 
Ban said he hoped the region 's leaders would see the situation `` as an opportunity to heed their own people 's wishes , '' and called on them to preserve democracy and restore peace and stability . 
His predecessor as U.N. chief , Kofi Annan , told CNN it was `` too quick '' to say if the protests would spread further in the coming weeks . 
`` What is important is that people are clamoring for democracy and the right to participate in government . 
`` These are signs that there is a need for serious changes in these countries , and the leaders have to take that on board and respond appropriately , '' he said . 
`` We need to be careful that some leaders may think ` It 's time to calm down -- you give an inch and you will be overwhelmed ' -- that approach will not work . 
`` It 's gone beyond that and I think they need to find a way of working out -LRB- the -RRB- changes that are required . '' 
