2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
CNN.com Live has both issues covered . 
9:00 am ET - Remembering the Challenger tragedy - Today marks the 25th anniversary of the space shuttle Challenger accident . 
The Astronauts Memorial Foundation holds a remembrance service for the victims of the tragedy . 
10:20 am ET - Obama pitches health care reform - President Obama defends last year 's health care reform package when he speaks before Families USA 's annual health action conference in Washington . 
1:00 pm ET - White House briefing - We may learn more about the next White House Press Secretary , Jay Carney , during today 's briefing with reporters . 
2:15 pm ET - ` Do n't ask , do n't tell ' repeal briefing - The Pentagon holds the first in a series of briefings on efforts to implement the repeal of the military 's `` do n't ask , don ' t tell '' policy . 
2:30 pm ET - Protesting Egypt in the U.S. - Anti-Egyptian government protests are not limited to Egypt . 
The Egyptian Association for Change will hold a protest in Jersey City , New Jersey . 
CNN.com Live is your home for breaking news as it happens . 
why are they protesting egypt in new jersey ? 
cant imagine there would be many egyptions in new jersey . 
but hey yall go with ur bad selves ! 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
