A somber Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak recognized demonstrators ' concerns while asserting his government 's duty to protect the African nation 's security in a nationally televised speech early Saturday , which he punctuated by announcing that he had asked his government to resign . 
Mubarak began the address , which started just after midnight , with a call for unity , saying , `` We all honestly should stand with each other for this country . '' 
Still , it was n't until the speech 's conclusion that he detailed a major step he had taken to begin addressing the crisis : asking for his current government 's resignation . 
The president -- who has been in power for 30 years -- then said he would form a new team , with a refocused mission acknowledging a popular desire for economic reforms , starting Saturday . 
`` I will ask the new government to have clear and specific responsibilities to deal , in a calculated way , with the the vital next phase , '' Mubarak said , according to a translation of his remarks from Arabic . 
Mubarak said earlier that he had heard , and understood , demonstrators ' pleas asking for the government to take more action to create jobs , lower prices and improve the plight of the poor . 
`` I know all these things ... that the people are asking -LRB- because -RRB- I 've never been separated from it . 
I work for it every day , '' he said . 
`` I 'll always be on the side of the poor . '' 
Still , most of the president 's speech did not focus on policy changes or economic issues but rather on how the government had and should respond to the demonstrations . 
As they had done earlier this week , thousands of protesters hit the streets of Egypt 's major cities on Friday , calling for major economic reforms and for Mubarak 's resignation . 
Military personnel became an increasingly visible presence during the day , even as many police withdrew to their stations in the capital of Cairo by Friday evening . 
Still , this was not before significant confrontations between protesters and authorities , who in some cases used tear gas and water cannons to pacify the crowds . 
In addition , the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights said the Egyptian government detained more than 1,000 people , including political foes like opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei , who was placed under house arrest . 
