Karl Rove with George Bush . 
Photograph : Ron Edmonds\/AP White House adviser Karl Rove told a grand jury that he discussed with journalists the identity of an outed CIA operative whose public identification has caused a political storm , US media reported today . 
Mr Rove told the grand jury that syndicated newspaper columnist Robert Novak had telephoned him and told him the operative 's name , the Associated Press and the New York Times reported . 
Both AP and the New York Times quoted a person briefed on Mr Rove 's grand jury testimony as the source of their stories . 
The grand jury is investigating the outing of Valerie Wilson , a CIA operative and the wife of Iraq war critic Joseph Wilson . 
Ms Wilson , who has been referred to as Valerie Plame in many media reports , was named in a July 2003 article by Mr Novak . 
In the article , Mr Novak cited two senior administration officials as the source of his story . 
It is a federal offence in some circumstances to reveal the identity of CIA operative , and the article sparked a justice department investigation to find out who had leaked Ms Wilson 's name to journalists . 
The investigation has ensnared presidential aides and reporters in a two-year legal battle . 
The story has also erupted into a political scandal for the US president , George Bush , as Mr Rove is a key adviser and the brains behind Mr Bush 's presidential campaigns . 
Democrats have claimed that the Bush administration was attempting to punish Mr Wilson through his wife in retaliation for Mr Wilson 's public condemnation of faulty intelligence used to justify an attack on Iraq . 
On 6 July 2003 , Mr Wilson wrote a New York Times article criticising the White House for including the allegation that Iraq was attempting to buy nuclear material from the Africa in Mr Bush 's state of the union address . 
Mr Wilson had himself traveled to Niger at the request of the CIA and found that claims Iraq was trying to buy uranium yellowcake from the African country were false . 
Mr Rove told the grand jury in testimony last year that he specifically remembered Mr Novak telling him that Ms Wilson worked for the CIA , AP reported its source , identified only as a person working in the legal profession , as saying . 
Mr Rove told the grand jury that by the time Mr Novak had called him , he believes he had similar information about Mr Wilson 's wife from another reporter but had no recollection of which reporter had told him about it first , the source said . 
Mr Rove testified that Mr Novak originally called him days before Ms Wilson 's identity was revealed in July 2003 to discuss another story . 
The conversation eventually turned to former ambassador Joseph Wilson , who was strongly criticising the Bush administration 's Iraq war policy and the intelligence it used to justify the war , the source said . 
According to Mr Rove 's testimony , Mr Novak told him he had learned and planned to report in a weekend column that Mr Wilson 's wife had worked for the CIA , and the circumstances on how her husband traveled to Africa to check bogus claims of alleged nuclear material sales to Iraq . 
Another journalist , Time reporter Matt Cooper , identified Mr Rove to the grand jury earlier this week as the source for his story regarding Ms Wilson . 
Mr Cooper refused to `` scoop '' himself by discussing precisely what Mr Rove told him before he can publish his story on the pages of Time . 
Mr Rove told the grand jury that four days later , he had a phone conversation with Mr Cooper and - in an effort to discredit some of Mr Wilson 's allegations - told Mr Cooper that Mr Wilson 's wife worked for the CIA , though he never used her name . 
A third reporter , New York Times staffer Judith Miller , is also believed to have known Ms Wilson 's identity . 
She is currently serving a prison sentence for contempt , after refusing to betray a journalistic confidence and testify about her source before the grand jury . 
Mr Novak has refused to discuss his sources or his involvement in the investigation . 
Yesterday the senate Democratic leader , Harry Reid , pressed for legislation to strip Mr Rove of his clearance for classified information , which he said Mr Bush should already have done . 
Instead , Mr Reid said , the Bush administration has attacked its critics : `` This is what is known as a cover-up . 
This is an abuse of power . '' 
The senate majority leader , Bill Frist , a Republican , said Democrats were resorting to `` partisan war chants '' . 
In the house of representatives , Rush Holt , a Democrat , introduced legislation for an investigation that would compel senior administration officials to turn over records relating to the Plame disclosure . 
Mr Rove 's attorney , Robert Luskin , said yesterday that his client had testified truthfully to the grand jury and expected to be exonerated . 
`` Karl provided all pertinent information to prosecutors a long time ago , '' Mr Luskin said . 
`` And prosecutors confirmed when he testified most recently in October 2004 that he is not a target of the investigation . '' 
In an a CNN interview yesterday , before the latest revelation , Mr Wilson kept up his criticism of the White House , saying Mr Rove 's conduct was an `` outrageous abuse of power ... certainly worthy of frog-marching out of the White House '' . 
