This live page is part of a BBC News trial to test new ways of presenting breaking news . 
Italy 's borrowing costs hit record highs over Greece and mounting political instability , as PM Silvio Berlusconi denies rumors he is to resign . 
A senior UK Border Agency official authorised the relaxation of border controls without ministerial sanction , Home Secretary Theresa May says . 
Robert Peston Business editor , BBC News Labor leader Ed Miliband MP Former Labor Party adviser , Alistair Campbell 1003 : Dominic Casciani Home affairs correspondent 1011 : Gavin Hewitt BBC Europe editor BBC Radio 5 live presenter Stephen Nolan 1129 : Kevin Hay BBC News Paul Griffiths from Milan , Italy Robert Peston Business editor , BBC News Let 's recap on the main stories of the day so far : Italy 's borrowing costs are hitting record highs over Greece and political instability , as PM Silvio Berlusconi denies rumors he is set to resign UK PM David Cameron says he has `` full confidence '' in the home secretary as she prepares to make a statement to MPs about claims border controls were relaxed Stefano Breviglieri from Milan , Italy Brompton : Health reporter Nick Triggle writes : Judicial reviews are not uncommon . 
But what set this one apart was that it was NHS v NHS . 
The Royal Brompton 's legal team contested the way the consultation had been carried out . 
By winning , it does not mean the unit is saved . 
Instead , the most likely scenario is that the consultation will have to be re-done , delaying what many experts say is a necessary change . 
The Royal Brompton is one of several units earmarked for closure as there is widespread agreement specialist care like child heart surgery is best provided at fewer sites . 
This has wider implications for the NHS . 
Up and down the country the health service is being re-organised . 
A&E units are closing and maternity services are being moved . 
Bisham Abbey National Sports Centre Let 's look at the developing euro story in more detail : A first phone call has taken place between resigning Greek PM George Papandreou and the opposition leader to choose a new prime minister . 
Once a candidate has been chosen , a cabinet meeting will be called to approve the deal . 
Italy PM Silvio Berlusconi has strenuously denied reports he is about to resign . 
Antonella Pellegrino from Milan , Italy Jacquelin Magnay , Telegraph 's Olympics Editor 1450 : Iain Carter , golf correspondent , Norman Smith Chief political correspondent , BBC News Channel Tony Smith from a police briefing in London 1626 : Dominic Casciani Home affairs correspondent The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
co. uk % 2Finc % 2Flive_event_experience % 2Fnews % 2F1_0_0 % 2Fmustache % 2Fgeneral % 2Fhi . 
