By Andrew Cohen The Atlantic Murray will be sentenced on 29 November , and was held without bail after his conviction The last doctor of Michael Jackson 's life was convicted of manslaughter by a California jury because the law demanded it and the facts supported it . 
Dr Conrad Murray was at Jackson 's home when the pop star died , sloppily administering medicine that should only have been administered in a hospital . 
There are , I suspect , few jurors in the world who would have gone out of their way to search for a more complex narrative in order to spare the defendant a few years or months in jail . 
Throughout the trial , Murray 's lawyers tried gingerly to blame Jackson himself for his own death , a tactic which reflected both the desperation of the defense case and the nature of California 's involuntary manslaughter statute . 
Team Murray hoped that if jurors blamed the singer himself for an overdose , they might mete out a measure of sympathy for a doctor who , like so many other doctors who treat celebrities , thought he had his patient under control when he did not . 
California law , however , makes this a very difficult proposition . 
It is not enough to demonstrate , as Murray 's lawyers did , that the victim of the crime contributed to his own death . 
Even if Jackson injected himself with the drug that ultimately killed him , prosecutors told jurors in closing arguments , Murray should have foreseen that this would occur because he knew that Jackson liked to `` push '' his own drugs . 
Given this standard , what chance did Murray ever really have ? 
The rest of world envisioned a tragic end for Jackson ... After covering his 2005 molestation trial I certainly did . 
Why did n't Murray ? '' 
The prosecution 's theory resonated with the jury because it was founded on the language of the statute as announced during jury instructions . 
But when you stop and think about it , it is truly an extraordinary thing . 
California is about to send a man to prison - for a while anyway - even though many reasonable people would agree that Jackson played a prominent role in his own death . 
The law says that Murray should have known better , even if Jackson did not ; that the doctor had a responsibility to his patient even if his patient were bent on pushing past medically acceptable standards . 
You could say , as Murray 's lawyers implied , that the good doctor was in the wrong place at the wrong time . 
They acknowledged , as they had to , that their client 's professional performance during the fatal episode was not what any of us would want from our own bedside doctors . 
But the defense lawyers tried to take the mens rea element , the criminal element , out of the case . 
Murray may have been a quack , they argued , but he had absolutely no bad intent toward the richest patient he or any private doctor was ever likely to have . 
Or you could say , as prosecutors did , that any good doctor would not have come anywhere near the circus that was Jackson 's relationship with prescription drugs . 
How long Murray will spend behind bars is up to Judge Michael Pastor Murray did not officially represent the King of Pop for long . 
But like everyone else in the world he surely knew that he was taking on a patient with a reputation for using drugs to try to tune out the demons which afflicted him . 
The rest of world envisioned a tragic end for Jackson along these lines . 
After covering his 2005 molestation trial I certainly did . 
Why did n't Murray ? 
The just-completed trial was a good one , in which the lawyers ably represented their causes and the trial judge , Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Michael Pastor , did a laudable job keeping control of a celebrity case . 
On 29 November , during sentencing , I believe that Judge Pastor will show more mercy to Murray than did his jurors . 
Murray faces anywhere from probation to four years , but it is clear from the fact that he is now in jail - the judge denied bail pending sentencing - that Judge Pastor is going to give him some prison time . 
My bet is that the sentence will be towards the lower side . 
California 's prisons are notoriously overcrowded . 
In fact , the state has been forced by the United States Supreme Court to reduce the prison population to more manageable levels . 
Michael Jackson 's billion or so fans may argue that Conrad Murray deserves the hardest time possible . 
But the truth of the matter is that the eternal law of economics is on Murray 's side . 
He made terrible errors in judgment , and he 's paying the price . 
And none of that will ever bring back Michael Jackson or tell us what next might have happened had he lived through that day . 
8th November 2011 - 17:42 This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the house rules . 
8th November 2011 - 17:40 This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the house rules . 
9th November 2011 - 8:40 This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the house rules . 
9th November 2011 - 8:26 This to me seems like the infectious American legal and suing culture . 
Always someone else 's fault . 
Frankly mj was running himself to an early grave long before Murray had the misfortune of meeting him . 
It 's just a shame that Jackson could n't have just got his head down and led a quiet life outside of his music career . 
9th November 2011 - 7:46 Oh please . 
When the doctor decided to take all that money from Michael Jackson , he immediately began to violate his professional oath -- `` do no harm '' . 
He took the job for the money and should suffer as much as the law allows for it . 
He administered an illegal drug in an illegal situation , left the scene of the crime ; in fright waited to call 911 ; and then lied to them about it all . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
