The oil and gas industry 's offshore safety and environmental record in the Gulf of Mexico has become a key point of debate over future drilling , but that record has been far worse than is commonly portrayed by many industry leaders and lawmakers . 
Many policymakers think that the record before the BP oil spill was exemplary . 
In a House hearing Thursday , Rep. John J. `` Jimmy '' Duncan Jr. -LRB- R-Tenn . -RRB- 
said , `` It 's almost an astonishingly safe , clean history that we have there in the gulf . '' 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said the industry 's `` history of safety over all of those times '' had provided the `` empirical foundation '' for U.S. policy . 
But federal records tell a different story . 
They show a steady stream of oil spills dumping 517,847 barrels of petroleum -- which would fill an equivalent number of standard American bathtubs -- into the Gulf of Mexico between 1964 and 2009 . 
The spills killed thousands of birds and soiled beaches as far away as Mexico 's Yucatan Peninsula . 
Altogether , they poured twice as much as oil into U.S. waters as the Exxon Valdez tanker did when it ran aground in 1989 . 
The industry 's record had been improving before the BP spill . 
In 2009 , the largest one was about 1,500 barrels , about what BP 's damaged well was leaking every hour before it was capped last week . 
But at least a handful of spills take place annually as a result of blowouts , hurricanes , lax pipeline maintenance , tanker leaks and human error , according to figures kept by the Minerals Management Service , now known as the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement . 
Moreover , in at least one key instance , the official statistics understate the actual quantities of oil that have leaked into the Gulf of Mexico . 
MMS statistics say that a 1970 blowout on a Shell Oil well that killed four people triggered a spill of 53,000 barrels . 
But Robert Bea , a University of California , Berkeley professor who at that time worked for Shell tracking the oil spill , says that the spill was 10 times that size and contaminated shorelines on the Yucatan Peninsula as well as the U.S. Gulf Coast . 
`` I see the numbers , and I shrug my shoulders , '' said Bea , who contributed to a report issued last week on the April 20 Deepwater Horizon accident . 
The 1970 Shell blowout happened on a production platform , he notes . 
`` We knew what the production rates were , '' he said . 
Today regulators rely heavily on company estimates , although some environmentalists fear that the spill size might be underestimated . 
The industry 's track record is a crucial issue . 
On March 31 , President Obama cited advances in offshore drilling technology as a key reason for his willingness to open up new offshore areas to exploration and production . 
Now , the oil and gas industry is trying to use its earlier record to persuade Obama to lift a temporary moratorium and to convince the public that companies can continue offshore drilling without a similar incident . 
`` The oil industry has drilled 42,000 wells in the Gulf of Mexico , and this is the first time an incident of this magnitude has happened , '' said the American Petroleum Institute 's president , Jack Gerard , who has been urging Congress to avoid imposing tough new regulations . 
The BP oil spill is the biggest ever , but MMS records tell a more complicated story . 
Performance had been improving but from a poor baseline . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
