By Wyre Davies BBC News , northern Lebanon Some of Syria 's wounded make it to Lebanon despite big risks The latest evidence from Syria suggests that President Bashar al-Assad may be preparing an all-out assault on areas still controlled by his opponents . 
The BBC has spoken to Syrian refugees who say the situation in many towns and cities is increasingly desperate . 
Getting information out of besieged Syrian towns is more and more difficult , but the latest shaky images , taken furtively from behind curtains , are ominous for people still trapped inside Homs . 
Tanks advance menacingly down deserted streets near the suburb of Baba Amr . 
Dozens of soldiers trudge behind the tanks - evidence perhaps that the Assad regime is getting ready for for a final push on Homs . 
In a hospital ward in northern Lebanon I met some of those who have managed to get out of Syria in recent days . 
They talk of a worsening humanitarian crisis , of a regime determined to crush its opponents . 
The Syrian government denies targeting civilians , but one man from Homs says he was deliberately shot in the arm and leg by an army patrol . 
He says he was not a fighter - but no one is safe in the city now . 
`` The city 's hospital is being used as a base by the army , '' he told me from his hospital bed . 
`` No one who needs medical help can get it , so their only option is to escape . '' 
In the next room lies a man who lost his leg to a land mine . 
It 's a stark reminder that getting out of Homs is not that easy . 
Refugees from Syria are housed in a damp , dilapidated school Here , on the northern frontier with Lebanon , the mountain border is relatively porous , but in recent days on the Syrian side fresh minefields have been laid . 
There are also unconfirmed reports that Syrian troops have pursued fleeing refugees into Lebanon . 
Conditions are also appalling at this time of the year . 
There is driving rain with snow at higher altitudes . 
But still people take extraordinary risks . 
I watched a small group dashing across a river that demarcates this mountain border - carrying tiny amounts of food and medical aid into Syria . 
I also spoke to a group of Syrian men - fighters with the Free Syrian Army -LRB- although it barely resembles a genuine fighting force and groups operate more as guerrilla units -RRB- . 
With very basic weapons they cross over every few days to conduct raids on army bases and other targets . 
Hundreds of refugees from across Syria - from Daraa , Homs , Hama and other cities - are now in the relatively safety of Lebanon . 
I met a group of 11 families who have been given basic food and shelter in a Lebanese border village . 
Some have been here for months , other are recent arrivals . 
Small groups of anti-Assad fighters carry supplies into Syria from Lebanon Another man , who asked not to be named for his own safety , said the situation in the Baba Amr district of Homs was unbearable . 
`` The last time I was able to get in touch with friends there they said they were stuck indoors with no basic services . 
Right now any vehicles trying to leave are shot at . 
Even ambulances are being targeted , '' he told me , as children played in what used to be a classroom , almost oblivious to what they and their families had gone through . 
In another cold , empty room Abu Fahed cradled a tiny baby , born prematurely in exile . 
Their happiness with a new son is clouded by tragedy . 
He and his sick wife still mourn a three-year-old boy - murdered , he says , by the Assad regime . 
Syrian children do not know when it will be safe to go back to Syria `` I was smuggling food into Daraa , '' says Abu Fahed . 
`` So when officers came to the house looking for me , they took my son Muhammad as a hostage - saying they 'd kill him if I did n't give myself up . 
They killed him anyway . '' 
It is a desperate story , and the aggrieved mother 's melancholy mirrors the dour , damp conditions in which they now live . 
This is no life , but they carry on for the sake of their new baby . 
`` I 've lost one child - I ca n't bear the thought of losing another , '' she told me as I turned to leave . 
As we left the school , the children defiantly chanted anti-Assad slogans . 
Their parents , who have n't heard from relatives stuck inside Syria for days , could not hide their concern and worry . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
