Syria crisis : UN mission ` last chance ' to avoid civil war Russian President Dmitry Medvedev told Kofi Annan : `` We will offer you any help we can '' Russian President Dmitry Medvedev has offered full support for envoy Kofi Annan 's peace mission in Syria , saying it may be the last chance to avoid a `` prolonged and bloody civil war '' . 
The governent in Moscow urged Mr Annan to work with both the Syrian government and opposition to end the violence . 
Mr Annan has been seeking to persuade Russia to take a firmer stance against President Bashar al-Assad 's government . 
He will later go to China which has also usually backed Syria at the UN . 
As clashes continue , Human Rights Watch has accused Syrian government forces of using civilians as human shields . 
Activists reported further bombardments and casualties on Sunday in the Homs area , killing at least five people . 
Shelling was also reported in Hama , and tanks were seen in the streets of the southern town of Nawa , the Local Coordination Committees said . 
More than 50 people were reported to have been killed in shelling or shooting by the security forces on Saturday , many of them in Homs . 
The UN says the conflict has cost more than 8,000 lives since it began a year ago . 
The Syrian government blames violence on `` terrorist gangs '' and says some 3,000 members of the security forces have been killed . 
Foreign media face severe restrictions on reporting in Syria , and it is hard to verify the claims of either side . 
Steve Rosenberg BBC News , Moscow Russia may have vetoed two UN Security Council resolutions condemning President Assad , but Moscow fully supports Kofi Annan 's peace mission . 
In his talks with the joint UN and Arab League envoy , President Medvedev will make it clear that Moscow 's priority is to secure an immediate ceasefire by all sides in the conflict . 
The Russians , though , have already warned that peace will not be achievable while the Syrian opposition is receiving weapons and political support from outside . 
Until now Moscow has been a staunch supporter of President Assad , a long-time Russian ally . 
There are geopolitical reasons , Russia leases a naval base in Syria . 
And there are financial concerns , too : the arms deals and Russians investments worth billions of dollars . 
But recently there have been signs that Moscow is losing patience with Damascus - senior Russian officials have criticised the Syrian government for dragging its heels on reform and accused it of making numerous mistakes . 
Mr Medvedev offered Mr Annan - the envoy for the United Nations and the Arab League - support `` on all levels '' . 
`` This could be the last chance for Syria to avoid a prolonged and bloody civil war , '' he said . 
`` We very much hope your work will end with a positive result . '' 
And at an earlier meeting Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov `` underscored the need to end violence from all sides and establish a broad Syrian political dialogue '' , a statement said . 
`` He called on the special envoy to work actively toward that aim with both the authorities and the opposition . '' 
Mr Lavrov urged the international community to co-operate with Mr Annan 's mission . 
`` This means no interference in Syria 's internal affairs and the inadmissibility of supporting one side in the conflict , '' the statement said . 
The BBC 's Steve Rosenberg in Moscow says that these remarks suggest a very delicate balancing act by Moscow - on the one hand seeking to put pressure on Mr Assad and on the other warning the West not to favor the Syrian opposition . 
Meeting Mr Medvedev , Mr Annan said that `` Syria has an opportunity today to work with me and this mediation process to put an end to the conflict , to the fighting , allow access to those in need of humanitarian assistance as well as embark on a political process '' . 
He has proposed a six-point peace plan , which calls on government forces to immediately halt the use of heavy weapons in populated areas . 
He also wants the armed rebels to halt their attacks - which seems unlikely to happen either , says the BBC 's Jim Muir in Beirut . 
Homs has been relentlessly targeted , activists say Russia has vetoed two UN Security Council resolutions on the crisis in Syria , but last week , with China , supported a UN statement on the Annan mission . 
Our correspondent says that recently there have been signs Moscow is losing patience with Syria . 
Senior Russian officials have criticised the Syrian government for dragging its heels on reform , and accused it of making numerous mistakes . 
Meanwhile US President Barack Obama and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan , meeting ahead of a nuclear security conference in South Korea , said they were looking for ways to bring about change in Syria . 
The diplomacy comes as a new report by New York based Human Rights Watch -LRB- HRW -RRB- accused pro-government forces of forcing civilians to march in front of them as they advanced on areas held by the opposition in the northern Idlib province earlier in March . 
Videos obtained by HRW from opposition activists showed people dressed in civilian clothes walking in front of armed soldiers and fighting vehicles . 
Witnesses told HRW it was clear that the move was to protect the army from attack . 
According to the HRW statement , residents also said children had been placed on tanks and inside security buses . 
In another development , the opposition Free Syrian Army and a rival military council have announced that they will work together to co-ordinate all military activity against the Syrian government . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
