As the confirmed number of Japanese infected with the H1N1 flu virus rises , the growing question among many is : Where can we buy face masks ? 
Disposable masks have become an essential accessory in the worst-affected areas of western Japan , while a growing number of Tokyo commuters are wearing them . 
The government has recommended use by those who suspect infection , but some businesses are ordering employees to wear them , especially if they have face-to-face client interaction . 
And Japan 's upper house of parliament is requesting that everyone , including lawmakers , wear a mask when entering the chamber . 
Not surprisingly , some pharmacies and drug stores have run out of stock , while shares of medical mask makers Shikibo and Daiwabo have shot up since the first case was confirmed in Tokyo . 
Osaka-based Shikibo says orders in April alone exceeded by 25 percent the volume of the previous business year , and TV footage shows lines outside stores . 
My cousin in Himeji , Hyogo Prefecture , says more than half the people on the street are wearing masks now and the only reason she is n't is because there are no masks to buy . 
Japan auction site , one box of 100 surgical face masks was auctioned at around $ 280 , compared with the original price of $ 20 . 
One listed on Friday was offered at $ 5,000 for a box of 50 . 
Masks are popular with Japanese who want to avoid passing on a cold or who have allergies , but flu-related demand now seems to be spreading to Tokyo , where `` Sold Out '' signs are becoming more common , along with a rising number of masked commuters . 
Somewhat belatedly , perhaps , public broadcaster NHK stressed that wearing a mask does not provide full protection from catching flu , and once again reminded people to wash their hands . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Before moving to my current position , I specialised in Japan 's economic policy and macroeconomic news for about 10 years , with a concentration in reporting daily policy developments at Ministry of Finance , the Bank of Japan and other economic agencies . 
