Japanese teenagers sanitize their hands before visiting the parliament in Tokyo May 20 , 2009 . 
TOKYO | Thu May 21 , 2009 2:32 pm EDT TOKYO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The spread of the new H1N1 virus in Asia showed no signs of slowing on Thursday as the Philippines recorded its first case and new infections were confirmed in Japan , China and Taiwan . 
In the United States , authorities reported the country 's ninth death from the virus ; a 13-year-old boy in Arizona . 
The H1N1 flu strain is a never-before-seen mixture of swine , bird and human viruses that spreads easily between people . 
It has killed 85 people and infected more than 11,000 in 41 countries , according to the World Health Organization . 
Most of the deaths have been in Mexico , occurring mostly in people with underlying medical problems . 
While it has killed nobody so far in Asia , its grip appeared to tighten on a region that has battled the H5N1 bird flu virus and the SARS virus over the past 10 years . 
The Philippines said a 10-year-old girl , who had returned from a trip to the United States and Canada , had the illness but was recovering . 
The government was contacting people who were on the same flight and asked the girl 's family to put themselves in quarantine until they are declared free of the virus . 
`` There is no community level outbreak in the country , and measures are being taken by the government to prevent transmission , '' said Health Secretary Francisco Duque . 
The number of cases in Japan rose to 272 , including a 16-year-old female high school student in Tokyo who had recently returned from New York . 
About 4,500 schools , mostly in the western prefectures of Osaka and Hyogo about 400 km -LRB- 250 miles -RRB- from Tokyo , have closed until the end of the week and more schools may follow suit . 
In China , authorities confirmed its fifth case , a 21-year-old Chinese-Canadian student in Beijing , while there was also a jump in infections in Australia to eight . 
Taiwan also reported two more cases of the new flu , bringing the number of people with the virus on the island to three . 
Elsewhere , Chile has become one of the most affected countries in South America . 
Sixteen children and adults have tested positive for the H1N1 virus . 
Margaret Chan , head of the World Health Organization , said on Thursday she would raise the global pandemic alert to the top of the six-point scale if the H1N1 flu was spreading globally . 
`` When I see more signals coming from the virus itself or the spread of the disease , including severity , I would not shy away from making a very difficult decision , '' she said , adding health experts were now monitoring carefully for signs the virus has taken hold in the southern hemisphere . 
Chan said progress was being made on an agreement on how to share drugs , vaccines and the viruses needed to make them . 
She said collaboration between governments and drug makers gave hope for conciliation between rich and poor countries . 
`` We have seen something that we have never seen before : the total commitment to countries affected to transparency , to timely reporting , sharing of information , sequences , viruses , diagnostic kits , laboratory equipment , and the list goes on . '' 
So far the symptoms of the new virus appear to be mild , but it is starting to cause more severe effects as it spreads . 
Japanese Health Minister Yoichi Masuzoe said a study on 43 cases in Kobe city suggested it was behaving like seasonal flu , and not everyone affected needed hospitalization . 
But U.S. federal health researchers said the seasonal flu vaccine provides virtually no protection against the new flu . 
Their study also supports an intriguing theory that people over the age of 60 have some immunity to the new H1N1 strain , perhaps because it resembles an older version of seasonal flu . 
They say an unusually high proportion of those being infected and hospitalized with serious disease are young adults , teenagers and older children . 
Seasonal flu , in contrast , is usually far more severe in very young children , people over the age of 65 and people with chronic disease . 
Japan is considering winding down strict health checks at international airports at the end of the week , which had been imposed to try to buy time before an outbreak in the country . 
But for the poorest of countries , there is hardly any protection to speak of . 
In Afghanistan , a medical center has been set up at Kabul airport to deal with possible cases , but the country can not afford temperature screening equipment and relies on other countries to scan outbound passengers . 
The WHO has donated $ 500,000 worth of the antiviral drug Tamiflu , still effective in fighting the new virus . 
That amount , however , covers only 30,360 people -- a mere fraction in a country of 26 million people and where the most basic of medical facilities and drugs are wanting even in the best of times . 
