TOKYO | Thu May 21 , 2009 5:44 am EDT TOKYO May 21 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Shares of Japanese medical mask makers rose on Thursday , a day after the first case of the H1N1 flu virus was confirmed in Tokyo , further fueling speculation of strong demand for masks to prevent infection . 
The government has recommended using disposable masks for those who suspect they have been infected with the new strain of flu , and some businesses are ordering employees to wear them , especially if they deal face-to-face with clients . 
`` Expectations for more demand for masks has grown since the virus has reached Tokyo . 
Shares of mask makers could continue to rise depending on the number of infected patients , '' said Masumi Yamamoto , market analyst at Daiwa Securities SMBC . 
Shares of mask maker Shikibo -LRB- 3109 . 
T -RRB- , which rose 4.4 percent to 190 yen on Thursday , have now nearly doubled their price in the last month . 
Osaka-based Shikibo booked orders for 2 million masks in April -- 25 percent more than the volume it sold in the entire business year ended in March , a spokesman said . 
Rival Daiwabo -LRB- 3107 . 
T -RRB- nudged up 0.3 percent to 344 yen on Thursday , and has climbed 57 percent in the past month as the virus spread internationally . 
Long popular with Japanese who want to avoid passing on a cold or breathing in pollen , masks have become an essential accessory in the western areas of Osaka and Hyogo prefecture , where 172 people have already been infected . 
-LRB- ID : nT320193 -RRB- -LRB- ID : nT233823 -RRB- Daiwabo , also based in Osaka , is churning out its specialised masks as fast as it can after the government asked it to supply more , a spokesman said . 
The company expects to take at least until next month to deliver on all of its April orders alone , he and a sales official said . 
Daiwabo will likely exceed its targeted mask sales of 1.5 billion yen -LRB- $ 15.88 million -RRB- for the nine months ending next month , a spokesman said . 
Still , the impact on mask makers ' earnings and share prices may be short-lived as they are unlikely to boost capacity in view of the current surge in demand , which may soon run out of steam . 
`` The manufacturers will probably only use existing capacity , which I think is a decent decision based on the fact that the virus spread wo n't go on forever . 
So not too much earnings impact is likely , '' said Katsuhiko Hiroshige , general manager of equities trading at Marusan Securities . 
Hiroshige added that masks are popular mostly in Japan and that experts say cheap masks offer little protection anyway . 
`` Buying of these stocks has been mainly by speculative individuals on margin . 
It 's not for long-term investment but quick capital gains , '' he said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Yumiko Nishitani ; Editing by Hugh Lawson -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
