Get To Know Piers Morgan Tonight : Donny Deutsch Guest Hosts This evening `` Piers Morgan Tonight '' welcomes the return of Donny Deutsch , as the brand guru is back for a fourth stint as guest host When Piers asked if Blair thinks Mubarak should stay in power until elections and not leave immediately , Blair would n't answer directly , but said , `` whatever happens , frankly , there 's going to be change . 
And that change will happen reasonably quickly . '' 
Also , there was this exchange about it being `` over '' : MORGAN : If you do n't have world leaders telling him publicly it 's over , are n't you going to create a - a vacuum and a void here into which the extremists could well come ? 
BLAIR : Well , it is over , in the sense that whatever we 're talking about , we 're talking about a period of transition until we get to elections . 
I really like your show and your doing a great job . 
But please quit saying in every interview the you playing devils advocate . 
It dosent sound good when you say it in every interview . 
February 2 , 2011 at 9:47 am | Report abuse | I watch CNN 24\/7 , and in every country I go to , it is the first thing I turn on to feel at home . 
I never noticed anything about an interviewer before , like I have noticed that Piers cuts of his guests , in the middle of sentences - like a friend that is thinking about what they are going to say next while you are still talking . 
It is so frustrating to listen to and downright painful to watch . 
Maybe other interviews do it , I however they do it , I have never noticed it . 
Piers needs to take a Valium and mellow out ! 
He could be cutting off his guests due to nerves . 
February 1 , 2011 at 11:04 pm | Report abuse | I quite agree that he interupts and cuts people off mid sentence -- very annoying - it is almost as if he is not interested in the answer . 
Oprah does it as well . 
February 2 , 2011 at 2:03 am | Report abuse | Your editing and cutting off of guests is appalling . 
Hire some new people for your staff . 
Also keep in mind your role here on CNN Mr. Morgan ... ... this is n't tabloid news ! 
February 2 , 2011 at 7:35 pm | Report abuse | SHUT THEIR MOUTH AND MIND THEIR OWN BUSINESS !! Dang !! ... given that we have our own organizations setup to specificly start these problems for other countries ... Some people , I swear ! 
I think British must stay away from all the problems in this world . 
Their greed and colonial time created all these pains and agony for 2\/3 of the world population . 
That pretty much goes for the US as well does it not ? 
@Dave , could you sound slightly more like a retarded 12-year-old ? 
February 1 , 2011 at 8:12 pm | Report abuse | Can you say English please because the Scottish , -LRB- Me -RRB- Welsh and Irish were also colonised to an extent ! 
lol Blair , you and your country are to be blame to everything bad that happens in the middle east . 
Blair , you lost a golden oportunity ti keep your mouth closed ! 
I do not think Tony Blair speak too much , he made international mess in UK , if will better for him to go and live peacefully in India or Thailand where God exists Shaji , I think you 're wrong ! 
The brits can not stay away from all the problems of this world just because , if they 're not the problem itself , they in one way or another helped to create it ! 
It 's utterly PATHETIC for Tony Blair to comment on what 's happening in Egypt or the region for that matter . 
He , as most `` experts '' in the Middle East , did not see the revolution of Freedom and Dignity coming in Tunisia and still does n't grasp its meaning . 
That revolution , being replicated in Egypt , is about the people taking matters in their own hands to let their regime and its foreign cronies know that they 've had enough and that they can manage their affairs on their own . 
Get used to it , Tony Blair , and find another line of work if you have any decency left . 
Blair should keep his mouth shut , he 's a total gaff . 
Especially when it comes to the Mideast , he 's simply a puppet . 
It seems that the only reason that the Westt is not completely siding with the people and fearing the fall of Mubarak is worry about Israel 's security . 
How long are we going to step on our values , principles , and way of life to please Israel that is not ever satisfied and often snubs its finger on our face ? 
If Israel was out of the equation , then I have no doubt that the West would be supporting the people , their freedom and democracy 100 % . 
The simple fact is that any democracy , whether bring Islamists to power or not , will not take Israeli abuses and atrocities lightly , while a paid coward dictator shields Israel . 
That 's why the West is really worried . 
Time to be on the right side of history , dump colonist fanatic unwavering Israel , live up to our principles of support to freedom , democracy , and human rights . 
Then , we would be cherished and our TRUE interests would be protected . 
Who the hell care what Tony Blair has to say . 
He has ruined his reputation so badly by being George Bush 's lap-dog . 
He should disappear with whatever dignity he has left and never been seen or heard again . 
Just like Colin Powell , and Condi Rice . 
As much as I find the irritating British accent annoying , I can deal with Tony Blair . 
I just ca n't stand YOU Pi-ss O-ff Morgan . 
Get off the air . 
I hate your annoying British accent . 
If an anchor had a Chinese accent , they would never be allowed on the air unless they were reporting on China . 
This is America and I really wish you 'd get off our air waves and go broadcast for your own people in the UK who do n't find your accent as annoying . 
Go away , please . 
wow , what a simple minded person you must be to be concerned about accents , if only the whole world was america and everyone spoke the same , would that make your life easier ? 
Well , not really . 
By your comment , I 'm assuming that you are saying you are not `` simple minded '' ! 
OK , Let 's see how you are NOT `` simple minded '' . 
consider this : If he had an Indian or Chinese or African accent , he would never even have a chance to be on the air here in America . 
A British accent is still a foreign accent and just as -LRB- if not more -RRB- annoying . 
Get him off the air . 
I 'm sick of his irritating voice ! 
February 1 , 2011 at 8:51 pm | Report abuse | Actually , I find it refreshing to hear someone , with clear diction and excellent grammar , regardless of accent . 
I will avoid watching the Tony B-Liar interview , however ! 
Surely you could find something more important on which to focus your attention . 
Simply change the station and in the process , take your absurd comments elsewhere . 
Right ... we should all listen to him . . 
He and Bush got us into a disastrous war under false pretences . 
He needs to go away and let Sovereign nations solve their own problems . 
Hosni Mubarak , who engineered 9\/11 to sell hatred of Islam for 10 years ? 
yes of course all the evil in the world is the fault of the usa and the uk ... all ignorant infidels ... muslims are the pure saints of the world oh and the muslim brotherhood are the greatest saints of all , they will take over egypt and install a true democracy with the brutal subjugation of women , stoning of adulterers and slaughter of all jews ... then the world will live in peace Tony Blair needs to hang his head in shame and disappear from the public stage . 
Better yet he should be in prison with Bush and Cheney and a number of others , but since no government has the integrity to pursue justice with these criminals , Blair should at least have the decency to shut up . 
that refers to you now , How professional -- why do n't you just roll your eyes the whole time Tony Blair speaks , Piers ? 
I first turned on your show expecting an arrogant , unconnecte person . 
I must say , I owe you an appology . 
You are a gifted interviewer . 
Your show is very unique and you press key leaders on recondite issues in a way that is absolutely spell bounding . 
To top it off you dice up your show with interviews of entertainers that show them in a light I have never seen . 
You have won me over as a viewer - but then again I am just a Bubba from Georgia ... . 
Best of luck - Phil Hey Piers i like u show ... ... i need to get to know u better can u tell Mr. Blair for me that after Iraq '' ` WHO THE HELL CARES ABOUT HIS OPINION '' '' Tony Blair sounds like a nervous coward right now on your show . 
Good Lord with people like Mr Blair no wonder Mubarak lasted so long in power Tony Blaire meant to say '' I am shameless clown with zero self respect and dignity . 
I would love to kill millions more if i get a chance '' No courage from Blair or Romny . 
they are both shame free . 
They stand for democracy only when it is conveniet to them Tony Blair sound very uncomfortable ... is it because he knows he 's guilty of dirty politics in the Middle East ? 
First piece of intelligent reporting I 've seen on the Middle East situation for days . 
Tony Blair brought a depth of analysis based on first-hand experience of the personalities shaping the region which has been absent from much of the one-sided gung-ho knee-jerk reportage . 
Piers asked some unpleasant questions and squeezed out a response from a seasoned political interviewee . 
A deftly handled interview . 
egypt today explains why there has never been success in the Israel Palistinian peace talks . 
No Arab government ever wanted to see a democratic Palistinian state because if it happened just such events as are happening now would threaten all the Arab Dictators and Kings . 
Therefore whenever `` peace '' was close it was undermined by those who had everything to lose . 
Is was not Israel , but the Arabs who had the most to lose . 
If I am not correct why did not Saudi Arabia or one of the other rich oil countries not give a few billions to the Palistinians ? 
Why do we always have to stick our noses where it does n't belong ! 
Because even though you say we do n't belong ; we most probably might get more than our noses punched . 
And that 's the reason for that not to be sneezed at . 
The protesters in Alexandra , Egypt , were n't checked for weapons at the protest ; where as those in `` Freedom Square '' Cairo were all checked going in for same . 
The comments have got very puerile since Larry King retired ... & it 's not down to Piers Morgan . 
Also , Tony Blair has as much a right to be on this program as any one else . 
Three times as Prime Minister of Great Britain & one of those times was after he went to war in Iraq with the Coalition of sorts was no small feat . 
Those remonstrating would have to be a leader of a country to ralise that you have to make decisions on the advice of a lot of experts that would give their opinions on different issues , re ; war , etc. . 
Even the Attorney General at the time backed him onhis decision along with a majority in the House of Commons . 
So to judge in hindsight is very easy ; but to have to make a decision that might even mean your own country 's soldier 's might n't come home alive , that is much more intractable . 
Even for a great Prime Minister . 
Future political historians will be much kinder to him , especially when they 're judging his whole life & especially for his role in the Irish Peace Agreement . 
Do you have any substance to back it up ? 
Ah Tony Blair , what do you really expect from a war criminal ? 
Still to this day he defends the Iraq War , maybe he should visit Iraq and just walk around the neighborhoods , I am sure people will thank him for their `` liberation . '' 
Piers ... you seem like you have a nice personality ... I wonder if you took out for dinner Susan Boyle as you said you would ... ? 
Tony Blair sorry to say , was hood winked by George Bush and followed him into disaster into Iraq . 
That 's why I believe he is not the guy who has any wise comments about Egypt . 
USA and GB should be ashamed of their dirty politics , for they personal profit they oppressed whole countries in the Middle East . 
May be the esteemed Tony Blair should comment on why the Brits allowed Hosni 's son Gamal to quietly sneak into their country with 200 suitcases when things got hot in Egypt . . 
Protecting the crooks because they were loyal ... ? 
Terrible Blair interview ... If you are going to invite one of the most influential leaders of our time to come on your show -LRB- boost your self-admittedly suffering ratings -RRB- and give his opinions on a situation that he has and will continue to have an influence on , then you should allow him to speak and not edit his responses . 
You did this presumably to woo the republicans in this nation , that do n't `` typically '' tune in to CNN , to listen to Romney . 
-LRB- I 'm more republican than not , but come on ... he 's tried twice -RRB- Not very many people in this nation are interested in you watering down Blair 's interview -LRB- someone who has perspective and impact on the situation -RRB- , to hear a former governor of Massachusetts and twice failed presidential candidate give his opinion . 
Larry King was as good as he was because he was n't chasing ratings by flying by the wind ... he was more thoughtful . 
What a terrible interviews and job you do Piers . 
Very poor and lack of clever questions . 
You are asking things that most people already know and when you ask a question that may be worth analyzing you just move on onto another silly question . 
Well , I am glad that CNN has other programs that we can enjoy professional journalism . 
Sorry Piers but I am not quite happy with your performance as an interviewer so far So , JPTX are you a Journalist or Reporter for the Wall Street Journal or maybe the New York Times ?? I did n't think so . 
So , then what makes you qualified to evaluate Piers Morgan 's qualifications as an Interviewer ? 
I 'm sure Piers has more awards and accolades for Journalism or anything else than you will ever see in a lifetime . 
Remember , when you point a finger at someone else you point two at yourself ! 
Instead of criticizing Piers Morgan , do n't watch the show ay ? 
Tune into Rush Limbaugh , he 's probably more your style -LRB- down and dirty -RRB- . 
Piers , tonight I enjoyed your interview with Tony Blair . 
I happen to believe Mr. Blair is a man to respect and look up to . 
My mother is from England and I have been to England twice with my mother in the past and all my mothers relatives are there . 
As I have come to know and respect the English people , I have come to the following conclusions : Our country -LRB- the U.S. -RRB- is in BIG trouble for many reasons and it is my belief our leaders , politicians , or whatever they want to call themselves need help from England 's leaders in the way of leadership , honesty , and discipline . 
After all , the English are our founding fathers and the english people have been on this earth much longer than any American . 
I 'm talking through history . 
I do know England is our greatest ally and the US needs England . 
The English are very strong in nature and determined to persevere . 
Americans somehow have become hostile , uncaring , greedy , and dishonest . 
I 'm not saying 100 % of Americans are this way but there are far more that are this way than are not . 
Barack Obama is the best thing that has happened to the U.S. in a very , very long time and yet he has n't even been in office two years and a large majority of Americans just want to tear him down . 
Actually that began the day he was sworn in . 
Now whoever does n't see anything wrong with that is really sick . 
I believe evil forces such as the Terrorists in this world have infiltrated the U.S. with the intention of stirring up trouble to the point of our own destruction by causing terrible divisions among American people . 
Well I believe their strategy is working . 
We are destroying ourselves from within . 
BTW you are a very good interviewer and try not to pay attention to the messages you get about being a terrible interviewer and person . 
You are working in the U.S. now on national TV and in America insults are now a part of our culture . 
You should be proud to be an Englishman . 
Good luck to you sir and keep up the good work . 
Tony Bliar is the unprincipled weasel of truth . 
Having him as a `` peace keeper '' is like having a fox manage a chicken coop ! 
Any Middle East leader that are friends of Toni Bliar are sitting on shifting sand . 
The Bush 's lap dog obediently changed laps . 
Tony Bliar lied to his own people and sent them to Iraq to be killed and kill millions of innocent people . 
What makes him different to Saddam Husein ? 
Welllll , Nana Brown I assume you are an American??!@? Who knows these days . 
In your comment is n't that kind of like the kettle calling the teapot black ? 
Did n't Bush start it all by telling Americans that Sadaam had WMD in his stash and then after over 4,000 Americans died in Iraq , Whoops , no WMD ! 
The first mistake Tony Blair made was to believe ANY American politician , President or not ! 
Let 's get our facts straight shall we all before we start throwing up all over the Internet . 
Because of work requirements tonight was the first chance I had to see Piers on this show . 
When it was announced he was taking over from Larry King I thought that all the American audience knew about Piers was his stint as a judge on America 's Got Talent , and that like some actors he may be too stereotyped to be accepted in this type show . 
Can anyone imagine Larry King conducting tonights interview with Tony Blair as well . 
Excellent questions and he knew something about the subject matter , and did n't simply accept responses but challeged them . 
There was this big hype about this program before it began . 
I have been watching every single interview and so far I must say I am not impressed at all . 
Why do you have to cut them off when they are in the middle of a sentence ? 
This is no art of an interview . 
We need to hear what they want to say fully . 
You may try being quiet after you 've asked the question . 
after all it is not a battle . 
And why do you keep repeating the programs this early in the season ? 
Tony Blair has done nothing of substance in the Middle East other than talk a good game . 
Now I am convinced more than ever why people are relying more and more on alternative media like intenet outlets They feell they get more realobjective , refreshing and truthful\/unbiased information from them than any of the main stream media and that also includes CNN I mean interviewing somebody like Tony Blair or Romney for that matter about democratization is like asking a predator about the peace and security of any of the herbivores groups . 
Mr. Blair although he likes to put in his two-cents worth has absolutely nothing to do with people 's revolution for democracy in Egypt . 
If anything , he was more than happy to . 
over the years , shake the hands of Mubarak at every turn for being such a pliant servant to the wishes of pro-zionist agendas . 
Tony Blair still believes he is significant when in fact he is a fraud and an old news !! Mr. Morgan , what did Tony Blair promise you so that you put him on your show . 
If Piers Morgan is going to have guests who speak in cliches , like the Kardashien sisters , you may as well go back to Larry King , then they can all speak in cliches together . 
Piers Morgan shame on you to say on Mubarak that he is Tyrant . 
Mubarak has done for Egypt and the Middle East more and more things to keep peace . 
What Obama or Tony Blair has done , Nothing . 
It is the first time I lose confidence in CNN . 
It looks like I m watching EL Jazeera or something . 
I m really disappointed I stopped watching CNN when I wanted to find news about Egypt I found this Morgan british guy . 
Why is this british guy on our national news program ? 
I did not like his tone or manners toward the Obama and the White House . 
I found the MSNBC -LRB- they were presenting a report about Goldman Sacs hand in all these uprisings -RRB- channel as a result and will no longer watch CNN . 
Is it my computer or is Tony Blair wearing a satin suit ? 
Last night was the first time I watched the new Piers Morgan Show , having never been a particular fan of Mr. Morgan , however I was pleasantly surprised with the straight forward , on point questioning of former Prime Minister Tony Blair and Mr , Blair 's opinion of the peoples revolutions taking place in Egypt and all across northern Africa and the Middle East . 
Morgan 's interview of Blair was respectful while at the same time asking the tough questions and not being afraid to push Mr. Blair to actually give an answer . 
I have a completely new respect for Mr. Morgan 's interviewing talents and look forward to watching his show on a regular basis . 
Mr. Morgan brings a completely fresh , comon sense voice to a sea of `` talking heads '' that otherwise waste air time on TV . 
Well what happens up here in Egypt is affecting everybody especially me ... I 'm Egyptian teenager who have been struggling from Mubarak 's presidency . . 
He is so old and so mischievous , We hated him long long time ago , He has been a vampire who sucks the people 's blood , It hurts to see your parents struggle all their life to provide us the fundamental basics of humanity that most Of Countries provide to their citizens . . 
we had enough as we had nothing of our Human Rights , Mubarak calls for Democracy then what Democracy means on his world ??! we 've been out of internet and Networks for 6 days because he 's coward fearing his citizens ' speech . . 
we have the right to speech and say what are we seeking for ... we 're seeking for freedom , for prosperity and Luxury . 
we did n't want him ever he stays by election fraud . . 
we want him to leave , and give up all he hopes to achieve for Egypt cause we 're sure that nothing would change , He promised a lot , He lied a lot , that we gained through these 30 years of his presidency , is n't the time to go ?? , He did let the police to kill over 300 innocent protesters who are calling for freedom . . 
is that what suppose to happen when you raise your voice ?! . 
He 's nonsense person , He 's deceiving cunning president . . 
we 're sick of him , we had enough , we want him out of this Country , legally he 's no of president to this country . . 
the people got him down . . 
we 'll find away to every unjust who does not respect humanity . . 
his speech is all nag nag nag !! Enough is enough ... we Have no future as long as he 's staying !!! I just listened to Anderson Cooper complaining about being harassed in a crowd in Egypt and I could n't help but wonder what on earth else he expected . 
For days he has been reporting only the side of the protestors , never did find out if they were being supported by outside forces from countries who want to see Egypt collapse and he never tried to find out how the millions of other Egyptians felt . 
It appears that the groups now opposing the protestors are not so much `` for Mubarak '' as they are `` for stability '' . 
They want their country back , want to be able to go to work , get food , get money at banks and not have to protect their own property . 
They have just as much right to be there as the protestors . 
Now that Mubarak has said he will go and will move up the elections , it appears the protestors are not using reason . 
They seem to have a mob mentality now and are not realizing that there has to be some sort of government in place . 
That fellow who claims to be an opposition leader who could have been a huge help refused to meet with Mubarak so what is his agenda ? 
The media fuelled the mob frenzy and now that there could be a peaceful stand-off and the government could work towards a democratic precess , the media and mob do n't seem to want that . 
The journalists can not complain if they are harassed because if you jump into a fire you may get burned . 
Toni Blair is the Middle East envoy for Peace is a blood thirst war monger serving Israel . 
The world finally has woken up and all those Middle East self serving corrupt leaders that could be bought for a price with our tax dollars will have to flee to England , Saudi Arabia or Israel . 
Google Tony Blair it all comes back to him : I 'm benefiting from all of your interviews . 
Thanks re Tony Blair . 
He was so insightful as UK PM . 
I am engrossed in his book '' A Journey '' . 
P. 454 -- in his speech to both Houses of Congress -LRB- July , 2003 -RRB- : '' ... anytime ordinary people are given the chance to choose , the choice is the same : freedom , not tyranny ; democracy , not dictatorship ; the rule of law , not the rule of the secret police '' . 
And , p. 682 : '' ... the power of people is needed to liberate the politics . '' 
Piers needs to lighten up . 
He 's trying way to hard to win ratings with what he thinks is a revolutionary style . 
It sadly comes off as just petulant rantings . 
I do n't give him long if he continues this way . 
I like your programm Mr Morgan . 
The interview with Tony Blair made me so sick to my stomch . 
This guy still thinks that they really needed to create that miss in Iraq . 
He never answered the questions about Mubarak and all the oppresion and torture he 's done to his own people . 
His only point was to tell us that he is a pro israel . 
So all the arabs and democracy and the right of people to live go to hell as long as Israel is safe and happy . 
Tony blair does not speak for people in the UK about anything he sold us a load of rubbish with iraq . 
The guy is a war monger who made a fortune for himself when he was prime minister . 
The guy is a disgrace ! 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Notify me of follow-up comments via email . 
`` If you are fat , it is the number one preventable cause of death '' @Faith_Saile ... calls Chris #Christie `` irresponsible '' for being overweight 9:08 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Donny , I 'm going to be killing it at 89 . '' 
@garyvee on how old is too old ... 9:04 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET How old is too old ? 
If you can do the job , should your age matter ? 
#nineatnine with @DonnyDeutsch now . 
Nine at nine with @DonnyDeutsch starts now . 
9:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Next , #Grammys , #SOTU , LA #Manhunt , #Pope , #OBL , cruise blues & more , all grist for the chat mill with guest host @DonnyDeutsch . 
