2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
But amid the chaos , one young American woman has decided to stay and document the uprising from the frontlines . 
Lauren Bohn , a 23-year-old Fulbright Fellow studying Arabic and journalism at American University in Cairo , told CNN 's `` American Morning '' on Tuesday what she is seeing on the ground and what prompted her to remain in Cairo . 
`` I 've been caught in some tear gas and bumped around a few times , but , if anything , the people here on the ground are very protective of foreigners , '' Bohn says . 
`` It 's been essentially a media blackstorm , '' Bohn said about reports of media outages in Cairo . 
`` I was able to tweet yesterday for about an hour . 
I ca n't tell you where I found it , but I was able to upload some video and people have been able to call me on my cell phone , on my Blackberry . '' 
Bohn said although she 's been unable to make outgoing international calls , she can receive them . 
`` It 's been completely demobilizing , and , of course , that 's the whole point , '' she said . 
She said she has not felt any danger or hostility toward Americans from demonstrators . 
`` They 're embracing me on the ground and embracing people on the ground , '' Bohn said . 
`` They want to make sure that the U.S. government is hearing them . '' 
If we still want to have Egypt as a strong ally in a Middle East , we must support brave Egyptian people in their fight for the freedom and demonstrate them what our President stated in his speech in Cairo , we really mean it . 
Laura is in the majority vote . 
I am not so sure I support the demonstrators . 
Their eyes show so much hate . 
What if the Egyptian people turn against us ? 
What if they support anti-American leaders that want war with Israel . 
The start of WW111 ??? I guess I 'd have post-stress syndrome if I was up to my elbows in dog blood . 
This guy was a sick even before he committed this act -- I guarantee it ! 
And this has what to do with a student in Egypt ??? February 1 , 2011 at 3:05 pm | Report abuse | The way people look when protesting is totally different from the way they look when things calm down and life goes back to governance and day to day living . 
Do n't freak yourself out . 
Also , why else would you participate in such incredible protests unless you \* hated \* your situation ? 
The hate is natural , and I think these people are channeling it well and will continue to do so - with a constructive and society-enhancing outcome . 
I think Israel is irrelevant here . 
Any new government in Egypt is going to have to spend a lot of time getting things together at home . 
Will there be some anti-Israel rhetoric to boost cohesion here or there ? 
I 'm sure there will . 
Will it come to fruition ? 
No one wants the entire region thrown into war . 
They want economic opportunities , and starting a war will make getting them impossible . 
Also , as an America Jew friendly to Israel , I feel strongly that fear of armed conflict should not stop the international community and\/or the USA from supporting a peoples ' right to economic self-determination . 
Sure , Gaza used their elections to pick war mongers , but the West Bank did n't and violence is down there . 
These things are inherently unpredictable . 
All we can do is support fairness and justice when we see it , and hope the favor is returned . 
Maybe , with all the prejudice against Muslims living in Europe , the Israel 's neighbors will start to figure out why the Jews do n't see going back there to be an option , and never really considered it home despite it being a Jewish population center for a few centuries . 
Sorry , I strongly believe in ideals but you are foolish to stay in a foreign country that is in such turmoil . 
Trust me , America will hear about what is going on without your silly dilly @ $ $ putting your life in jeopardy . 
Ahhh youth ... I find it interesting that journalists such as Anderson Cooper , who is always in direct line of fire when it comes to major events occurring around the world , are revered for their work in the field and recognized for their bravery . 
But when it comes to a new US journalist , who is coming upon her first opportunity for real reporting and fully seizing that opportunity , is thought of as naive or `` silly dilly '' because she is young . 
As for Lauren , excellent job and good luck with your journey . 
February 3 , 2011 at 11:17 pm | Report abuse | Cesar . 
Egyptian people will not turn against us , but hypocrisy , arrogance , double standards , and pre-justice can turn any people against us . 
I married an Egyptian and I visited the country several times . 
I met so many great people there . 
Very well said , Laura . 
Just ignore the clown who keeps posting under my name , please . 
February 1 , 2011 at 7:39 pm | Report abuse | @Cesar - Watch this short interview with a young woman at the square in Cairo . 
She is calm , determined , articulate . 
It might help you understand . 
@ \* Cesar , you forgot to mention Rlh2104 and Kat , who along with Laura sound very informed on the subject . 
If you refuse to place a star by your name , I 'll place it for you . 
No offense , but your ideology is n't my cup of tea . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
