Documents suggest BP , Transocean and Halliburton ignored tests indicating faulty safety equipment , says committee The Deepwater Horizon oil rig burning last month . 
Photograph : KPA\/Zuma\/Rex Features BP was aware of equipment problems aboard the Deepwater Horizon rig hours before the explosion pumped millions of gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico , a congressional hearing was told yesterday . 
In a second day of hearings , the House of Representatives 's energy and commerce committee said documents and company briefings suggested that BP , which owned the well ; Transocean , which owned the rig ; and Halliburton , which cemented into place the casing for the well , ignored tests in the hours before the 20 April explosion that indicated faulty safety equipment . 
`` Yet it appears the companies did not suspend operations , and now 11 workers are dead and the gulf faces an environmental catastrophe , '' Henry Waxman , the chair of the energy and commerce committee , said , demanding to know why work was not stopped . 
The committee heard testimony from oil executives suggesting multiple failures of safety systems that should have given advance warning of a blowout , or should have promptly cut off the flow of oil . 
The failures included a dead battery in the blowout preventer , suggestions of a breach in the well casing , and failure in the shear ram , a device of last resort that was supposed to cut through and seal the drill pipe in the event of a blowout . 
`` Already we have uncovered at least four significant problems with the blowout preventer used on the Deepwater Horizon drill rig , '' said Bart Stupak , a Democrat from Michigan who chairs the oversight subcommittee . 
The examination was far tougher on the oil companies than the Senate hearings on Tuesday . 
BP also faced a financial sting as the White House asked Congress to approve $ 118m in recovery costs , to be passed on to the oil company . 
While the committee accused the oil industry of failing to anticipate the dangers of offshore drilling , senators John Kerry and Joe Lieberman unveiled a climate and energy bill that for the first time will put a price on carbon and require American cuts in greenhouse gas emissions . 
Kerry said he believed the oil spill would give impetus to the American Power Act . 
`` This a bill for energy independence after a devastating oil spill , a bill to hold polluters accountable , a bill for billions of dollars to create the next generation of jobs and a bill to end America 's addiction to foreign oil . '' 
But after eight months of careful courtship of industry and political opposition , the bill has no Republican backers after Senator Lindsey Graham , a co-author , withdrew his support last month and the immediate response from industry groups and mainstream environmental groups was guarded . 
Passage of the law is seen as crucial to a global deal on climate change . 
The 987-page bill was carefully positioned to secure support from industry and moderate Republicans , making the final product far weaker than environmental organizations wanted . 
In response to the oil disaster , the bill moderated its original support for offshore drilling , giving states veto power over projects in waters 75 miles from their shores . 
States that go ahead will be able to keep a bigger share , 37 % , of federal revenues from drilling . 
Otherwise the bill calls for 12 nuclear plants and sets aside $ 2bn for research into clean coal . 
Greenpeace condemned it as a `` dirty energy bailout '' , with director Phil Radford adding : `` It seems that after a year and a half wrangling , the only people who can be happy with this bill are the fossil fuel industry lobbyists . '' 
The bill aims for a 17 % cut in emissions over 2005 levels , the same weak target enshrined in a bill passed by the House in June last year . 
But the Senate version would apply to a smaller share of the US economy . 
Heavy industries would not be required to cut emissions until 2016 . 
The bill would stop the Environmental Protection Agency regulating greenhouse gases and would scrap region cap and trade systems now underway in two dozen states and Canadian provinces . 
cents This article was amended on 19 May 2010 . 
The original said that Halliburton `` made the cement casing '' for the well . 
This has been corrected . 
RT @BrianSozzi : Within food , white bread had one of the strongest price increases in December . 
