Syria massacre in Houla condemned as outrage grows Jim Muir in Beirut : `` Some opposition groups are saying this could be a turning point '' Western nations are pressing for a response to the massacre in the Syrian town of Houla , with the US calling for an end to President Bashar al-Assad 's `` rule by murder '' . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague has called for an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council this week . 
The UN has confirmed the deaths of at least 90 people in Houla , including 32 children under the age of 10 . 
Syria 's foreign ministry denied army involvement , blaming `` terrorists '' . 
Spokesman Jihad Makdissi said there was a clash in the area on Friday afternoon between security forces and armed terrorists . 
He said hundreds of armed men then gathered , armed with heavy weapons including mortars and anti-tank weapons , and attacked Houla . 
The government had sent a team to investigate the killings , he added . 
However , activists say the Syrian military bombarded Houla after demonstrations . 
Activists say some of the victims died by shelling , while others were summarily executed by the regime militia known as the `` shabiha '' . 
The killings have sparked a chorus of international condemnation . 
Mr Hague said he would lobby Russia , the regime 's only major foreign ally , during a visit to Moscow starting on Sunday . 
He wrote on his Twitter feed : `` Will call on Russia to support rapid and unequivocal pressure on Assad regime and accountability for crimes . '' 
Shashank Joshi Associate fellow , Royal United Services Institute So far , there is no sign that Houla will be a game-changer . 
First , remember that this massacre will be interpreted differently around the world . 
Many countries sympathise with the Assad 's government narrative that the opposition are Arab-backed Sunni fundamentalists and terrorists . 
Just as some critics argue that the massacres in Libya last year and Racak , Kosovo , in 1999 are exaggerated or fabricated , similar scepticism about Houla will persist , even in the face of incontrovertible evidence - and that will affect how the UN Security Council lines up on the issue . 
Moreover , the growing role of al-Qaeda and affiliated jihadist groups in Syria has , in recent months , become a further deterrent to intervention . 
American officials are terrified that support for the opposition may end up in the hands of the very same people that mounted attacks on Western forces in Iraq just a few years ago . 
Above all , however , no-one wants to pick a fight with Russia . 
`` Time is running out for the Assad regime to adopt the -LRB- Kofi Annan peace -RRB- plan , implement that plan and stop the torture , abuse and murder of their own people , '' he told the BBC . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called it an `` appalling '' massacre , saying President Bashar al-Assad 's `` rule by murder and fear must come to an end '' . 
In a statement on Saturday , Mrs Clinton called the deaths an `` atrocity '' and said Washington would increase pressure on `` Assad and his cronies '' to give up power . 
France 's Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said he was making immediate arrangements for a Paris meeting of the Friends of Syria group . 
The group includes Western and Arab nations , but not Russia or China , which have blocked previous attempts to introduce UN sanctions . 
In a joint statement , UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan said the attack was a `` flagrant violation of international law '' . 
They said the crime involved `` indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force '' and violated commitments by Syria 's government . 
In April , Damascus pledged to implement a six-point plan brokered by Mr Annan , including a ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weaponry from urban areas . 
Mr Annan is expected to visit Damascus on Monday to try to breathe life into the political process . 
But the opposition Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- said it could no longer commit to the ceasefire unless the Security Council could ensure that civilians were protected . 
In a statement , the FSA said that if urgent steps were not taken , then Mr Annan 's plan was `` going to hell '' . 
It said killings in Syria were taking place `` under the eyes of the UN observers , '' and called on states to `` announce the failure of the Annan plan '' . 
Violence in Syria has continued despite the deployment of some 260 UN observers sent to oversee a ceasefire . 
The head of the observer mission in Syria , Maj Gen Robert Mood , called the massacre a `` brutal tragedy '' , but did not say who carried out the murders . 
After a UN visit to the town on Saturday , he said they could confirm `` the use of small arms , machine gun , artillery and tanks '' . 
`` Whoever started , whoever responded and whoever carried out this deplorable act of violence should be held responsible , '' Gen Mood said . 
The UN has confirmed the deaths of at least 90 people , but the opposition Syrian National Council , as well as rights groups , put the toll higher . 
Activists have complained that they called for help as the massacre was taking place . 
Abu Emad , speaking from Houla , said their appeals to UN monitors failed to produce action . 
`` We told them at night , we called seven of them . 
We told them the massacre is being committed right now at Houla by the mercenaries of this regime and they just refused to come and stop the massacre , '' he said . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
