U.S. hopes for quick end to violence in Egypt protests President Barack Obama and his administration `` strongly condemn the outrageous and deplorable violence that 's taken place on the streets of Cairo today '' and want it to end quickly , White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said Wednesday . 
Supporters of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak attacked anti-government demonstrators in Cairo 's Tahrir Square , and the ensuing violence killed three people and injured more than 600 , according to Egypt 's health minister . 
`` It is our hope that what we saw today we wo n't see tomorrow or Friday or into the weekend , '' Gibbs told reporters . 
`` Obviously ... this is not all going to be wrapped up in a matter of hours . 
It 's going to take some time . '' 
Gibbs reiterated the Obama administration 's opposition to any violence in the Egypt demonstrations , either by Egyptian security forces , protesters or criminal elements . 
He added that if the Egyptian government is instigating any of the violence , `` it should stop immediately . '' 
At the State Department , spokesman P.J. Crowley called the attacks by what he described as `` thugs '' a clear attempt to intimidate the anti-government protesters , who were demonstrating for a ninth straight day . 
The United States does n't know the identity of the `` thugs , '' Crowley said , adding that others have identified them as `` supporters of the government . '' 
In an operation that started Monday , more than 1,900 U.S. citizens and their family members have been evacuated from Egypt , Crowley said , adding that further evacuations would take place Thursday . 
The attacks came the day after Mubarak announced he would not seek re-election as part of a series of political reforms . 
Opposition activists and protesters , however , said Mubarak must step down immediately with a caretaker unity government running the country until elections for president and a new parliament can take place . 
It was unclear whether such confrontations were being repeated elsewhere . 
Other Cairo neighborhoods were calm , and contesting rallies in Egypt 's second largest city , Alexandria , were largely peaceful . 
Gibbs said the time for a political transition in Egypt `` is now '' because the Egyptian people `` need to see change , '' and a `` meaningful transition must include opposition voices and parties being involved in this process as we move toward free and fair elections . '' 
At the same time , Gibbs noted that events in Egypt `` have moved enormously quickly in a very volatile region of the world , '' adding : `` What we 're watching is history being made . '' 
