Heavy gunfire reverberated in central Cairo before dawn Thursday as supporters and foes of embattled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak continued to face off at Tahrir Square , where chunks of concretes and Molotov cocktails were employed as weapons in the escalating crisis . 
CNN personnel saw wounded people being carried into Tahrir Square , largely held by anti-regime demonstrators , through an entrance that leads to the nearby Egyptian Museum . 
Several ambulances entered and left the square shortly before 4 a.m. Thursday . 
The source of the gunfire was not immediately known . 
Voices were heard chanting a prayer after a day of violent street battles in central Cairo . 
Sustained automatic weapons fire , including from what sounded like a heavy machine gun , echoed around the square , the epicenter of nine days of protests calling for Mubarak 's ouster . 
Anti-government demonstrators hunkered down behind makeshift barricades in the square and outside the nearby national museum against the onslaught , which demonstrators said included plainclothes police officers . 
`` They 're coming in with weapons . 
They 're spreading violence , '' human rights activist Gigi Ibrahim told CNN on Wednesday . 
`` We 've had peaceful protests here since Friday and no violence here . 
Only today were we faced with this really violent reaction . '' 
The pro-government protesters were not impeded by the army when they entered the square , CNN 's Ben Wedeman said early Thursday . 
Anti-regime protesters are now unhappy with troops , whose commanders had promised Monday not to use force against peaceful demonstrations , for standing by , he said . 
Small fires burned in the square early Thursday , some spreading to trees and walls . 
Egypt 's health ministry reported three people were killed and 639 were wounded in Wednesday 's clashes , according to the state television network . 
Reported fatalities in the previous eight days of demonstrations ranged as high as 300 , but CNN has not been able to independently confirm the death toll . 
In one surreal moment , whip-wielding Mubarak supporters thundered through the crowd astride horses and camels , and at least one man was pulled off his mount and beaten . 
A Mubarak supporter who spoke to CNN said the riders were pyramid workers who were protesting the negative economic impact of the crisis . 
