By Dan Primack February 2 , 2011 : 2:24 PM ET One day before Egyptians took to the streets in protest , a Cairo-based venture capital firm called Sawari Ventures formally launched . 
It is the nation 's only privately-funded VC firm , with plans to invest between $ 2 and $ 5 million in local technology and telecom startups . 
Earlier today I spoke with Leslie Jump , a Sawari Ventures partner who works out of Washington , D.C. -LRB- her husband is Edward Walker , U.S. Ambassador to Egypt between 1994 and 1997 -RRB- . 
Below is an edited transcript of our conversation : Fortune : Is it safe to say that business is on hold for Sawari Ventures ? 
Leslie Jump : Definitely . 
The country is dealing with existential questions right now , and today you have thugs on camels attacking people in the streets . 
So obviously all regular business has been put on hold . 
One of our Egyptian partners has a non-Egyptian wife , so he took her to London to keep her safe -- but he plans to return soon . 
Our other partner is out in his neighborhood with a cricket bat , helping to protect it from looters . 
It was great to see our entrepreneurs come back online today , although they 're all out protesting . 
How are your firm 's investors reacting ? 
Our lead investor is Naguib Sawiris , the richest man in Egypt . 
He has been coming out with statements about how we need to get through this period first , and then remember that investment is key to Egypt 's economic development . 
We completely agree , of course . 
Obviously the American investors are a different story , and are a bit more cautious . 
We knew that a majority of our funding would come from the region , but we wanted some Americans involved to help validate the market . 
You said that you hope that there is a continued interest in economic development through investment . 
I believe in the pragmatism of the Egyptian people . 
Political folks keep asking if Egypt will turn into Turkey or turn into Iran , but I have a very hard time believing the latter is possible . 
The people are devout , but not fanatical , and the protests have been driven by middle and upper-middle class educated people who understand that economic reform is critical . 
Well , if I had the ear of the minister of finance in the prevailing government , I 'd tell him that the number one issue for entrepreneurs is that the country 's bankruptcy laws must be reformed . 
It takes two days to start up a company in Egypt and two years to wind it down . 
You can not have a successful and thriving entrepreneurial ecosystem unless you can fail fast . 
The second thing is access to capital . 
Speaking of which , how many other venture capital firms are active in Egypt besides Sawari ? 
Before January 25 , I used to tell people that the Arab digital economy was a lot like the U.S. digital economy in 1995 . 
In terms of venture capital , it 's more like 1975 . 
There are just seven firms in the region : Two in Dubai , two in Egypt -- one is public , and we 're the private one -- one in Jordan , one in the West Bank and Intel Capital . 
Egypt is a market of 80 million people who speak a common language , but it is very under-served in terms of access to capital . 
Despite the political challenges , Egyptians are rampant consumers of consumer technologies and are digital natives because the vast majority is under the age of 30 . 
I 'm hoping that , once things begin to stabilize , we 'll be part of helping to build out an entrepreneurial ecosystem that has incredible potential . 
Dan Primack joined Fortune.com in September 2010 to cover deals and dealmakers , from Wall Street to Sand Hill Road . 
Previously , Dan was an editor-at-large with Thomson Reuters , where he launched both peHUB.com and the peHUB Wire email service . 
In a past journalistic life , Dan ran a community paper in Roxbury , Massachusetts . 
He currently lives just outside of Boston . 
Market indexes are shown in real time , except for the DJIA , which is delayed by two minutes . 
All times are ET . 
Disclaimer LIBOR Warning : Neither BBA Enterprises Limited , nor the BBA LIBOR Contributor Banks , nor Reuters , can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of BBA LIBOR . 
Morningstar : 2013 Morningstar , Inc. . 
Disclaimer The Dow Jones IndexesSM are proprietary to and distributed by Dow Jones & Company , Inc. and have been licensed for use . 
All content of the Dow Jones IndexesSM 2013 is proprietary to Dow Jones & Company , Inc. . 
The market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors . 
FactSet Research Systems Inc. 2013 . 
Most stock quote data provided by BATS . 
