A supporter of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak expresses his devotion . 
For more than a week , opponents of Egypt 's President Hosni Mubarak had the upper hand in Cairo , protesting with near impunity in the face of police and an army that did little to stop them . 
That all changed on Wednesday . 
The morning after Mubarak dramatically announced he would not run for re-election in September , his supporters waded into Tahrir Square by the thousands , and suddenly serious , prolonged violence reigned in central Cairo . 
There were immediate suspicions that the pro-Mubarak demonstrators were not simply average citizens standing up for the man who has led Egypt for three decades -- suspicions that proved at least partly founded . 
As battles raged between the two sides , some pro-Mubarak protesters were captured by his opponents . 
Some were terrified to be caught and begged for their lives , screaming that the government had paid them to come out and protest . 
Others turned out to be carrying what seemed to be police identification , though they were dressed in plain clothes . 
Shadi Hamid , a Brookings Institution analyst based in Qatar , told CNN that the use of hired muscle to break up demonstrations `` is a longtime regime strategy . '' 
`` There are usually a line of thugs outside a protest who are waiting there , '' he said . 
`` They 're dressed in plain clothes , and then they 'll usually go and attack the protesters . 
Egyptians have seen this for quite some time , and that 's why they were able to recognize what was going on fairly quickly . '' 
The global rights group Amnesty International said it has documented the use of unsavory forces by Egyptian authorities to disperse political gatherings in election years . 
`` It looks like much of this violence is being orchestrated by the Egyptian authorities in order to force an end to the anti-government protests , restore their control and cling onto power in the face of unprecedented public demands for them to go , '' said Hassiba Hadj Sahraoui , the deputy director for the Middle East and North Africa at Amnesty International . 
An Interior Ministry spokesman denied on state-run television that police identification cards had been confiscated from demonstrators . 
He said if they had been , they were were stolen or fake . 
But state television reporting Wednesday did not always match CNN 's own observations of what was happening in Tahrir Square . 
Several CNN journalists heard from pro-Mubarak demonstrators that they worked for the government . 
Staff from the national petrochemical company said they had been ordered to come and protest . 
