People pack Cairo International Airport this week in an effort to evacuate Egypt . 
Americans describe seeing history unfold while in Egypt Devon Youngblood : People were n't sure what to expect when protests began More than 2,600 Americans ask to be evacuated `` You 're caught in something for which you have no control , '' tourist says -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- It was Tuesday , January 25 . 
Word had spread for days through the streets of Cairo that there would be protests . 
No one knew exactly what to expect . 
Riot police lined the streets around Tahrir Square . 
Police kept people from gathering into a crowd . 
Devon Youngblood , a 22-year-old American who had been working since August at an art gallery , showed up near the square around 2 p.m. . 
She was curious to see how many people would gather . 
`` Most people I talked with were pessimistic , '' she said . 
`` They did n't think people would show up . '' 
She encountered an enthusiastic crowd . 
At one point , a large group of cheering protesters broke through the police line and into the square . 
Police lobbed tear gas and used water cannons . 
But the crowd would not be moved . 
Gallery : Protesters take to the streets The evolution of Egypt 's protests So began the international crisis still unfolding in Egypt . 
Several Americans who made it out of the country shared their experiences with CNN ; their stories provide a front-row seat to history in a nation where communication with the outside world is spotty at best . 
A curfew went into effect at 3 p.m. Tuesday and extends until 8 a.m. Wednesday . 
The internet has been shut down , as has phone service . 
The turmoil has paralyzed daily life in other ways , with food shipments spare and many groceries closed . 
Gas is running low in some areas , and many banks have closed . 
Nile TV has set up a hotline for citizens to call in and report bread shortages . 
International leaders are monitoring the situation closely . 
Amid the chaotic street scenes , foreign governments -- including Australia , Canada , China , India , Israel , Mexico , Russia and the United States -- have launched evacuation efforts to get their citizens out . 
About 52,000 Americans are believed to be in Egypt . 
More than 2,600 have asked to be evacuated , a figure expected to rise in coming days . 
The Americans who left Egypt were students and tourists -- all sharing a passion for Egypt . 
In Alexandria , Tik Root , a student from Middlebury College , had returned to Egypt in mid-January to continue his studies in Arabic . 
Like many U.S. students , he left with a mix of emotions : excited , happy and concerned for the Egyptian people . 
Diane and Gaynor Kelley of Chicago were concluding a dream vacation , a cruise down the Nile River . 
The couple said they feel lucky to be alive but remain concerned for the Egyptians who helped them escape . 
One of their tour guides was shot . 
Taking it to the streets Youngblood left work early last Wednesday , the first day after the protests began . 
Residents still seemed in awe : `` Wow , people really came together . '' 
But word spread that police were going to crack down and make sweeping arrests of people on the streets . 
Many felt it was best to leave before the clashes intensified . 
As she walked downtown , Youngblood said she was struck by the silence in the city of 8 million . 
Downtown was abandoned : `` It was really surreal because Cairo is not a quiet place . '' 
She continued on , still unsure if the unrest would build and what could come next . 
By Thursday , Facebook and Twitter were silenced . 
Then , text messaging was shut down . 
By nightfall , residents were cut off from the internet and phone service . 
`` The motivations behind it were scarier than the actual lack of information , '' Youngblood said . 
Egyptians prepared to take to the streets en masse the next morning . 
On Thursday night , Youngblood 's friends began referring to the movement as a revolution . 
`` It had n't really hit me until then that people were thinking of this as a revolution , '' she told CNN . 
`` I had thought of this as a string of protests and people just wanting to protest . 
I was n't sure what direction people really knew they wanted to take it . '' 
With communication limited , people worried : What is the government planning if they 're cutting off access to the outside world ? 
Google connects Egyptians to Twitter Egypt unites , tells Mubarak ` go ' At a glance : Nations facing unrest The streets erupted in protest Friday . 
Root , the student from Middlebury , stood in the middle of the madness in Alexandria . 
A government building was burned . 
Police fired rubber bullets and launched tear gas canisters . 
`` I saw people coming back bloodied from the front lines , '' he said . 
At times , a wave of anti-Americanism swept through the crowd . 
One man picked up a spent tear gas canister . 
He held it up for all to see . 
`` Made in America , '' it said . 
If people asked , Root decided to tell people he was from Mexico . 
To survive , it seemed the right thing to say . 
By Saturday , police were gone . 
Ordinary citizens had taken over . 
They were directing traffic and setting up neighborhood watches to prevent looting . 
`` It was one of the coolest things I 've seen in my life , '' Root said . 
Scary end to Nile cruise The Kelleys had been isolated on their cruise down the Nile . 
They had heard rumblings of something going on but did n't know quite what . 
The vacation was wrapping up . 
They caught a flight into Cairo . 
Their tour guide remained confident they would be safe . 
When they arrived , no other flights were taking off . 
The couple , and the rest of the tour group , were stranded and cut off from the outside world . 
`` You 're caught in something for which you have no control whatsoever of your own destiny , '' Gaynor Kelley said . 
Their Egyptian hosts , with the Abercrombie & Kent tour group , helped make sure they were safe . 
They got them food and put them up in a hotel while working around-the-clock to see how the group could leave the country . 
The father of one of their Egyptian guides was shot as the group made its way to the airport . 
The Kelleys have n't heard any updates on his condition . 
`` Our last day getting to the airport was the scariest , '' Diane Kelley recalled . 
Military police were stopping cars at roadblocks set up outside the airport . 
Gunshots could be heard in the distance . 
She said she thought about the recent bombing at the airport in Moscow . 
The Egyptian tour guides offered constant reassurance . 
Once inside the airport , flight after flight was canceled . 
Gaynor Kelley had a sinking feeling : Will I ever make it back home ? 
`` You sort of begin to lose confidence that you 're ever going to get out , '' he said . 
For Youngblood , leaving the country was agonizing . 
She did n't realize how many friends she had made since August until it was time to say good-bye . 
But by Saturday night , she said she knew it was time to go as the streets became more chaotic . 
Citizens were setting up their own neighborhood watches . 
Outside her building , men stood guard with thick plastic pipes . 
She was armed with one too , inside her apartment . 
`` That 's when it hit me that I should get out . '' 
She caught a flight Monday to Athens , Greece . 
She said she plans to return to Cairo as soon as it 's safe again . 
Root is still trying to absorb all that 's transpired in the last week . 
`` I do n't think anyone 's been able to process what has happened , '' he said , just before leaving for Europe . 
As a college student , he 's learned more in a week than most get in a semester . 
`` This has been a very great and meaningful experience . 
It 's taught me a lot about Egyptian politics , the Mideast and revolutions . '' 
The Kelleys are left wondering about the folks who got them out of the country . 
`` I am thinking how grateful I am of the Egyptian people who helped us , '' Diane Kelley said . 
`` I 'm feeling very sorry for the conditions that they 're in . 
I 'm feeling very sorry that their homes are being looted , that their families are n't safe . 
These people helped us . '' 
