New York -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak 's announcement Tuesday that he will turn over power to an elected successor in September does n't go nearly far enough , says analyst Fareed Zakaria . 
`` Mubarak is going to have to go , '' Zakaria said in an interview , adding that he will not be able to stay in office for eight more months . 
`` But the manner in which he goes and the nature of the transition is going to be very important . 
So I hope the United States is using what influence it has to try to make sure that there 's a transition that makes sense and does n't lead to chaos or allowing any one group to capture the political process . '' 
Mubarak 's announcement that he would end his 30 years of rule in September came after massive protests in Egypt for the past eight days . 
But many protesters proclaimed they were unsatisfied with his statement and called for him to leave office immediately . 
The author and host of CNN 's `` Fareed Zakaria GPS '' spoke to CNN on Thursday . 
Here is an edited transcript : CNN : What do you think of the way the administration is handling the crisis in Egypt ? 
Fareed Zakaria : I think the administration is getting the balance right now , if reports are correct that President Obama has delivered a message to Mubarak that urges him to announce that he will not seek the presidency again . 
But privately U.S. officials should be further urging that he announce a transition plan immediately . 
He wo n't be able to stick around till September . 
CNN : So what should happen next ? 
Zakaria : The best course would be for Mubarak to get ahead of these events and announce a process by which it is clear that he is not going to be president . 
I think there is a technical problem that most people have not focused on . 
Under the Egyptian constitution , if Mubarak resigns , it immediately triggers a new election within 60 days . 
And in the midst of everything that is going on in Egypt , that is not the ideal solution . 
So perhaps what he should do is announce that he 's going to resign at a certain point -- but in the interim create a constitutional committee that can amend or rewrite the Egyptian constitution so that all elections , parliamentary or presidential , take place under new rules which will be free and fair , unlike the old rules that were completely stacked in favor of Mubarak and his party . 
CNN : What 's the potential path to democracy in Egypt ? 
Zakaria : I think there will have to be a much greater role for public participation , elections and democracy . 
The more difficult part is : Will there be a transition to constitutionalism , the rule of law and the protection of human rights ? 
That 's always been the tricky part in these kinds of circumstances . 
You want to make sure that you have protections for minorities , protections for individual rights , independent courts , freedom of press , freedom of association and all those things tend to be the real inner stuffing of democracy . 
That 's why I think having some kind of process and a constitutional order become very important . 
You know , these sound like technicalities , but at the moment of transition how you deal with these questions has a huge impact on the kind of eventual political system you end up with . 
CNN : Why is that so crucial ? 
Zakaria : If you look at Iraq , it was the decisions made in the first month -LRB- after Saddam Hussein 's rule ended -RRB- that ended up creating the climate for what became a civil war . 
We should try as much as we can to help the Egyptians understand that what they want is a transition that ends up producing stable liberal democracy . 
Obama on Egypt : Change must happen now Cleric : ` Islamic uprising ' in Egypt The other key is the role of the army . 
People have n't completely recognized that Egypt is really a military dictatorship , with a civilian at the top . 
The army is not going to quietly allow for a democratic order that completely takes away all its powers and privilege , so the army will want to have a very strong role in the process , and that is probably inevitable -- and maybe where the United States has much of its influence because we have maintained pretty good contacts with the army . 
CNN : Is a strong role for the army compatible with a more democratic Egypt ? 
Zakaria : It 's compatible as long as the army understands it ca n't be the old system . 
In Turkey the army effectively ran the country and began to yield power . 
It 's happened in other countries as well . 
But unless there 's a real process put in place you could easily end up with a pseudo democracy like Pakistan where civilians are elected , but the military wields the real power . 
CNN : What are the implications of this for the wider Arab world ? 
Zakaria : The implications of this will be substantial because Egypt is the heart and soul of the Arab world . 
The two biggest political movements in the Arab world in the past 50 years have been pan-Arabism or Arab nationalism and Islamic fundamentalism , both of them were centered in Egypt -- pan-Arabism with Nasser and Islamic fundamentalism with the Muslim Brotherhood and also al Qaeda , which was largely a marriage of Egyptian brains and Saudi Arabian money . 
You can already see the implications in Jordan . 
I do n't think it means there will be a domino effect and you will see regimes all over the Mideast toppling . 
But I think you will certainly see a greater demand for accountability and reform , and without any question it will rattle regimes like Syria , and Libya . 
Whether or not they fall will be a case by case situation . 
Most of these regimes are very tough police states , so it is not really that easy to protest or do things that would undermine the regime . 
But I think we 're entering a new era in the Middle East , and I think it 's impossible that things will remain the same in any of those countries . 
CNN : Was America blindsided by these events ? 
Zakaria : I do n't think that 's true . 
The Americans for 15 years now have been urging the Mubarak regime to engage in serious political reforms . 
The reality is that people sometimes exaggerate American influence . 
And there was in Washington a concern that you did need Egypt to maintain a peaceful border with Israel , to enforce the embargo on Hamas , to fight al Qaeda and other terrorist groups . 
Now perhaps this led to us not pushing political reform strongly enough . 
But since the presidency of Bush senior , Washington has been pushing these issues . 
The truth is that the Mubarak regime was a very tough unyielding regime that had decided that it was not going to do any political reform . 
I think that in the face of that , it was difficult to see how we could have had a huge impact . 
But the broader point I 'd make is that the reason this is happening in Egypt is that they are aware of the wider world , they are aware that the United States was pushing for reform . 
They see openness in other parts of the world . 
This is partly a desire of Egypt to catch up with the rest of the world and become like other modern countries . 
Watch Fareed Zakaria GPS Sundays at 10am and 1pm ET . 
For the latest from Fareed Zakaria GPS click here . 
