By Lyse Doucet BBC News , Zaatari refugee camp , Jordan Foreign Minister Nasir Judah told the BBC 's Lyse Doucet that Jordan 's resources were under strain A dry , hot wind blows across the Jordanian desert , coating a freshly pitched city of tents with a fine film of dust . 
`` No-one would want to live in a tent here , '' admits Andrew Harper , head of the UN 's refugee agency , the UNHCR , in Jordan . 
But for hundreds of Syrians fleeing across the border every day , Jordan 's first official refugee camp is their only safe haven from the growing violence at home . 
On Saturday night , nearly 2,000 Syrians are reported to have made the increasingly dangerous escape to Jordan , marking what officials describe as a dramatic increase in the exodus . 
They make heroic journeys to get here from their homes in Syria '' End Quote Maria Calivis Unicef `` We tried for months to delay the opening of official camps , '' reflected Jordan 's Foreign Minister Nasser Judeh . 
`` We have our conscience but we also have our realities on the ground . 
`` A lot of Syrians came here over the past 15 to 16 months and stayed with family and friends , but it puts a burden on resources like water , health , education and energy , '' he told me , against the backdrop of a long straight line of empty , cream colored tents flapping in the desert wind . 
Mr Judeh and Interior Minister Ghalib Al Zu'abi joined several ambassadors under a rough tarpaulin marquee in the scorching summer heat to mark a new , more visible , phase in Jordan 's response to a deepening humanitarian crisis . 
The authorities will gradually begin moving the first 5-600 refugees from some of the overcrowded `` transit camps '' into this new facility . 
Initially , the UN expects to house 10,000 refugees here , but it has been given enough land to eventually provide for 100,000 people . 
The UN says 37,000 Syrians have registered as refugees in Jordan `` Jordan is providing the land , the water , the electricity but what we need in money , it 's as simple as that , '' underlined the UNHCR 's Andrew Harper . 
`` Everyone talks about refugees , but helping refugees is something different , '' he insisted . 
`` We hope that in the holy month of Ramadan Jordan 's neighbors , particularly in the Gulf , will step forward and do more . '' 
Jordan has long been a refuge for people fleeing in waves in a troubled neighborhood . 
But it has put the kingdom under constant strain with its meager natural resources , fragile economy , and its own political fault lines . 
We are extremely vigilant - nothing comes ahead of our own security '' End Quote Nasser Judeh Jordanian foreign minister The foreign minister said 142,000 Syrians had arrived in Jordan over the past year . 
The UN says some 37,000 have registered as refugees and the numbers are expected to keep climbing . 
`` Seventy-five per cent of the refugees are women and children , '' pointed out Maria Calivis , Regional Director for Unicef . 
`` They make heroic journeys to get here from their homes in Syria . '' 
`` Now these tented camps are a new level of challenge , an immense challenge , '' she told me as we made our way through a row of tent pegs . 
On Friday , six-year-old Bilal died en route to Jordan . 
The little boy was shot dead by Syrian forces as he let go of his mother 's hand when the whole family , including his father , a soldier , tried to flee . 
There are also reported to have been `` minor clashes '' as Jordanian border guards tried to provide covering fire . 
The incident highlighted the risk of tensions spilling across the border , drawing Jordan deeper into this crisis . 
`` We are extremely vigilant , '' emphasised foreign minister Judeh , who said families often came under Syrian fire as they tried to escape . 
`` Nothing comes ahead of our own security . '' 
Jordan is carefully vetting those who cross legally , and keeping on eye on the many more Syrians who enter illegally , including defectors and activists . 
Look at the situation in Damascus , Aleppo , Deraa , and Homs . 
This is a real crisis '' Sources say another reason why Amman delayed the establishment of a highly visible refugee camp is the impact it could have on already strained bilateral relations with Damascus . 
Both watch each other warily , fearing efforts to destabilise their own internal politics . 
Jordan has been able to keep a lid on its own small but unprecedented protests , responding to calls for change and against corruption with a limited program of reform . 
Its own politics have long been complicated by its neighbors ' violent conflicts . 
`` Jordan is full , '' said Mr Harper . 
`` Aside from the Syrians , there are still Iraqi and Palestinian refugees here . '' 
`` Look at the situation in Damascus , Aleppo , Deraa , and Homs . 
This is a real crisis . '' 
It is a crisis , affecting all of Syria 's neighbors , that is not going away anytime soon , which means the refugees look set to stay too . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
