\* Capital spending to rise 2012-2015 , overheads frozen \* Budget to assume ambitious oil production ABUJA , Oct 5 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Nigeria plans to end costly fuel subsidies in the 2012 fiscal year to release funds for infrastructure projects and to create jobs , while overall spending next year is likely to rise , according to plans sent for lawmakers approval . 
Subsidising the cost of fuel , mainly diesel , petrol and kerosene , costs the government 1.2 trillion naira -LRB- $ 7.5 billion -RRB- in lost revenues but removing the support will be unpopular with many Nigerians who see it as the only benefit they gain from living in an oil-rich country . 
Previous efforts to remove subsidies have resulted in nationwide strike action in Africa 's most populous nation , where most people live on less than $ 2 a day . 
There have been several protests this year in anticipation of deregulation . 
`` A major component of the policy of fiscal consolidation is the government 's intent to phase out the fuel subsidy beginning from 2012 fiscal year , '' said a 2012-2015 Medium Term Fiscal Framework -LRB- MTFF -RRB- and Medium Term Expenditure Framework -LRB- MTEF -RRB- paper . 
`` This will free up about 1.2 trillion naira in savings , part of which can be deployed into providing safety nets for poor segments of society to ameliorate the effects of the subsidy removal , '' the federal government document said . 
The document is with the national assembly . 
How quickly lawmakers pass the plans will give an indication of how soon and the next budget will be ready for implementation . 
The 2011 budget process was chaotic after lawmakers inflated spending plans before the president reduced them again , finally passing the budget in May . 
Finance Minister and Coordinator of the Economy , Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala , has pledged to avoid the problems of the 2011 budget by getting the spending plans organised earlier . 
The fiscal strategy paper hints that the government will forward a 4.8 trillion naira budget for 2012 to the national assembly later this month , up from around 4.5 trillion in this year 's budget passed in May . 
Nigeria only spends around a quarter of its budget on capital expenditure , meaning most of the billions of dollars it earns in oil revenues are spent keeping its government running . 
However , capital expenditure looks set to rise slightly to 1.32 trillion naira in 2012 as a component of the overall budget , while this should improve as overhead allocations are to be frozen until 2015 , the documents showed . 
`` Although aggregate expenditure is expected to increase from 4.8 trillion in 2012 to 5.18 trillion in 2015 , concerted efforts are being made to make savings from overheads as allocations will be frozen till 2015 , '' it said . 
Okonjo-Iweala will need to persuade lawmakers to get the budget passed when it arrives at the national assembly but they have previously fought hard to defend recurrent expenditure levels , some of which make up their large wages and expenses . 
The former World Bank chief has pledged to keep the fiscal deficit under 3 percent and if the MTFF is adhered to the deficit would be reduced to 2.69 percent next year . 
`` The Increase in capital expenditure is a welcome development , given the excesses of the recent past , in which recurrent spending was increased greatly , to the detriment of Nigeria 's oil savings and wider macroeconomic stability , '' said Razia Khan , Head of Africa Research at Standard Chartered . 
`` Even more positive is the proposal to remove the fuel subsidy put to national assembly . 
The subsidy was expensive , responsible for significant distortions and rent-seeking opportunities in the Nigerian economy , with little overall benefit . '' 
The 2012 budget will be based on the assumption of an ambitious average oil production of 2.48 million barrels per day and a benchmark price LCOc1 of $ 75 dollars per barrel . 
Nigeria 's current oil output is around 2.5 million bpd and the projections leave little room for maneuver should Nigeria suffer outages , common in the past , while global economic uncertainty by no means guarantees oil prices will stay high . 
-LRB- $ 1 = 159.300 Nigerian Nairas -RRB- -LRB- Additional reporting and writing by Joe Brock ; editing by Ron Askew -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
