BEIRUT | Wed Oct 5 , 2011 7:49 pm EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Turkey said on Wednesday it would impose sanctions on Syria despite the blocking of any U.N. measures against President Bashar al-Assad for his crackdown on dissent . 
Russia and China handed Assad a diplomatic victory on Tuesday by vetoing a Western-backed U.N. resolution that could have led to U.N. sanctions on Damascus , but Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan promised action of his own . 
`` Naturally the veto ... can not prevent sanctions , '' Erdogan said . 
`` We will of necessity implement a package of sanctions . '' 
Erdogan , who is visiting South Africa , has said he will announce the package after he visits a Syrian refugee camp in Turkey in the next few days . 
The double veto by Moscow and Beijing infuriated Western powers which have already imposed their own sanctions on Syria and were trying to pave the way for a U.N. embargo , and will reinforce Assad 's hold on power -- at least in the short term . 
`` This is a sad day for the Syrian people . 
It 's a sad day for the Security Council , '' France 's Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said . 
Germany also expressed disappointment . 
A government spokesman said the draft resolution would have been an important signal of support for many Syrians `` who for months have been taking to the streets for political freedom . '' 
Syria 's state news agency SANA said Damascus welcomed the veto . 
`` It restores hope for a balanced world ... after a long time of American and European domination which turned the Security Council 's resolutions into a tool for punishing defenders of independence and liberation , '' SANA said . 
The draft resolution received nine votes in favor and four abstentions . 
U.S. Ambassador Susan Rice said Washington was outraged and called for `` tough targeted sanctions '' on Damascus . 
Russia 's ambassador Vitaly Churkin said Moscow rejected the threat of sanctions on Syria and China 's envoy Li Baodong said Beijing opposed `` interference in -LRB- Syria 's -RRB- internal affairs . '' 
Russia has close ties with Assad 's government , which has been a client for arms sales , and has a naval maintenance facility on Syria 's Mediterranean coast . 
Beijing and Moscow , which had voiced concern that the draft could pave the way for Libya-style military intervention , also want to limit Western influence in the Middle East , while the United States and Europe have long sought to loosen Syria 's alliance with Iran . 
Assad has used tanks and troops to crush an uprising which erupted in March , inspired by regional revolts which toppled three North African leaders this year . 
The United Nations says 2,700 civilians have been killed . 
Damascus blames the violence on foreign-backed armed groups which it says have killed at least 700 security personnel . 
Syria 's economy is reeling from the impact of the unrest and U.S. and European sanctions on the small but key oil sector . 
Assad faces a more united opposition after groups in exile came together in Istanbul on Sunday to call for his downfall , but the U.N. vote marks a setback to his opponents who had hoped for an escalation in international pressure on Damascus . 
`` We deeply regret the positions of Russia and China toward the resolution , '' said Omar Idlibi of the grassroots Local Coordination Committee in Beirut , adding he had `` not lost hope in the international community . '' 
Idlibi said the opposition was studying options including a general strike or civil disobedience campaign , but analysts said Assad did not look threatened in the immediate future . 
`` The mere fact that Assad can avoid international sanctions for the time being reinforces his position in the short term , '' said Ayham Kamel from the Eurasia thinktank . 
`` Assad is going to remain in power in the near term . 
I do n't think there are signs of imminent collapse but Syria faces challenges across the country -- the economy , insecurity across the country , and a more organized opposition . '' 
Syria banned most imports last month to try and conserve dwindling foreign currency reserves , but rescinded the measure on Tuesday after a spike in prices and disquiet among an influential merchant class that has been backing Assad . 
Turkish sanctions could also have a major impact . 
But Turkish officials have made clear that any measures will target Assad 's government and not the Syrian people . 
For this reason Turkey has ruled out cutting off electricity sales or reducing the flow of water in the Euphrates river into Syria . 
Bilateral trade between Turkey and Syria was worth $ 2.5 billion in 2010 , and Turkish firms had investments of $ 260 million in Syria One target of sanctions is likely to be Syria 's state banking system , which could effectively block purchases of Syrian crude oil . 
Other possible measures could freeze Turkish cooperation in oil and gas projects involving state-run firms . 
State television broadcast an interview on Wednesday with a young woman who denied reports by rights groups last month that she had been killed and mutilated , possibly in state custody . 
The mother of Zainab al-Hosni , 18 , from the city of Homs , confirmed that the woman on television was her daughter , who was reported to have killed after disappearing in July , Human Rights Watch said . 
`` We spoke to the family and they were able to confirm that the person who appeared on TV was Zainab , '' said Nadim Houry of HRW in Beirut . 
`` The mother said she was her daughter . '' 
Hosni became an icon for the Syrian revolt against Assad after the body of a badly burned , decapitated woman was found in a morgue by Hosni 's family , according to reports by HRW and Amnesty International . 
After months of peaceful protests , some army deserters and dissidents have taken up arms , prompting military operations against them , especially in areas bordering Turkey and Jordan . 
Colonel Riad al-Asaad , a Syrian officer who defected and fled to Turkey , said last week 10,000 soldiers had deserted , but authorities have denied any army defections , saying the military operations were a response to appeals by residents . 
Assad retains control of the military , whose mostly Sunni Muslim rank and file are largely commanded by officers of his minority Alawite sect . 
Syria has mostly closed its doors to independent media , making it hard to verify events , but a trickle of desertions appears to have gathered pace in the last several weeks . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
In Syria Russia has military installations , so Syrian people that want democracy are killed by Syrian soldiers using Russian , T-64 , T-85 I suppose tanks . 
I SEE NO DIFFERENCE , if anybody is brilliant to perceive it please comment . 
Well in fact fate of Bahraini is far worse than Syrian , but it is a different story ... What is the address of the site with unbiased news , just news ? 
, why to have info I have to read simultanously : US news , China news,AL-Jazeera , and so on , it is time consuming ... This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
