NEW : Dutch authorities confirm 2 people shown on Libyan TV are captured crew members Libyan state TV says the aircraft was a fighter helicopter with no permission to enter The crew was trying to rescue a Dutch citizen from Libya when armed men captured them `` Intensive negotiations '' are under way to get them freed , the Dutch defense ministry says Are you in Libya ? 
Share your protest photos and video with CNN , but only if you can do so safely . 
-LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Dutch authorities continued to press Thursday for the release of three Navy personnel captured by armed men loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi days earlier during an evacuation operation . 
`` Intensive diplomatic negotiations '' are going on between Dutch and Libyan authorities and relatives of the crew are being kept informed , said Otte Beeksma , a spokesman for the Dutch Ministry of Defense . 
The crew members were trying to evacuate a Dutch citizen from the Sirte area when they were taken prisoner , he said . 
They deployed in a Lynx helicopter from the HMS Tromp , anchored off the Libyan coast , he said . 
A report on Libyan state television stated that the crew was in a fighter helicopter rather than one used for transportation or rescue . 
It claimed the aircraft did not have permission from Libyan authorities to enter the country , a violation of international law . 
The state TV broadcast showed pictures of those believed to be the crew , as well as the helicopter and images of weapons . 
After looking at the still pictures and video , Dutch authorities confirmed Thursday that at least two of the three people shown on the Libyan state TV footage are captured helicopter crew members , according to Beeksma . 
Beeksma said that the ship 's communications officer and Dutch consular authorities tried to negotiate the crew 's release soon after they were taken captive , but they were not immediately successful . 
The Dutch citizen they were trying to rescue and another European Union national have been transferred to the Dutch Embassy in Tripoli , Beeksma said , without saying whether the Dutch Navy had made contact with them . 
News of their capture has not been made public until now , to prevent further endangering the Navy personnel involved , Beeksma said . 
CNN 's Per Nyberg contributed to this report . 
