The growing humanitarian crisis in Libya and the flood of people fleeing into Tunisia -LRB- above -RRB- are increasing pressure on the U.S. and Western allies to react more forcefully . 
CNN Pentagon correspondent Christopher Lawrence shares insights into Libya situation Arab League has said it is against any foreign intervention in Libya Lawrence : United States still has the ability to impose a successful no-fly zone U.S. unlikely to divert troops , material from Afghanistan to Libya , Lawrence says Editor 's note : Christopher Lawrence is a Pentagon correspondent for CNN\/U . 
S. Previously , Lawrence had worked as a correspondent for CNN based out of the network 's Los Angeles and Chicago bureaus . 
He is also a veteran of the U.S. Navy Reserve . 
-LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The people 's revolt against Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi remains dangerous -- and fluid . 
On Thursday , U.S. military aircraft and French charter jets joined efforts to get tens of thousands of people fleeing the fighting back home as the United Nations called for stepped-up aid to refugees . 
The humanitarian gestures came a day after Gadhafi warned that `` thousands will die '' if the United States or its allies attack Libya , and Defense Secretary Robert Gates cautioned members of Congress of the difficulties that would be inherent in such a move . 
CNN.com turned to Pentagon correspondent Christopher Lawrence for some insights into the complexity of the situation . 
Question : The Arab League has said it is against any foreign intervention in Libya , even though it has called for Gadhafi to leave . 
Is it possible for the U.S. and its allies to work around this ? 
Calls for military action in Libya Tired , filthy and stuck at border Christopher Lawrence : The United States still has the ability to impose a successful no-fly zone , even without the Arab League , -LRB- but -RRB- Defense Secretary Robert Gates is extremely hesitant to project American military power into this conflict -- especially a highly visible symbol like U.S. fighter jets . 
Question : If a no-fly zone is to be enforced , Robert Gates has said it must begin with attacks against Libyan air defenses . 
`` That 's the way you do a no-fly zone , '' he told a House committee . 
He also said such an engagement is not possible with a nation the size of Libya `` with the planes you would find on a single aircraft carrier . '' 
Chief of Naval Operations Gary Roughead indicated that the USS George H.W. Bush is still in Norfolk , Virginia . 
Is the sense here that the clock is ticking and it might be too late for the U.S. to mount a meaningful no-fly operation on its own ? 
Lawrence : Part of Gates ' comment about `` not enough planes on one carrier '' refers to the fact the United States would not undertake this mission unilaterally . 
So even if the USS GHW Bush arrived , the Pentagon would not want to solely depend on U.S. assets . 
They would be expecting to use some land bases in Italy , for example , which has recently suspended its `` friendship treaty '' with Libya . 
That conceivably opens up Italy to the ability to stage missions . 
And British Prime Minister David Cameron has already signaled the British military to start working up plans with allies in case a decision is reached to impose a no-fly zone . 
Question : What are the main issues that need to be addressed if the decision is made to enforce a no-fly zone ? 
Lawrence : There would need to be numerous answers to `` rules of engagement '' questions first : -- What 's considered a `` hostile act '' ? 
-- Is it Libyans firing on other Libyans -- or coalition planes ? 
-- Would the U.S. jets be able to fire on Libyan air assets on the ground , before they take off ? 
There is a sense that before any no-fly zone is imposed , the United States and its allies need to answer a fundamental question : Is this no-fly zone being enforced to protect the Libyan people on humanitarian grounds ? 
Or is it being enforced to help the Libyan people overthrow Gadhafi ? 
It sounds simple , but each answer can come with vastly different rules of engagement . 
Question : Would the Obama administration consider the possibility of redeploying any troops and materiel from Iraq or Afghanistan ? 
Lawrence : I have n't heard talk of any -LRB- redeployment of -RRB- forces and\/or equipment of any real scope mentioned . 
Afghanistan is such a priority right now . 
With the president 's July 2011 date to at least symbolically start the withdrawal , it 's hard to conceive assets being diverted from there to Libya . 
This is unlike say Bahrain , where the U.S. bases its all-important 5th Fleet or even Egypt , which keeps the peace with Israel . 
Libya does not rise to a level of strategic importance that officials would take assets from Afghanistan . 
CNN.com 's Cameron Tankersley contributed to this report . 
