Monday 14 February 2005 13.32 GMT More than 50 journalists and media workers have been killed in Iraq in the last two years CNN 's top news executive has quit abruptly after 23 years following claims he accused US forces of deliberately targeting journalists in Iraq . 
Eason Jordan said he was resigning to prevent the news giant being `` unfairly tarnished '' by his remarks , which he claims were misinterpreted . 
`` After 23 years at CNN , I have decided to resign in an effort to prevent CNN from being unfairly tarnished by the controversy over conflicting accounts of my recent remarks regarding the alarming number of journalists killed in Iraq , '' Jordan told staff in a memo . 
`` I have devoted my professional life to helping make CNN the most trusted and respected news outlet in the world , and I would never do anything to compromise my work or that of the thousands of talented people it is my honor to work alongside . '' 
Jordan 's alleged remarks , made during a panel discussion at the World Economic Forum in Davos , caused a huge controversy after they were reported on the internet . 
CNN faced calls from bloggers to produce a transcript of the remarks and to fire its chief news executive if the accusations turned out to be true . 
Announcing his resignation on Friday , Jordan insisted he had never `` stated , believed or suspected that US military forces intended to kill people they knew to be journalists '' , but conceded that his comments `` were not as clear as they should have been '' . 
`` I never meant to imply US forces acted with ill intent when US forces accidentally killed journalists , and I apologise to anyone who thought I said or believed otherwise , '' he added . 
CNN 's president , Jim Walton , paid tribute to Jordan , saying he had `` served CNN and the pursuit of journalism with distinction '' . 
Jordan has lobbied the Pentagon to improve the safety of journalists in Iraq and other war zones where US forces are present . 
At a news conference last autumn he expressed frustration with the US authorities , saying there had been only a `` limited amount of progress '' , despite repeated meetings with news organizations . 
`` We hear good words but not the actions to back them up , '' he told an audience of news executives at the News Xchange conference in November . 
More than 50 journalists and media workers have been killed in Iraq since the US-led invasion nearly two years ago . 
To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or phone 02072399857 If you are writing a comment for publication , please mark clearly `` for publication '' . 
