Monday 14 February 2005 17.14 GMT The first full day after Iraq 's election results were announced saw three Iraqi troops die in a roadside bomb , two Baghdad police shot dead in a drive-by shooting , an oil pipeline detonated and a woman and child killed by a mortar attack . 
As the newly elected politicians attempted to agree on a power sharing coalition behind closed doors - a process expected to last weeks - it was also reported that a kidnapped Swedish man had been threatened with decapitation by his purported hostage-takers . 
Meanwhile , in Washington the White House requested a supplementary $ 80bn -LRB- # 42bn -RRB- from Congress to fund the ongoing costs of military operations in both Iraq and Afghanistan . 
Around the world , leaders welcomed last night 's election results as a positive step in Iraq 's evolution . 
On the ground in Iraq , a roadside bomb killed three National Guards when it was detonated in Baqouba , 35 miles northeast of Baghdad , Mudafar Al-Juburi from the Dyala police station said . 
Three soldiers were wounded , he added . 
The oilfield attack occurred at the North Oil Company 's Al-Dibbis oilfield near Kirkuk , said Major General Anwar Mohammad Amin . 
The pipeline supplied oil for internal use and the damage will hamper the country 's oil production , he said . 
It would take workers at least three days to extinguish the blaze and repair the pipeline , Amin added . 
An insurgent mortar attack in Samarra , 60 miles north of Baghdad , killed a woman and a two-year-old girl , as well as injuring seven others , said Dr Alaa Al-Din Muhammed of Samarra Hospital . 
In Baghdad , gunmen firing from a car killed two high-ranking policemen on Sunday night , an interior ministry official said . 
He provided no other details . 
Insurgents also fired six mortars at a police station in central Baghdad , injuring three , police said . 
The violence comes after election officials announced the results of the January 30 elections . 
A Shia Muslim clergy-backed slate won 48 % of the votes and 140 of the 275 National Assembly seats , according to results released on Sunday in Baghdad . 
A Kurdish ticket got 26 % and 75 seats , while a secular Shia party won 40 seats . 
Nine parties divided the remaining 20 seats . 
The announcement of the election results , however , did nothing to slow down the violence . 
The kidnappers of a Swedish citizen have demanded a ransom for his freedom and threatened to decapitate him if they do n't receive it , a Stockholm radio station reported today . 
The kidnappers , who call themselves The Martyr al-Isawy Brigades , also want Sweden 's King Carl XVI Gustaf to take part in negotiations for the freedom of Minas Ibrahim al-Yousifi , the purported leader of the Christian Democratic Party in Iraq , his family told Radio Joenkoeping over the weekend . 
In Brussels , the European Union today congratulated the winners of the January 30 vote and urged them to ensure all Iraqis are represented during the drafting of a new constitution . 
`` The preliminary publication of results from Iraq 's first pluralist elections marks another step forward in Iraq 's political transition , '' Benita Ferrero-Waldner , EU external affairs commissioner , said . 
`` I trust they will ensure full representation of Iraq 's diverse society in the political process , and in particular in the drafting of the constitution , '' she added . 
Many world leaders were watching closely to see whether a deal could be struck that would avert ethnic and religious conflict and quell the raging insurgency . 
Japan , a vocal backer of the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 , said it was optimistic . 
`` There may be some issues such as how to balance different groups , regional issues , as well as the vote turnout , '' said chief cabinet secretary Hiroyuki Hosoda . 
`` But we expect that these will be solved as Iraq becomes stabilised . '' 
Others called on the incoming government to play fairly with minorities . 
New Zealand 's prime minister , Helen Clark , told the country 's Newstalk ZB radio station that those elected had to make sure the Iraqi government was `` inclusive '' . 
`` The key to Iraq 's future is going to be whether the largest group can accommodate satisfactorily the interests of the two smaller groups , the Sunnis and the Kurds , '' she said . 
But the Turkish foreign ministry said in a statement that voter turnout in some regions was low and charged that there were `` imbalanced results '' in several regions , including Kirkuk . 
Turkey has long complained that Kurdish groups are illegally moving Kurds into Kirkuk , a strategic northern city , in an effort to tip the city 's population balance in their favor . 
