Monday 14 February 2005 01.50 GMT Short of improbable developments in the courts , foxhunting will become illegal in England on Friday . 
Many people reading this will , no doubt , be pleased , but I suggest that the left might pause before gloating and wipe any smiles off their faces . 
This is a very nasty piece of political work indeed and what it says about the Labor party is truly horrible . 
By now all the arguments about hunting have been exhausted , but one point needs to be made for one last time . 
Hunting is morally indefensible in strict ethical terms , but no more so than angling , which is in some ways more objectionable . 
There is , of course , the supra-ethical difference that only a quarter of a million people hunt , very few of them Labor voters , whereas 4 million people fish , and their votes are desperately needed by the government , not to say by individual Labor MPs . 
Attempts to explain this away have a wonderfully hollow ring . 
Alun Michael , the minister responsible for passing the hunting ban , has said the only tests that matter are `` cruelty and utility '' . 
Alan Milburn has been recalled to the government to mastermind the election campaign and has said on the radio , with an audible smirk , that hunting is different from fishing because foxes ca n't be eaten . 
Even he may be aware that by far the largest part of recreational fishing in this country is what is called competition angling , catching harmless and specifically inedible coarse fish by sheer volume . 
This pastime has neither culinary nor environmental justification of any kind , and has been called pure sadism . 
Let me leave it there , while asking Michael , Milburn or any other member of the government to defend competition angling in terms of cruelty and utility . 
All this is by the way , since everyone must recognize by now that the hunting controversy long ago took on a life of its own and ceased to be debated in any real terms of right or wrong . 
Its true importance lies the role it has come to play in Labor politics , and above all in the squalid , and frankly humiliating , relationship between Tony Blair and his party . 
For Labor MPs , hunting has become a displacement activity , a means in which they try to persuade themselves - against all evidence - that they still belong to a radical movement . 
For the government it has been a vital sop to buy off discontent in the ranks , up to and including the most appalling betrayal of what the party once stood for . 
It is of real historical significance that this ban has not come about under what anyone can honestly call a government of the left . 
By any objective standards , New Labor is a centre-right party , and it is hard to argue with Martin Jacques when he says that Blair personally stands to the right of every postwar prime minister apart from his heroine , Margaret Thatcher . 
Hence , in its roundabout way , the importance of this one irrelevant issue . 
Hence also the way that political defences of the ban backfire . 
The Labor MP Peter Bradley has said that it `` is not about the politics of envy but the politics of power '' . 
This was misrepresented by the Tory press as a declaration of class war . 
Others , too , were happy to pick up his torch : `` There 's nothing like a bit of class war , '' said one Guardian writer . 
This is n't class war as Kautsky and Lenin understood it , or Hardie and Bevan . 
Let us never forget the guiding principle of our present rulers : `` New Labor is intensely relaxed about people getting filthy rich . '' 
No one could accuse Peter Mandelson of ambiguity when he said that , nor deny that his party has lived up to that precept . 
The Blair government worships money and adores the rich , something Labor MPs try ineffectually to disguise when they attack the traditional -LRB- though long since eclipsed -RRB- values and mores of the old gentry . 
Class conflict has given way to `` culture wars '' , and hunting is a cultural and not a political question . 
It certainly has nothing to do with left and right , unless one were to suppose that the `` Blairite loyalist '' and fanatical exponent of the hunting ban Sir Gerald Kaufman is further to the left of that hard man to hounds Friedrich Engels , which does n't seem very likely . 
All that is overshadowed by Blair 's sordid dealings with the party he leads but which has never really liked him . 
When the prime minister returned from sojourning in Bermuda last year to announce his ludicrous volte-face on the European referendum , he is supposed to have told a colleague : `` I 'm going to have a lot of shit to eat '' . 
Maybe so , but nothing compared with the diet he has imposed on his party for the past 10 years , that mighty coprophagic banquet , that great orgy of ordure . 
Over and again , and to a degree quite unprecedented in political history , Labor MPs have been ordered to support ministers they despised and vote for measures they have detested . 
The cut in benefit for single parents mattered much less economically than psychologically . 
With that , Blair showed that he had completely broken the will of his MPs , who would thereafter accept anything - even a war that almost none of them wanted . 
At the same time , hunting was brought back at regular intervals to propitiate the resentful and self-hating parliamentary party . 
Many people , among them Jackie Ashley and Polly Toynbee on these pages , have asked the same thing : why on earth was so much time spent on hunting when parliament had so many more important questions to deal with ? 
But that has been answered by another eminent political journalist . 
For those who do n't know the figures , by the way , more than 700 hours of parliamentary time were devoted to the hunting ban , as against seven hours spent on the decision to invade Iraq , a comparison that sums up the way we are governed . 
On the evening the ban was passed , Martha Kearney on Newsnight described the political background , and the government 's motives last year in taking up the hunting bill once again . 
As she said quite matter-of-factly , `` it was brought back to restore morale after the war in Iraq '' . 
So there you have it . 
This was a crust thrown to Labor MPs to thank them for supporting an unnecessary , illegal and immoral war , which Blair took this country into simply to demonstrate his uncritical loyalty to the most reactionary American president in living memory , and which has killed at least 20,000 and possibly 100,000 innocent people . 
As the election approaches , with a further drop in turn-out all too likely , politicians are wondering why they are so widely despised . 
Here is their answer . 
Blair got his war , Labor got their hunting ban . 
I hope it makes them all happy . 
Geoffrey Wheatcroft 's book , The Strange Death of Tory England , will be published next month Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
