`` We all failed , '' CNBC correspondent Charlie Gasparino says of news outlets missing the danger signs of the current economic crisis . 
-LRB- Cnbc -RRB- Washington Post columnist Steven Pearlstein says his columns last year about a then-looming crisis were often dismissed . 
-LRB- By Alex Wong -- Getty Images For `` Meet The Press '' -RRB- David Brancaccio of PBS says journalists too often accept what `` smart people hand down to us . '' 
-LRB- By Peter Krogh -- Pbs -RRB- Charlie Gasparino was so anxious to get on the air that he phoned in to CNBC , rather than walking to the studio , to report that nervous federal authorities were considering a bailout of the insurance giant AIG . 
`` I was sweating through my underwear . 
That was scary , '' the correspondent says of his mid-September story , which was n't confirmed until that night . 
When his colleagues said on the air that their own sources were expecting AIG to go bankrupt instead , `` that freaked me out . '' 
The stakes are enormous in a fast-moving crisis where the traditional concern about journalists causing a run on the bank is hardly a theoretical danger . 
But as news organizations chase exclusives about the Wall Street meltdown , they also are grappling with a troubling question : Why did n't they see this coming ? 
`` We all failed , '' says Gasparino , a former Wall Street Journal and Newsweek reporter . 
`` What we did n't understand was that this was building up . 
We all bear responsibility to a certain extent . '' 
The shaky house of financial cards that has come tumbling down was erected largely in public view : overextended investment banks , risky practices by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , exotic mortgage instruments that became part of a shadow banking system . 
But while these were conveyed in incremental stories -- and a few whistle-blowing columns -- the business press never conveyed a real sense of alarm until institutions began to collapse . 
`` Did we not accent that enough ? 
Put it above the fold , or on the cover of Fortune , or lead off the television shows ? '' 
asks Fortune Managing Editor Andy Serwer . 
`` Yeah , that 's probably true . '' 
At the same time , he says , `` if we had written stories in late 2000 saying this whole thing 's going to collapse , people would have said , ` Ha ha , maybe , ' and gone about their business . '' 
After being burned by years of cheerleading before the dot-com collapse , the media warned repeatedly that the surge in housing prices might turn out to be a bubble . 
But the emphasis was generally on the potential toll on homeowners , not the banks that would be left holding bagfuls of bad loans . 
As in the savings-and-loan scandal of the late 1980s , the press was a day late and several dollars short . 
Marcus Brauchli , The Washington Post 's new executive editor , who was the Journal 's top editor until this past spring , says no policymaker who followed those papers , the New York Times , the Financial Times and CNBC could have been unaware of the explosive growth of derivatives that embedded debt across the financial system . 
Still , he says , `` I regret that when I was at the Journal , we did n't keep the focus on some of these questions , including the possible moral hazard posed by the structure of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
These are really difficult issues to convey to a popular audience ... You do have an obligation as a journalist to push important issues into the public consciousness . 
We also have to remember you 're pushing against a powerful force , which is greed . '' 
It is not easy for journalists to take on the masters of the financial universe , especially when the market is going up and everyone is happy . 
Franklin Raines , then chief executive of Fannie Mae -- which was seized by the government last month -- complained to Brauchli about critical Journal stories in 2001 . 
Gasparino , who also broke the news about the Treasury bailout plan , says debt-rating agencies cried foul with his Journal bosses when he challenged their approach -LRB- some of today 's now-toxic loans , he notes , were rated AAA -RRB- . 
PBS 's David Brancaccio says that `` we journalists have had a long history with accepting what the smart people hand down to us , especially on complicated stuff ... When I would cover these very issues about problems with regulation , problems with ` is this a disaster waiting to happen ? ' 
people would say : ` Well , young man , you do n't have an MBA like I do . 
We went to business school . ' '' 
Post business columnist Steven Pearlstein , who won a Pulitzer Prize for columns last year warning about the magnitude of the coming crisis , says he was often dismissed as a pro-regulation zealot or gadfly critic of Alan Greenspan . 
`` The business press tends to get in with the people that they cover , '' he told me in a CNN interview . 
`` They get in the bubble that is Wall Street , just like political reporters get in the bubble that is the White House and the traveling press of the campaign ... and they do n't see the obvious things . '' 
