The financial turmoil has pushed the Obama campaign into the lead , and this is mostly justified . 
Barack Obama is more thoughtful on the economy than his opponent , and his bench of advisers is superior . 
But there 's a troubling side to the Democratic advance . 
The claim that the financial crisis reflects Bush-McCain deregulation is not only nonsense . 
It is the sort of nonsense that could matter . 
The real roots of the crisis lie in a flawed response to China . 
Starting in the 1990s , the flood of cheap products from China kept global inflation low , allowing central banks to operate relatively loose monetary policies . 
But the flip side of China 's export surplus was that China had a capital surplus , too . 
Chinese savings sloshed into asset markets ` round the world , driving up the price of everything from Florida condos to Latin American stocks . 
That gave central bankers a choice : Should they carry on targeting regular consumer inflation , which Chinese exports had pushed down , or should they restrain asset inflation , which Chinese savings had pushed upward ? 
Alan Greenspan 's Fed chose to stand aside as asset prices rose ; it preferred to deal with bubbles after they popped by cutting interest rates rather than by preventing those bubbles from inflating . 
After the dot-com bubble , this clean-up-later policy worked fine . 
With the real estate bubble , it has proved disastrous . 
So the first cause of the crisis lies with the Fed , not with deregulation . 
If too much money was lent and borrowed , it was because Chinese savings made capital cheap and the Fed was not aggressive enough in hiking interest rates to counteract that . 
Moreover , the Fed 's track record of cutting interest rates to clear up previous bubbles had created a seductive one-way bet . 
Financial engineers built huge mountains of debt partly because they expected to profit in good times -- and then be rescued by the Fed when they got into trouble . 
Of course , the financiers did create those piles of debt , and they certainly deserve some blame for today 's crisis . 
But was the financiers ' miscalculation caused by deregulation ? 
The key financiers in this game were not the mortgage lenders , the ratings agencies or the investment banks that created those now infamous mortgage securities . 
In different ways , these players were all peddling financial snake oil , but as Columbia University 's Charles Calomiris observes , there will always be snake-oil salesmen . 
Rather , the key financiers were the ones who bought the toxic mortgage products . 
If they had n't been willing to buy snake oil , nobody would have been peddling it . 
Who were the purchasers ? 
They were by no means unregulated . 
U.S. investment banks , regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission , bought piles of toxic waste . 
U.S. commercial banks , regulated by several agencies , including the Fed , also devoured large quantities . 
European banks , which faced a different and supposedly more up-to-date supervisory scheme , turn out to have been just as rash . 
By contrast , lightly regulated hedge funds resisted buying toxic waste for the most part -- though they are now vulnerable to the broader credit crunch because they operate with borrowed money . 
If that does n't convince you that deregulation is the wrong scapegoat , consider this : The appetite for toxic mortgages was fueled by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , the super-regulated housing finance companies . 
Calomiris calculates that Fannie and Freddie bought more than a third of the $ 3 trillion in junk mortgages created during the bubble and that they did so because heavy government oversight obliged them to push money toward marginal home purchasers . 
There 's a vigorous argument about whether Calomiris 's number is too high . 
But everyone concedes that Fannie and Freddie poured fuel on the fire to the tune of hundreds of billions of dollars . 
So blaming deregulation for the financial mess is misguided . 
But it is dangerous , too , because one of the big challenges for the next president will be to defend markets against the inevitable backlash that follows this crisis . 
Even before finance went haywire , the Doha trade negotiations had collapsed ; wage stagnation for middle-class Americans had raised legitimate questions about whom the market system served ; and the food-price spike had driven many emerging economies to give up on global agricultural markets as a source of food security . 
Coming on top of all these challenges , the financial turmoil is bound to intensify skepticism about markets . 
Framing the mess as the product of deregulation will make the backlash nastier . 
The next president will have to make some subtle choices . 
In certain areas , markets need to be reformed -- by pushing murky `` over-the-counter '' trades between banks onto transparent exchanges , for example . 
In other areas , government needs to fix itself -- by not subsidizing reckless mortgage lending . 
But a president who has a mandate only to reregulate will be a boxer with a missing glove . 
By going along with the market skepticism of his party , Obama may end up winning an election while compromising his presidency . 
