NEW : Ban says further steps on Libya may be necessary U.S. officials have frozen at least $ 30 billion in Libyan government assets U.S. President Barack Obama meets Monday with U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon The European Union has imposed new sanctions against the Libyan regime Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The United States has frozen at least $ 30 billion in Libyan government assets , a U.S. Treasury official announced Monday -- one of a series of steps being taken by international leaders designed to break strongman Moammar Gadhafi 's grip on power . 
The $ 30 billion is the largest amount ever blocked under any sanctions program , according to David Cohen , the acting Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence . 
American officials slapped the sanctions on Libya last Friday , and the U.N. Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution on Libya on Saturday . 
President Barack Obama met Monday with U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to discuss a variety of measures under consideration . 
Ban later told reporters that `` further action may well be necessary . '' 
UN imposes sanctions on Libya For rebels , a long road to Tripoli Gadhafi `` has lost his legitimacy when he declared war on his people , '' Ban said of the Libyan leader . 
`` This is again a totally unacceptable situation . 
I sincerely hope and urge him to listen to the peoples ' call . 
That 's my message to him . '' 
All options are still on the table , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said at a meeting of the U.N. Human Rights Council in Geneva , Switzerland . 
`` Gadhafi and those around him must be held accountable -LRB- for any actions -RRB- which violate international legal obligations and common decency , '' she said . 
`` Through their actions , they have lost the legitimacy to govern . '' 
Susan Rice , U.S. ambassador to the United Nations , called Gadhafi `` delusional , '' adding that `` when he -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- can laugh when talking to American and international journalists while he is slaughtering his own people , it only underscores how unfit he is to lead and how disconnected he is from reality . '' 
The imposition of a no-fly zone over certain portions of the increasingly chaotic country is among the courses of action being contemplated , White House Press Secretary Jay Carney told reporters . 
Carney indicated that exile is `` certainly one option '' for the Libyan leader . 
He also said that American officials are `` actively reaching out '' to Libyan opponents of the ruling regime , Carney said . 
But any speculation on U.S. assistance to the Libyan rebels is premature , Rice said , calling it `` unclear at this point who will emerge as the critical opposition element . 
We await to see how the opposition will coalesce . '' 
Pentagon spokesman Col. David Lapan said the U.S. military is moving Navy ships closer to Libya . 
Two U.S. Navy warships -- the carrier USS Enterprise and the amphibious assault ship USS Kearsarge -- are currently in the Red Sea and available to assist , U.S. military officials told CNN . 
Lapan refused to indicate whether any American ground forces have been put on a heightened state of alert . 
British PrimeMinister David Cameron echoed Washington 's call for Gadhafi to step aside . 
`` We are taking every step possible to isolate the Gadhafi regime , deprive it of money , shrink its power and ensure that anyone responsible for abuses in Libya will be held to account , '' Cameron told members of Britain 's parliament Monday . 
In Brussels , the European Union banned the sale of arms and ammunition to Libya . 
It also prohibited any trade with Gadhafi 's government that could lead to the acquisition of equipment that could be used for the repression of Libyans . 
The EU also froze the assets of Gadhafi and five members of his family , while imposing a visa ban on Gadhafi and 15 other people tied to the regime 's crackdown . 
`` The massive violence against peaceful demonstrators shocks our conscience , '' EU High Representative Catherine Ashton said . 
`` It should also spring us into action . '' 
Over the weekend , Italy suspended a treaty with Libya that includes a non-aggression pact , helping to pave the way for possible military action by U.S. or NATO troops . 
Italy is home to the U.S. Navy 's Sixth Fleet . 
Kurt Volker , a former U.S. ambassador to NATO , told CNN that Italy 's suspension of the pact would not immediately suffice for military actions to be launched from that country . 
The question , from the perspective of the Italian government , is `` if you 're really trying to think about military action , do you have some kind of authorization to do so ? '' 
he said in an interview . 
`` You would need a U.N. mandate and possibly a NATO declaration or both , and there is n't anything like that on the table at the moment . '' 
But , Volker said , others in the international community may soon have to decide whether to intervene militarily . 
`` At some point we have to face the question of are we willing to help them or not , '' he said . 
The situation in Libya differs from that of Egypt , where the United States was trying to balance various interests , Volker noted . 
`` We have no countervailing interests -LRB- here -RRB- . 
... -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- has been a terrible dictator . 
He was a terror plotter . 
He blew up the plane in Lockerbie . 
So we have no reason not to be helping the people of Libya get rid of this tyrant . '' 
Despite the growing international pressure , Gadhafi stood his ground Monday . 
Protesters fearful of violence stayed off the streets in Tripoli . 
Government officials warned that thousands of people could die if the popular uprising continues . 
The death toll from the unrest -- now in its 14th day -- has already topped 1,000 , according to a U.N. estimate . 
Clinton noted Monday that U.S. humanitarian teams have been dispatched to Libya 's borders at Tunisia and Egypt . 
Washington has set aside an additional $ 10 million for humanitarian aid , including medical supplies , she noted . 
CNN 's Tom Watkins , Lesa Jansen , Kelly Marshall Smoot and Larry Shaughnessy contributed to this report 
