BP oil spill : Endangered species still at risk Deepwater Horizon spill in US leads to rise in dolphins and endangered brown pelicans injured or killed this week Monday 9 August 2010 20.39 BST Deepwater Horizon : US officials say the BP oil spill has resulted in a rise in the number of brown pelicans killed or injured in the past week . 
Photograph : Bevil Knapp\/EPA US officials recorded a big jump in the numbers of dolphins and endangered brown pelican and sea turtle injured or killed by the BP spill over the past week , even as officials were proclaiming that the oil was rapidly disappearing from the Gulf . 
Some 1,020 sea turtles were caught up in the spill , according to figures -LRB- pdf -RRB- today an ominous number for an endangered species . 
Wildlife officials collected 177 sea turtles last week more than in the first two months of the spill and a sizeable share of the 1,020 captured since the spill began more than three months ago . 
Some 517 of that total number were dead and 440 were covered in oil , according to figures maintained the Deepwater Horizon response team . 
`` It is a high number for any endangered species , '' said Elizabeth Wilson , a scientist for the Oceana conservation group . 
The number of dolphins , whales and other marine mammals captured or found dead also rose last week , from 69 to 76 . 
An analysis by the National Wildlife Federation said the numbers of oiled birds collected had nearly doubled since the well was capped , from 37 to 71 a day . 
It was not immediately clear why the numbers of injured and dead wildlife have jumped . 
Kevin Godsea , a fish and wildlife official overseeing the rescue of threatened brown pelican , said many of the more recent victims were hatchlings who took their first flights right into the oil . 
`` We had a lot of young birds hanging right around the boomed areas of rookeries , and lot of those young birds are testing out their wings and they are getting right into the oil , '' he said . 
Older pelicans exposed to oil are also able to survive much longer because of relatively warm temperatures in the Gulf , and are only succumbing now , he said . 
In addition , he said officials had purposely stayed away from island bird sanctuaries to avoid exposing hatchlings to disease . 
But that concern to avoid disturbing habitat may have put pelican eggs and hatchlings at greater risk once able-bodied pelican fled the oil . 
`` There has been a lot of criticism of fish and wildlife for the fact that they never actually went on the islands , and because they did not , abandoned nests were left so that any chicks that were already hatched died , and any eggs that were left were also left to die , '' said Cynthia Sarthou executive director of the Gulf Restoration Network . 
A version appeared on p14 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 09.06 BST on Tuesday 10 August 2010 Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
