The scientists said the `` most likely flow rate of oil today '' ranges from 35,000 to 60,000 barrels -LRB- 1.47 million and 2.52 million gallons\/5 .57 million and 9.54 million liters -RRB- per day . 
That is a significant jump from the last estimate issued by the Flow Rate Technical Group on June 10 and pegging the well 's flow at 20,000 to 40,000 barrels per day . 
And those figures were considerably higher than the previous `` best estimate '' of 12,000-19 ,000 bpd issued by the flow rate group on May 27 . 
`` This estimate brings together several scientific methodologies and the latest information from the sea floor , and represents a significant step forward in our effort to put a number on the oil that is escaping from BP 's well , '' said Energy Secretary Steven Chu . 
The team of scientists said they may revise the estimates again as they gather new data on the well , one mile beneath the ocean surface . 
Even at the minimum estimated rate of 35,000 bpd , the ruptured well has dumped nearly 2 million barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on April 20 -- nearly eight times the amount that the Exxon Valdez spilled into Prince William Sound in Alaska in 1989 . 
At the U.S. government 's direction , BP is boosting its oil capturing capacity to up to 53,000 bpd by the end of June and to 80,000 bpd by mid-July from about 18,000 bpd . 
The new estimates come from detailed pressure data taken by instruments inside BP 's oil-containment device on the sea floor over the last 24 hours , the government said . 
`` This estimate , which we will continue to refine as the scientific teams get new data and conduct new analyses , is the most comprehensive estimate so far of how much oil is flowing one mile below the ocean 's surface , '' Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said in a statement . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
She is one of the folks in DC who would cheerfully sell-out their own mother for a few dollars ... So enjoy your bangers and mash This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
