The old idiom `` in like a lion , out like a lamb '' might need some revising in 2011 . 
Based on a recent study by the University of Hawaii , March 2011 will go out more like a sea monster -- thanks to the BP oil spill . 
As BP abruptly halts efforts to cap the open Gulf Coast rig and drill a relief well , spring 2011 bodes badly . 
According to a simulation conducted by the scientists at the University of Hawaii at Manoa , oil from the Deepwater Horizon leak could reach Georgia , the Carolinas , and even Europe by day 360 of the spill . 
July 15 marks day 87 . 
The study , titled `` The long-term fate of the oil spill in the Atlantic , '' uses a high-resolution ocean flow simulator called Ocean General Circulation Model for the Earth Simulator -LRB- OFES -RRB- . 
Researchers based their analysis on the fate of 8 million buoyant particles -- which are representative of the oil spilled . 
`` The paths of the particles were calculated in eight typical years over 360 days from the beginning of the spill ... From these eight typical years , five were selected to create an animation for which the calculated extent of the spill best matches current observational estimates , '' said Fabian Schloesser , graduate assistant in the Department of Oceanography . 
In addition , researchers used the following assumptions : Within 150 days of the April 20 spill -LRB- that is , by September -RRB- , BP will have stopped the oil flow ; an estimated 50,000 barrels of oil from the Deepwater Horizon rig will leak each day for those 150 days ; northeasterly winds in October and November will push the oil east along the U.S. coastline ; and 20 % of the oil must pass through a narrow channel of the Florida Current , which will filter the oil via a bottleneck . 
The purpose of the study is to `` help guide research and mitigation efforts , '' according to a press release from the school . 
Axel Timmermann , professor of Oceanography , and Oliver Elison Timm also worked on the simulation . 
Both are from the SOEST International Pacific Research Center , which is sponsored by the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology -LRB- JAMSTEC -RRB- , NASA and NOAA . 
Wednesday morning , BP halted testing of a new temporary well cap following a federal call to re-evaluate the testing procedure . 
On Monday , BP installed the 75-ton cap to slow the flow of oil in the Gulf of Mexico until a permanent fix with cement and mud could take place . 
On Tuesday , BP began to close the cap 's three valves to analyze the effect on internal pressure and check for leaks surrounding the rig . 
