cents Cap placed on Deepwater Horizon wellhead cents Obama postpones trip to Australia and Indonesia to visit region President Barack Obama on a visit to the Louisiana coast last month . 
He will be back in the region today . 
Photograph : Larry Downing\/Reuters BP has managed to place a cap on the shattered end of the deepwater wellhead in the Gulf of Mexico but it will be several hours until engineers will know how successful this latest attempt to halt the worst oil spill in US history has been . 
The oil giant is hoping for some good news as president Barack Obama is due in the region later today on his third visit since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded , having postponed his scheduled trip to Australia and Indonesia for the second time in as many months . 
News that BP engineers have successfully manoeuvred a cap into position comes as the oil giant 's embattled chief executive Tony Hayward prepares to update investors on the potential financial impact of the disaster this afternoon . 
He is expected to ignore calls from Washington to put the firm 's payments to shareholders on hold while the full cost of the oil spill is calculated and pledge to retain the company 's dividends payments , worth more than $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.8 bn -RRB- . 
Senators Charles Schumer and Ron Wyden sent a letter to Hayward earlier this week demanding that payments to investors be halted during the clean-up . 
The White House has already sent a preliminary bill for $ 69m to BP and `` other responsible parties '' but that is likely to be a very small fraction of the final cost . 
Overnight the US coastguard gave an update on moves to stem the flow of oil into the sea . 
`` The placement of the containment cap is another positive development in BP 's most recent attempt to contain the leak , however , it will be some time before we can confirm that this method will work and to what extent it will mitigate the release of oil into the environment , '' said Admiral Thad Allen . 
`` Even if successful , this is only a temporary and partial fix and we must continue our aggressive response operations at the source , on the surface and along the Gulf 's precious coastline . '' 
The placement of the cap follows work on Thursday which saw BP 's robot submarines cut away the well pipe after two days of trying . 
BP hopes to be able to use the cap to siphon off some of the escaping oil and pump it into collection ships on the surface 1.6 km above the shattered well . 
Oil experts have warned , though , that the cap will not be able to capture all the oil gushing from the shattered well . 
Hayward said that the next 12 to 24 hours will determine whether the capping operation will succeed . 
`` It 's an important milestone , '' he said at a briefing in Houston overnight . 
`` This is simply the beginning . '' 
Speaking to US TV networks today , chief operating officer Doug Suttles said he hoped that the cap could capture at least 90 % of the oil . 
But BP does not expect to completely halt the escape of 19,000 barrels of oil a day until August , when it hopes to have completed two relief wells . 
Shares in BP rose as much as 4 % today to 450p , making it the biggest riser on the FTSE 100 . 
Obama telephoned Australia 's prime minister Kevin Rudd and Indonesia 's president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono to express his `` deep regret '' over the cancellation of his trip , during which he would have addressed a joint sitting of the Australian parliament . 
Obama first planned to visit the region in March , but had to cancel to help push his healthcare bill through Congress . 
A version appeared in the Guardian on 13.07 BST on Friday 4 June 2010 . 
