Obama , about that BP oil spill just get the job done Outrage and punishment are good responses to the Gulf disaster . 
But above all , the president needs to show competence Signs emerged yesterday that maybe BP had finally done something right and begun to contain the devastating oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , which is spewing at least 12,000 barrels of crude every day since 20 April into a vital commercial fishing area and bird habitat , creating what we officially started calling in late May the US 's worst-ever environmental disaster . 
We 're told we 'll know more in `` some time '' , according to the commander of the federal response to the disaster . 
By `` commander of the federal response to the disaster '' , I mean the coast guard admiral Thad Allen . 
But his commander , of course , is Barack Obama . 
And from his perspective , the underwater well is n't the only thing leaking . 
His poll numbers are , daily . 
The reason can be summed up in one word , a word that describes a quality we have n't seen nearly enough of in recent presidents , and a quality that more voters are starting to worry Obama lacks . 
Back in 1988 , the Democrat Michael Dukakis ran for president against George HW Bush by saying that the election was `` about competence , not ideology '' . 
As campaign slogans go , it lacked a certain poetry , and besides , it did n't do him much good : a -RRB- the liberal base was put off because everyone knew that Dukakis was speaking in code and trying to tell average Americans that he was n't some acid-flinging leftie ; and b -RRB- he lost . 
Competence as a theme went into storage . 
We went through two presidencies , one more-or-less incompetent -LRB- Bush Sr 's -RRB- and one more-or-less competent -LRB- Bill Clinton 's -RRB- . 
Then came George W Bush , whose reverse-Midas touch made a mess of virtually everything , from Iraq to Katrina and culminated in the worst financial meltdown in eight decades . 
Twenty years after Dukakis , competence was looking pretty desirable . 
In those heady days of November 2008 , many US liberals convinced themselves Obama 's election meant average Americans were ready for a turn to the left . 
As I suspected then , and as time has confirmed , this was n't so . 
The independent , middle-of-the-road voters who chose Obama over John McCain were n't crying : `` Give us liberalism . '' 
They were pleading : `` Give us competence . '' 
The verdict so far ? 
As Obama 's poll numbers suggest , not terrible , but not so hot . 
The administration 's biggest accomplishment , the passage of the health bill , was seen by all but liberals as the Democrats choosing ideology over competence , and thus was n't and is n't very popular . 
On the plus side , the economy is picking up , the employment figures are improving , and there are signs that consumers are aware . 
There has been progress , however unspectacular , in Afghanistan and Iraq . 
And while the administration has not yet produced any diplomatic breakthroughs of note , neither has it precipitated any major crisis . 
The record has been good enough barely so that continued economic improvement and a diplomatic accomplishment or two will show voters that the guy is doing what they elected him to do . 
But this oil spill , especially if it lingers until August , could change everything . 
This is not the moral equivalent of the Katrina catastrophe in which , let us recall , some 1,500 Americans died . 
Most Americans seem to grasp this . 
However , people are desperate for action as more and more of the Gulf coastline comes under threat . 
And since surely no more than 2 % of them even know who Tony Hayward BP 's chief executive is , they quite understandably turn to the guy they do know : the president . 
Much discussed in recent days here in Washington is Obama 's inability to `` connect '' with the frustrations and concerns of Joe Sixpack . 
It 's a valid criticism . 
Obama appears to see himself as a mediator and conciliator , who vacuums up all -LRB- non-crazy -RRB- viewpoints and tries to express a consensus . 
This is a valuable skill , and at his best moments , he 's put it to use either publicly or behind the scenes to nudge public opinion or get legislation passed . 
It 's a style of leadership that has its place . 
The spill requires a different style of leadership . 
It requires a leader who can give voice to what regular people are feeling in their bones . 
Obama has little instinct for that . 
`` let 's keep our heads here '' . 
There are times , though , when outrage is needed . 
But even more than executive outrage , what we really need here is a solution of some kind . 
If BP 's new attempt to cap the leak does n't work , and if oil starts washing up on beaches and properties in a dramatic way that is , if this disaster takes on a more urgent , more human dimension then it really could become Obama 's Katrina . 
Especially , let 's face it , if the ooze and the calamity spread to the electorally pivotal state of Florida , which is just on the precipice of happening . 
People are also looking for BP to be punished . 
Late this week , demonstrations began emerging outside BP petrol station-convenience stores across the country . 
But Washington has to do more . 
Congress is considering a bill raising BP 's liability cap from the current $ 75m -LRB- # 51m -RRB- to $ 10bn , but it 's debating and dithering as usual . 
Earlier this week the US attorney general , Eric Holder , surveyed the damage , met with state law-enforcement types in the region and launched a criminal investigation aimed at BP . 
This marks a much tougher posture from the government , which , for public relations purposes , is much needed . 
And yet , at the same time , the government still needs to work closely with BP on fixing the problem . 
Ratcheting up the rhetoric and launching a federal investigation in that context are delicate matters , though not impossible ones . 
Anyone who does n't hate him has to feel a little badly for Obama . 
First , he got smacked with the financial crisis , leaving him to spend his first two years in office -LRB- if not more -RRB- cleaning up somebody else 's mess . 
Then this , a uniquely perverse situation so lacking in precedent that there does n't even exist a federal agency designed to deal with it . 
But hey he ran for the job , and he asked for it . 
He can still be the kind of transformative president he wants to be . 
But first things first . 
Gain voters ' trust . 
There 's an old American saying in urban politics that there 's not a Democratic or Republican way to pick up the garbage . 
Nor to clean up an oil spill . 
Just get it done . 
A version appeared on p39 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 23.40 BST on Friday 4 June 2010 Comment is free on Twitter Latest news , views and links from Comment is free journalists and editors philipoltermann : Recognise the young man walking in front of Norman Lamont on Black Wednesday in 1992 in first few seconds of this clip ? 
