There has been barely a mention that the oil flowing into the Gulf of Mexico -LRB- Deepwater disaster , 3 June -RRB- would have badly damaged the environment wherever it had ended up , ie it would have been refined , itself a dirty industrial process , and subsequently burned by the internal combustion engines of vehicles or in generators or boilers . 
Eventually , this would add to the acidification of the oceans and contribute to global warming , which itself is likely to trigger more hurricanes of a greater intensity . 
Both of these outcomes would be particularly detrimental to the area in question . 
The greater tragedy is that through our great oil companies we seem to be intent on extracting every last drop of this wretched fossil fuel before adapting our economy along truly sustainable lines . 
Perhaps spreading this particular batch of oil out for micro-orgnisms to deal with is the least damaging option . 
cents In arguing there can be no undersea oil clouds associated with the spill because `` oil has a specific gravity that 's about half that of water . 
It wants to get to the surface '' -LRB- BP clashes with scientists , 1 June -RRB- , Tony Hayward , BP 's chief executive , displays an alarming ignorance of the properties of his product . 
True , seawater has a specific gravity of about 1.03 g\/cubic cm whereas that of crude oil is about 0.8 g\/cubic cm -LRB- less than but not half that of water -RRB- . 
But significant fractions of crude oil consist of asphaltenes and other complex substances with specific gravities around 1.4 g\/cubic cm , ie greater than seawater . 
These heavier fractions will almost certainly separate and so be retained at depth . 
cents The BP spill has become an embarrassment , possibly damaging the British business community as a whole . 
I 'm outraged that BP claims to be doing all it can , when , as a specialist company in natural cotton absorbents that not only absorb spillages of hydrocarbon , but also allow in-situ bioremediation when contamination reaches the shores , I know they are not . 
We approached BP four years ago . 
Our efforts and any attempts to follow up proved to be a waste of time , as we encountered only arrogance and lip service . 
We believe that BP is using polypropylene booms in the Gulf : polypropylene is an oil derivative . 
There are miles of cellulose booms available : why is BP ignoring the more natural approach ? 
Worse : our HQ and manufacturing plant is located three hours ' drive from the contaminated areas . 
cents Gordon Brown agonised over what it meant to be British . 
Now , British Petroleum and British Airways have shown unambiguously what British stands for . 
