cents Two top men have apologised cents BP confident that the cap may work well cents No official decision on dividend payments yet cents Company splitting off its clean-up operations cents BP still can not say how much this disaster will cost The site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Jae C. Hong\/AP 1.53 pm : Afternoon all , and welcome to our live coverage of the latest development in the Gulf of Mexico oil spill - BP 's conference call with its biggest investors . 
Chief executive Tony Hayward will be joined with Fergus MacLeod , head of investor relations . 
We 're expecting BP to confirm whether or not it will be paying a dividend to shareholders , defying opposition from US politicians . 
We should also hear the very latest information about BP 's efforts to limit the damage and stop the leak . 
2.01 pm : A quick recap before we get going : Overnight BP managed to fit a cap , or container , onto the riser pipe that is leaking oil on the seabed . 
We do n't know how successful this operation has been yet - BP 's COO was talking about it eventually capturing 90 % of the leak . 
However , the live feed from the seabed still shows oil gushing into the ocean . 
2.03 pm : And we 're off -- and Carl-Henric Svanberg , BP 's chairman , is also on the call -LRB- he 's been criticised for not taking a more public profile since the Deepware Horizon rig blew up -RRB- . 
Svanberg starts by telling shareholders that he is `` keenly aware of the gravity '' of the disaster in which 11 people died . 
`` We deeply regret , and are sorry , for this tragic accident and the aftermath , '' he says . 
2.05 pm : Svanberg explains that oil production is an inherently risky business , and people trusted BP to get it right . 
`` We must regain that trust , '' he says , and pledges that BP will be a `` good citizen '' in every territory where it operates . 
The BP chairman also talks about ensuring BP 's long-term presence in the business world . 
He also touches on the issue of the dividend - `` We know how important it is to shareholders . '' 
2.09 pm : After promising to `` meet obligations to shareholders '' who rely on its dividend , Svanberg hands over to Tony Hayward . 
Both men are taking a very sombre tone . 
`` Everyone at BP is heartbroken by the event , '' says Hayward . 
`` It should not have happened - we are bound and determined to learn lessons to ensure it never happens again . '' 
Hayward is now running through the events of the last seven weeks - saying BP has organised an `` armada '' of vessels , and 60,000 staff and contractors , to try and control the spill -LRB- this was n't enough to keep the oil off the beaches , of course -RRB- . 
He touches on today 's capping operation - he says it will capture `` the majority '' of the oil . 
Apparently it will be refined in mid-June , and BP hopes to set up a better system by early July that will make it `` more robust in the event of hurricanes . '' 
BP 's embattled CEO also promises to be transparent with the US government , and insists that the leak will eventually be stopped . 
`` Ultimately , doing the right thing will prevail . '' 
2.12 pm : It 's too early to say where the fault lies - a lot remains unknown , says Hayward . 
He explains that BP has drawn up a four-point plan : 1 -RRB- It will be `` transparent with the US government and the US people '' in what it does and says 2 -RRB- It will meet responsibilities to those who have suffered economic harm 3 -RRB- It will make good `` in full '' the environmental impact of the disaster 4 -RRB- It will invest in creating a safe Gulf of Mexico oil industry . 
This photo gallery gives a grim reminder of that environmental impact . 
2.17 pm : So what 's the long term solution ? 
Hayward says the oil industry needs a `` paradigm shift '' . 
`` We need better safety technology . 
For example , the Blow Out Preventor , which this incident has shown is not failsafe . '' 
2.18 pm : Some analysts have argued that the crisis may force BP to be broken up - Hayward is trying to calm these fears . 
He confirms that BP has now spent more than $ 1bn on the clean-up , and warns that the eventual damages claims will be `` sizeable '' . 
Hayward also announces that BP are going to spin off the Gulf of Mexico situation into a new division -LRB- called Bad BP , perhaps -RRB- . 
It will be run by Bob Dudley , a well-respected BP executive who used to manage its Russian arm -LRB- until he fell foul of the Kremlin -RRB- . '' 
I do n't believe we could have a better person to lead this organization , '' says Hayward . 
`` This will remain my number 1 priority for as long as necessary '' `` I wish to apologise both personally , and on behalf of the whole of BP for what has happened . '' 
2.25 pm : Over to questions from analysts -LRB- as this is a financial call , journalists do n't get to take part , alas -RRB- . 
An ING analyst goes first , and congratulates Hayward on his leadership during the crisis -LRB- not sure you 'd hear that on a press call -RRB- . 
He wants to know more details on the total cost of the crisis . 
Tony Hayward has apologised today for the catastrophic Deepwater Horizon oil leak , and vowed to help make the industry safer . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP Hayward says it 's simply not possible to say , but hands the question over to Byron Grote , BP 's chief financial officer . 
He explains that BP is going to break out the Deepwater Horizon costs as a separate item on its financial results , so we 'll be able to see how much it is costing . 
2.28 pm : Morgan Stanley wants more information about the dividend -LRB- which makes up about a seventh of the overall dividend payment from FTSE 100 countries -RRB- . 
Hayward refers to Svanberg , who declines to give a firm answer on this issue . 
`` Our first responsibility is to fix this disaster ... but we need to strike a balance with our obligations to shareholders , '' he says . 
Is that a hint that the dividend is going to be cut ? 
2.32 pm : Now Bank of America\/Merrill Lynch , who wants more details about the `` paradigm shift '' on safety that BP admitted is needed . 
Hayward explains that today , the odds of a Blow Out Preventor failing is somewhere between one in 100,000 and one in 1,000,000 , and that needs to be made even less likely . 
2.35 pm : My colleague Terry Macalister is following the call too . 
Here 's his early thoughts : The chairman is on the call ... wow ... responding to criticism of his absence ? 
Hayward is stressing multiple `` technological '' failures ... but not mentioning human failures that others have pointed out . 
2.39 pm : Barclays Capital wants to know what assessment BP has made on the Clean Water Act , the US legislation that covers water pollution ? 
`` Clearly we will be liable to fines under the Clean Water Act . 
That 's a certainty , '' admits Hayward . 
He does not like to speculate on how big a fine it might be . 
Under the Act , any fine would be much larger if BP were found guilty of gross negligence . 
One expert recently estimated BP could be hit by a $ 60bn fine , although that is a very worst-case scenario . 
2.43 pm : More from Terry Macalister : While BP chairman says the dividend will remain under review there is lots of stressing from Tony Hayward about the financial buoyancy of the company ... ... Tony Hayward sounds calm and lucid - but tired and forgot one of the analyst 's questions . 
Setting up a new organization set up to look after spill is a good idea ! 
Tony Hayward can keep the main business on track while Bob Dudley -LRB- ex-boss of TNK-BP -RRB- is an American citizen which should play better in US . 
Dudley was effectively kicked out of Russia but dealt very well with a highly charged political situation in Moscow . 
Right man for the job and good counter to Hayward whose `` Britishness '' seems to have been counting against him . 
2.45 pm : Investors are asking for more details about exactly what went wrong on the Deepwater Horizon before it exploded on 20 April , but Hayward is n't biting . 
This must wait for the official investigation , he says . 
He does defend BP 's action , though , insisting that all procedures carried out on the rig had been approved by safety authorities first . 
2.53 pm : Now the call moves onto the threat caused by the hurricane season . 
Wo n't a large storm make it impossible for BP to keep collecting oil -LRB- assuming that this week 's capping work is a success -RRB- . 
Hayward touched on this point earlier -LRB- 2.09 pm -RRB- , and now fleshes out BP 's plans . 
The key , apparently , is that BP has developed a new and better way of collecting the oil that will be corralled by the container system and then transported to the surface in a pipe . 
This new system , which will be working by mid July , is much more hurricane resistant . 
It is based on a `` submersible riser '' which will offer `` very rapid connect and disconnect capabilities '' . 
In other words , if the oil tanker collecting the oil is driven back to port by a hurricane , it will then be much quicker for it to reconnect once the weather is calmer . 
Hayward says reconnecting could happen in `` perhaps 24 hours '' , down from around 10 days . 
Those numbers also indicate that an early hurricane could scupper BP 's efforts to collect oil , if it arrives before this system is working . 
2.57 pm : Now a US-based analyst wants to know BP 's views on senators Charles Schumer and Ron Wyden , who called on BP to suspend dividend payments . 
Good question , says Hayward -LRB- who is sounding a bit cheerier than at the start -RRB- and one for my boss . 
BP chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg simply says that he needs to understand the senators ' concerns better . 
He 's got until late July , when BP 's next financial results are due . 
3.00 pm : It 's hard for those of us in London to understand how much much fury there is in America to BP right now . 
For a flavor , my colleague Matthew Weaver recommends this video , in which Andrew Revkin from Pace university and David Roberts discuss the prospects of the US government forcing BP into temporary receivership or even nationalisation . 
The clip has just been uploaded but it was recorded on 1 June so it 's bit out of date , but it gives you an idea of the increasing anger at BP in the US . 
3.06 pm : Final question for Tony Hayward , and it touches on the issue of his popularity -LRB- or otherwise -RRB- . 
Hayward acknowledges that he has been the public face of BP during the crisis , which he claims has helped his colleagues get on with the job of fixing the leak . 
`` So far I 'm unscathed ... no-one has physically harmed me . '' 
`` They 've thrown some words at me , but I 'm a Brit . 
Sticks and stones may break my bones but words will never hurt me , or however the saying goes . '' 
And with that , the call 's over . 
3.10 pm : So a quick summary . 
cents We 've heard apologies from BP 's two top men for the disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , cents BP remains confident that the cap fitted overnight may work well , and collect a lot of the oil that has been spilling into the sea cents There is no official decision on dividend payments yet cents The oil giant is splitting off its clean-up operations into a new division , run by Bob Dudley . 
cents It has also built a better way of collecting oil from the striken well , to help it cope with hurricanes cents It is braced to be fined by the US authorities , but still can not say how much this disaster will cost Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
