Arab leaders watch in fear as Shia emancipation draws near Thursday 27 January 2005 00.02 GMT For the first time in centuries , Shias are about to come into their own as the rulers - or at least the politically dominant community - in a key Arab country . 
In principle , the Iraqi elections will ratify and lend constitutional legitimacy to a transformation inexorably under way since the fall of Saddam Hussein . 
In the Arab world , except for Lebanon with its largely Christian population , the rulers of all 22 states have traditionally hailed from the orthodox Sunni majority . 
But until now that has included two countries , Iraq and Bahrain , where , against the broader trend , Shias compose the majority . 
The correction of this anomaly will be momentous , given Iraq 's history and geopolitical weight , and the tumultuous conditions in which it is taking place . 
Iraq , after all , is where , in the bloody struggle over the prophet 's succession , Islam 's great schism first took root ; where , for centuries , Shias under Sunni Ottoman rule bore the brunt of its conflicts with Shia Persian empires ; where , in the 1920s , Shias led the rebellion against British mandatory rule , but ended up grossly underrepresented in the modern Iraqi state ; where , under Ba'athism , Sunnis turned minority rule into despotism of the most chauvinistic and brutal kind . 
The idea of electorally established Shia dominance of Iraq deeply troubles Arab regimes , with or without Shias of their own . 
Jordan 's King Abdullah has most publicly declared what others keep to themselves . 
For him the great peril is Iran , the world 's only -LRB- apart from Azerbaijan -RRB- Shia-majority state that is also Shia-ruled - and clerically , militantly ruled to boot . 
Iran 's `` vested interest '' , he says , is `` to have an Islamic republic of Iraq ; if that happened , we 've opened ourselves to a whole set of new problems that wo n't be limited to the borders of Iraq '' . 
He warned of a Shia `` crescent '' stretching from Iran into Iraq , Syria and Lebanon , destabilising Gulf countries and posing a challenge to the US . 
`` This is the first time , '' said the Lebanese commentator Joseph Samaha , `` an Arab official has used such crude , direct and dangerous language to publicly incite against a particular confession and warn that it may turn into a fifth column to be used against the majority . '' 
For other Arab commentators , what such remarks indicate , at bottom , is fear of democracy , and the prospect that Iraq will now demonstrate what Palestine already has - that in the Arab world people have more electoral choice if they are occupied rather than sovereign . 
`` They are terrified , '' said Salama Ne ` mat , `` lest elections prove contagious and spread to Iraq 's neighbouring states and peoples . 
`` The danger to certain Arab governments is the democratic ` weapon of mass destruction ' that could destroy the structure of tyranny and backwardness that weighs heavily upon the chests of their peoples . '' 
Any Iraqi democracy is bound , at first , to assume the `` sectarian '' character King Abdullah deplores . 
The ruthless , discriminatory exploitation of sectarianism that was the foundation of Saddam 's rule has to give way to a system whose primary building block is the fair and representative stake which the country 's various communities acquire in it , the Shias acquiring the largest . 
Inevitably , too , Iran , for which the emancipation of its Iraqi co-religionists is a great potential enhancement of its own regional influence , is Iraq 's only neighbor to be happy about that . 
Ironically , it was much quicker than Arab friends of America to `` recognize '' the new American-installed Iraqi order and is the most ardent supporter of American-sponsored elections . 
Arab regimes with Shia citizens , especially in the Gulf , perhaps have most grounds for alarm , because , like Saddam , they have in varying degrees discriminated against them . 
The quest for equal rights has been common to Shias in every modern Arab state . 
The only one in which they have basically achieved them , through civil war as well as that country 's unique , confessionally organised political system , is Lebanon . 
`` Iraq could represent a democratic model for the Arab-Muslim world which has experienced futile and utopian conflicts for 14 centuries , '' said Sheikh Ali Salman , a Shia leader in Bahrain . 
Though Shias constitute 60 % of Bahrain 's population , they do not apparently aim for an Iraq-style change of regime , only for greater representation than they have achieved so far . 
But Iraqi Shia emancipation is also disturbing to a non-Shia country such as Jordan , because , small and fragile , it is deeply affected by any political upheavals in neighbors more powerful than itself , and its relatively benign autocracy does depend on discrimination of a kind , favoring Transjordanians over Palestinians . 
In multi-confessional Syria , minority Alawites dominate the regime ; Shia triumph in Iraq might encourage the majority Sunnis to regain the ascendancy which - the opposite of their co-religionists in Iraq - they lost with the rise of Ba'athism . 
It is obvious that all these regimes , like the Iraq insurgents themselves , hanker after a restoration of the old Sunni - or Ba'athist - dominated order , or even some Saddam-like figure to preside over it - or , at least , as King Abdullah once put it , `` somebody with a military background who has experience of being a tough guy '' . 
Equally obviously , however , the Shias , recalling what happened in the 20s , will not have it . 
So , like the Americans , the regimes have now calculated that , while holding elections , which a large part of the Sunni community might boycott , is a grave risk , not holding them would be a graver one . 
They are all - even Syria the US accuses of abetting the insurgency - urging the Sunnis to lend their vital sanction to the kind of popular consultation they would never permit in their own countries . 
For what makes Arab regimes fear an Iraqi democracy makes them fear civil war more ; and while quite possible with elections , that would be even more so without them . 
The Shias have so far been remarkably restrained in their response to the anti-Shia terror that seems to be a secondary part of the Sunni resistance to American occupation ; their mainstream religious leaders clearly want to keep their distance from Iran , and , according to a recent opinion poll , Sunnis are twice as much in favor of a fully fledged `` Islamic government '' of some kind as they are . 
But , if they can not come into their inheritance by constitutional means , they will be all too likely drawn into unconstitutional , violent means instead . 
And Iran would get deeply involved in that . 
