By the CNN Wire Staff Libyan rebel forces gained ground at Bir al-Ghanam on Saturday , but government forces claimed to have won it back . 
NEW : A rebel commander says the opposition still has control of Bir al-Ghanam The town is 53 miles from Tripoli , with little between The Libyan PM says the town is back in the government 's control Rebels said 1,500 opposition members joined Saturday 's battle Zintan , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The Libyan government said Sunday it had retaken the key town of Bir al-Ghanam after losing it briefly to rebel forces , but a rebel commander said his forces were holding onto the town . 
Bir al-Ghanam is about 85 kilometers -LRB- 53 miles -RRB- southwest of the Libyan capital Tripoli . 
Its capture is significant because little else stands between Bir Al-Ghanam and the Libyan coastline where Tripoli is situated . 
After rebels gained control of the town Saturday , one rebel fighter told CNN the `` next step '' was Tripoli . 
Libyan Prime Minister Baghdadi Al-Mahmoudi told reporters in Tripoli on Sunday that rebel forces had the town for only a few hours . 
Bir al-Ghanam `` is now back in the hands of the honorable brave tribes , with its surface back in normal life and under the control of the legitimate government of Libya , '' Al-Mahmoudi said . 
But Nasr Abu al Qassem , who was in Zintan , about 70 km -LRB- 43 miles -RRB- southwest of Bir al-Ghanam , said rebels remained at the front line in Bir Al-Ghanam and were being reinforced . 
The situation in the town was stable , he said . 
Rebels on the move in Libya Libyan Rebels Aim for Tripoli Some grad rockets were fired at the town from a distance Sunday morning , but no rebels were injured , he said . 
Rebel commanders said 1,500 opposition members joined in Saturday 's battle , which lasted five hours . 
Rockets and gunfire were exchanged from both sides , and rebels took on Gadhafi fighters from three fronts . 
At least eight rebels were killed and dozens more were wounded , according to medical sources . 
Casualties inflicted on Gadhafi forces were not immediately known . 
The fighters in Saturday 's attack were part of what some have dubbed a Mad Max army -- a fleet of pickup trucks modified to take heavy weapons speeding across the desert . 
Most of the men were civilians before the fighting broke out . 
For months , rebel fighters -- who have controlled the eastern city of Benghazi and other areas -- have been trying to move closer to the capital . 
They are seeking the ouster of Gadhafi , who has ruled Libya for 42 years . 
CNN 's Michael Holmes and Kareem Khadder contributed to this report . 
