LOS ANGELES | Sat May 1 , 2010 3:36 am EDT LOS ANGELES -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The first known wildlife casualty of the massive oil spill threatening the U.S. Gulf Coast was a single Northern Gannet seabird , found alive but coated in the toxic grime creeping ashore along Louisiana 's coast . 
That bird , recovered offshore on Friday and taken to an emergency rehabilitation center to be cleaned up and nursed back to health , is only the tip of a potential calamity facing the region 's birds , sea turtles and marine mammals . 
Besides the rescued Gannet , and several sperm whales seen swimming in and around the oil slick earlier , no `` confirmed animal impacts '' have been reported , yet , Dr. Michael Ziccardi , a veterinarian overseeing some of the wildlife rescue teams in the region , said in a telephone interview from Houma , Louisiana . 
But , he added soberly : `` That is not going to stay the same . 
We are expecting many more -LRB- casualties -RRB- in the days to come . 
We hope that number is not catastrophic . 
We 're ... hoping for the best but planning for the worst . '' 
Ziccardi is director of the Oiled Wildlife Care Network in California , a hub for the world 's leading experts in capturing and caring for oil-soaked sea life . 
He knows from responding to more than 60 oil spills in California that the full scope of harm to birds and other wildlife only becomes apparent once the oil washes ashore . 
Oil has been gushing unchecked from a ruptured deepwater well off Louisiana , pouring into the Gulf of Mexico at a rate of up to 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons or 955,000 liters -RRB- a day since last week , and so far efforts plug the leaks have failed . 
As of Friday , the giant slick in the gulf had just begun to make landfall on barrier islands of the Mississippi River Delta off Louisiana . 
Ziccardi said the risk to bird species would grow as the spill progressed . 
Oil impairs the insulating properties of birds ' feathers , exposing them to cold and making it difficult for them to float , swim and fly . 
Chemicals in the petroleum also can burn their skin and irritate their eyes . 
They also end up ingesting the oil when they preen , damaging their digestive tracts . 
Similarly , oil can be ingested by turtles and marine mammals , burn their skin and eyes and cause respiratory damage when fumes are inhaled . 
How high a toll the gulf spill takes on wildlife hinges on several factors that have yet to play out , including the weather , how much of the slick can be contained and how soon crippled undersea well spewing oil can be capped . 
`` It 's really only going to be clear in the coming days because there are a lot of unknowns , '' said Paul Kelway , a regional manager of the International Bird Rescue Research Center , which sent a team to Louisiana . 
`` All we can do is prepare these -LRB- rescue -RRB- facilities and get staff trained and be ready to help , '' he said in California . 
The spill has come at an especially bad time for the region 's bird life . 
The Mississippi Flyway is a key migratory corridor that runs through the area , said Ziccardi , a professor at the University of California at Davis who wrote the U.S. federal guidelines for rescuing wildlife in oil spills . 
`` There are certain songbirds and shorebirds that are going through their peak migratory period , '' he said . 
`` There are other birds for which this is a nesting and egg-laying period . '' 
The oil-coated Northern Gannet , a sea bird with striking black and white plumage that feeds by plunge-diving for fish and squid , was found in the water . 
But because most birds tend to stay fairly close to land , they are most vulnerable once the oil washes ashore . 
`` With turtles and marine mammals , they 're out in the open water , so they are at risk earlier , '' Ziccardi said . 
Turtles may be particularly hard hit because many have just started nesting or are close to doing so in the gulf . 
As for marine mammals in the region , some studies have found that dolphins and whales tend to go out of their way to avoid oil spills , while the sperm whales seen swimming around the slick suggest otherwise . 
Ziccardi said , however , that the large presence of boats and planes in cleanup operations `` are a wonderful deterrent '' in keeping animals out of the danger zone , `` so that has a double advantage for us . '' 
Some experts have raised the possibility that prolonged difficulty in halting the oil flow from the BP-owned well could lead to an environmental disaster on the scale of the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska , in which an estimated 250,000 seabirds perished . 
But Ziccardi said that even if that happens , the mortality level for birds along the Gulf Coast may be smaller . 
`` We do n't have the same densities of sea birds in this area as Prince William Sound , '' he said . 
`` But that 's not to say that if the spill continues and birds are affected , we wo n't have sizable losses Ziccardi arrived in Louisiana on Thursday to manage rescue efforts for the five threatened and endangered species of sea turtles in harm 's way , along with manatees , dolphins and other marine mammals . 
Kelway 's group and another from Tri-State Bird Rescue and Research in Delaware are overseeing bird rescues . 
They will be relying on teams of trained professionals and volunteers who specialize in capturing , transporting and rehabilitating animals injured by oil spills . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The oil is known to have affected an estimated 90 miles of shoreline , numerous bird species , and recreational use of the bay , such as shell fishing and boating . 
We need to review the George Stephanopoulos interview the other day in which the Coast Guard Rear Admiral Mary E. Landry told George there was no leak ! 
Where did the Rear Admiral get this faulty information and who does are government think they are dealing with ? 
OMG a bird was covered in slim !!! SHUT DOWN THE ENTIRE GULF COAST DRILLING !!! ... seriousy people ? 
stopping drilling is a great plan , but first we need to curb our reliance anything with plastic in it or that used plastic in it 's manufacture , we will also need to stop all travel other than than by horse . 
we will also need to reduce our national electricity consumption by 17 % as it is derived from drilling . 
If this were to happen out healthcare system would fall apart as modern medicine relies on plastics . 
I do n't know about you all but i would have a hard time living without a computer , healthcare , a car to get me where i need , or anything that uses transportation or plastics such as food or clothing . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
