MEXICO CITY | Wed Sep 29 , 2010 8:26 pm EDT MEXICO CITY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Mexico 's federal government could join a list of its states suing the companies blamed for the disastrous Gulf oil spill , claiming damage to fishing and tourism , the plaintiffs ' attorney said on Wednesday . 
Earlier this month , three Mexican states sued British oil giant BP and its contractors Transocean , as well as affiliated businesses . 
The northern state of Tamaulipas -- which shares a border with Texas -- and Veracruz with its long coastline on the Gulf of Mexico , both said the spill posed risks to beaches and marine life that would cause lost profits and potentially large clean-up bills . 
Quintana Roo on the Yucatan Peninsula , home to major tourist destinations like Cancun , also filed suit in a Texas court on September 15 . 
`` We expect the rest of the -LRB- Mexican -RRB- Gulf states will join the endeavor and potentially ... Mexico , '' said lawyer Enrique Serna , whose San Antonio-based practice represents the states . 
The lawsuits are believed to be the first by foreign governments against the petroleum giant BP and its contractors in the aftermath of April 's Deepwater Horizon rig explosion and ensuing oil spill , Serna said . 
More than 300 civil lawsuits have already been filed in the United States by out-of-work rig workers , fishermen and hotel workers , and that number is expected to increase . 
Mexico 's federal government has been studying the viability of a legal claim against BP , the environment minister told Reuters in an interview in June , adding that the remnants of the oil spill could hit Mexico 's shores next month . 
As of August , the government of Mexico had spent about $ 35 million monitoring the spill , according to media reports . 
`` It is only natural for them to sue BP and the rest of the corporate defendants to reclaim such sums , '' Serna said . 
`` There are a number of damages that eventually we 'll be able to quantify but only time will tell , '' he said . 
Serna said he also expects more than 1,500 individual claimants in Mexico -- from fishermen to restaurant operators who have been forced to pay more for fish from Pacific waters -- to eventually press claims . 
A spokeswoman for Halliburton said the allegations appeared to be without merit , but BP and Transocean declined to comment . 
BP has set up a $ 20 billion fund to compensate those who lost livelihoods or income due to the spill , but it excludes foreign claimants . 
The company has paid out over $ 240 million thus far and has said it will add to the size of the fund if necessary . 
U.S. District Court Judge Carl Barbier was recently named to navigate the vast array of claims prompted by the spill that some expect to be among the costliest and most complex litigation in U.S. history . 
-LRB- Reporting by Alexandria Sage ; Editing by Eric Walsh -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
How about the ongoing claims eight years after the oil spill with Mitt Romney as governor of Massachusetts ? 
Mitt Romney was the 70th Governor of Massachusetts from Jan 2.2003 to Jan 4.2007 . 
During his one term the Buzzards Bay oil spill happened during April 2003 . 
On April 27 , 2003 , eight years ago the Bouchard Barge B-120 hit an obstacle in Buzzards Bay , creating a 12-foot rupture in its hull and discharging an estimated 100,000 gallons of No. 6 oil . 
The oil is known to have affected an estimated 90 miles of shoreline , killed 450 numerous bird species , and recreational use of the bay , such as shell fishing and boating . 
Since the 2003 oil spill the US Coast Guard has appealed the 2004 Massachusetts Oil Spill Prevention Act and one Mattapoisett , Massachusetts property damage lawsuit has dragged on for eight years . 
Republican Mitt Romney is laying the groundwork for a possible White House campaign in 2012 , hiring a team of staff members and consultants . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
