\* China statements appear aimed at any U.S. involvement in dispute \* Vietnamese military exercises under way off its coast \* Vietnamese PM issues decree on possible call-up -LRB- Adds quotes and details -RRB- BEIJING , June 14 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - China opposes external powers weighing in on territorial disputes in the South China Sea , it said on Tuesday after Vietnam said other countries , including the United States , could help defuse tensions over the potentially resource-rich region Vietnam outlined the terms of a possible military draft , a move that experts called a signal meant to show the country was prepared to defend its interests , but Beijing 's warning appeared aimed at Washington , which urged a collective solution to the sea tensions last year . 
`` We hope that countries that are not parties to the South China Sea dispute truly respect the efforts of the countries concerned to resolve their disputes through consultation , '' Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said . 
China 's main military newspaper was blunter . 
`` China resolutely opposes any country unrelated to the South China Sea issue meddling in disputes , and it opposes the internationalisation of the South China Sea issue , '' said a commentary in the Liberation Army Daily . 
China 's statements coincided with naval exercises by Vietnam 's military along its central coast , and followed a weekend statement by Hanoi welcoming efforts by the international community , including the United States , to help resolve the maritime disputes . 
China and Vietnam have traded accusations for weeks over what each sees as intrusions into its territorial waters by the other in a stretch of ocean spanned by key shipping lanes and thought to hold large deposits of oil and gas . 
Beijing has said it is not to blame . 
`` The recent developments in the South China Sea were the result of unilateral actions by some countries that damaged China 's sovereignty and maritime rights , '' spokesman Hong said . 
`` China has been protecting its legitimate rights and not violating those of other countries . '' 
Accusations of unlawful intrusions in the South China Sea are not uncommon between China , Vietnam and the Philippines , Malaysia , Brunei and Taiwan , but this bout of tension has run longer than usual . 
Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung signed a decree on Monday listing the types of cases which would be exempt in the event of a military draft in time of war . 
The decree takes effect from Aug. 1 . 
`` Vietnam is speaking to two audiences , '' Carlyle Thayer , a Vietnam expert at the Australian Defense Force Academy , told Reuters . 
`` It 's speaking to a domestic audience where it is under pressure to be shown to be taking steps to deal with China . 
The other is to China . '' 
China 's latest comments were in response to those from a key U.S. Democratic lawmaker on Asia policy , Senator Jim Webb , who said on Monday he would introduce a resolution urging China to enter into multilateral talks on maritime territorial disputes with its neighbors . 
Tension between China and the United States intensified last year after the Obama administration became embroiled in the South China Sea dispute by stressing Washington 's support for a collective solution . 
This year , Sino-U.S relations have steadied , and Washington has so far been more muted about the issue . 
Beijing insists on handling the disputes on a one-on-one basis rather than multilaterally , a strategy some critics have described as `` divide and conquer '' . 
A Vietnamese military source confirmed the live-fire drills were under way . 
Vietnam 's military newspaper accused China at the weekend of creating disputes `` through provocative actions -LRB- and -RRB- hostilities aimed at its neighbors '' . 
