ASCOT , England | Tue Jun 14 , 2011 6:12 pm BST ASCOT , England -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Canford Cliffs denied globetrotting mare Goldikova a 14th Group One victory and staked his claim to be Europe 's top miler when he outbattled the French raider to win the Queen Anne Stakes at Royal Ascot Tuesday . 
Jockey Richard Hughes rode a supremely confident race , sitting at the back in the early stages before producing Canford Cliffs , the 11-8 second favorite , to challenge inside the final furlong . 
The four-year-old secured his fourth Group One triumph , producing his renowned turn of foot to win by a length from 5-4 favorite Goldikova . 
Victory was sweet compensation for trainer Richard Hannon , whose Paco Boy was beaten by a neck by Goldikova in the race last year . 
`` These sort of horses do n't come along very often , '' said Hannon , father-in-law of the winning jockey . 
`` He had a good lead from Goldikova and Hughsie did n't lose sight of her . 
Thankfully when it came to it he was able to go by her . 
It 's a shame really for anyone to beat the mare as she 's been so good but someone has to take her on . '' 
It was a third consecutive win at Royal Ascot for Canford Cliffs having won the Coventry Stakes in 2009 and last year 's St James 's Palace Stakes . 
Goldikova , who completed an unprecedented third Breeders ' Cup Mile triumph in the United States in November , was also given a rousing reception by racegoers on her return to the paddock on a warm and sunny afternoon . 
`` I was thrilled with that . 
The people here know a champion , '' said trainer Freddy Head . 
`` I think she ran a top , top race and is as good as ever . '' 
Britain 's Queen Elizabeth unveiled a statue of four-time Ascot Gold Cup winner Yeats in the parade ring before the start of the Royal meeting with the racecourse commemorating 300 years of racing in 2011 . 
The Queen suffered disappointment as an owner earlier this month when her Carlton House , favorite for the Epsom Derby , could only finish third . 
That race was bypassed by Henry Cecil 's Frankel because of stamina doubts and the colt had to dig deep to extend his unbeaten record to seven races , holding on to win the St James 's Palace Stakes from the fast closing Zoffany . 
Frankel 's workmanlike victory was a stark contrast to his scintillating English 2,000 Guineas win last month and 68-year-old Cecil , awarded a knighthood last week , breathed a sigh of relief after celebrating his 73rd Royal Ascot success . 
`` That was a bit nerve-wracking and it did n't go to plan , '' said Cecil after the 30-100 favorite held by three-quarters of a length after tiring in the closing stages of the one mile contest . 
`` He looked as if he was going to win a bit more easily and I think he thought that he had just done enough . 
The horse is a gentleman but complicated '' Zoffany 's Irish trainer Aidan O'Brien gained swift compensation when 4-1 favorite Power won the Coventry Stakes while Prohibit , a well-backed 7-1 chance , handed British trainer Robert Cowell and jockey Jim Crowley a first Royal Ascot success . 
In a helter-skelter five furlong dash to the King 's Stand Stakes , Prohibit fended off Australian-trained Star Witness -LRB- 6-1 -RRB- and Sweet Sanette -LRB- 16-1 -RRB- , trained in Hong Kong . 
Hungarian sprinter Overdose , known as the `` Budapest Bullet , '' was in the front rank for much of the race but faded to finish fourth . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
