Japanese schools have been taking precautions against the virus Health officials in Japan have confirmed the first cases of swine flu in the densely populated capital , Tokyo . 
Two schoolgirls tested positive for the H1N1 virus after their return from a trip to New York . 
So far , about 250 infections have been recorded in Japan , as a handful of new cases have been reported around Asia . 
Health officials stress there have been no deaths from the H1N1 virus in Japan and most cases have been mild . 
Nearly 10,250 swine flu cases have been confirmed in 41 countries , the World Health Organization says in the latest update on its website . 
The virus is known to have killed 80 people , the vast majority of them in Mexico , where it was first reported . 
Tokyo 's first known case of swine flu was detected in a girl of 16 who arrived back home on Tuesday from New York . 
She had complained of a fever and tested positive for H1N1 . 
She had a cough and sore throat but was recovering well , said Hideo Maeda , secretary of the city 's welfare and health department . 
A second girl on the same trip was also infected , officials later told reporters . 
Tokyo and the surrounding districts are home to around 36 million people . 
Most of Japan 's cases so far have been in areas around the city of Kobe to the west where a high school student who had not been overseas was found to be infected on Saturday . 
Since then the numbers have risen steadily and more than 4,000 schools have been closed as a precautionary measure . 
A 21-year-old Canadian has tested positive for swine flu in Beijing , becoming mainland China 's fifth case of the virus , the Health Ministry reported . 
The man , who is in stable condition , arrived in Beijing on the afternoon of 16 May aboard an Air Canada flight from Toronto . 
Taiwan has also recorded a case of the virus - an Australian doctor who arrived by plane from Hong Kong earlier in the week . 
Australia has reported five new cases , including three young brothers , raising the overall number of confirmed infections to six . 
