BEIRUT | Wed May 11 , 2011 4:25 pm EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian activists are losing hope that pro-democracy protests will topple the 11-year rule of President Bashar al-Assad and fear that his use of force against protesters may crush the movement . 
Activists from inside and outside Syria said a fragmented opposition had failed to build on street demonstrations which broke out seven weeks ago demanding greater freedoms , missing a fleeting opportunity to press for reforms from the Baath party led by the Assad family for the past four decades . 
`` The forces on the ground can not topple the regime ... They have lost a golden and rare opportunity to do something , '' said Abdul Karim-Rihawi , head of the Human Rights League in Damascus . 
`` The protests will continue but will not grow in popularity , '' he said , adding that Assad might deploy even greater force to crush them if necessary . 
Under the rule of Assad 's father , Hafez , Syrian forces razed the old quarter of the city of Hama in 1982 to end an uprising led by the Muslim Brotherhood . 
Up to 30,000 people were killed . 
`` If , God forbid , the regime crushes the protests then I think it will take us 50 years before we move again , '' said another Syrian activist who lives in exile . 
Analysts say that the unrest may not topple Assad but has definitely shaken his rule . 
Bouthaina Shaaban , an adviser to Assad , said earlier this week that the government had gained the upper hand over the revolt and that Assad 's rule had passed its `` dangerous moment '' . 
The downbeat comments from some activists , which contrast with statements from others who say Assad 's use of force will only increase protesters ' determination , reflect frustration at the inability to rally the same numbers as the Egyptian uprising which toppled Hosni Mubarak , or to agree a political manifesto . 
The opposition includes secularists , Islamists and ethnic Kurds , in exile and in Syria . 
Some seek Assad 's downfall and others want more freedoms and reform of the autocratic system . 
That has made it difficult to unify demands on the back of protests driven more by street anger than activists ' agendas . 
`` The opposition has failed to even form a council to lead and guide the protesters . 
This has left each city on its own and now is being crushed . 
They finished Deraa and now Banias and Homs then will move to another one , '' the exile activist said . 
Rihawi said so far no more than 200,000 Syrians had taken to the streets , from a population of 20 million . 
As well as Assad 's use of force , some activists said fears of chaos if Assad were to be toppled and concerns that some protesters were driven by sectarian motives could have dissuaded some people from demonstrating . 
`` We are now convinced that there are Islamists working from within the protesters . 
They are only 5 percent but they are causing damage , '' one secular activist said . 
`` We want democracy in Syria , but not a democracy to unleash sectarianism . '' 
Syrian authorities have blamed Sunni Muslim Islamist groups for the unrest , which so far has claimed the lives of more than 600 civilians and 120 soldiers and policemen . 
Citing chants by some crowds against Assad 's minority Alawite sect , as well as against Syria 's Christian community , another activist said : `` It is clear now that they have Islamist background . '' 
Alawites , an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam , and Christians fear their freedoms of religion would end if Sunni Islamists came to power in place of Assad 's secular Baath party . 
`` I am a Sunni , but I do not want the hardliners to rule us , '' said one of the activists , adding that some Sunni mosques had urged a `` greater Jihad '' , an Islamist rallying call . 
Syria , which opposed the U.S. invasion of Iraq that toppled fellow Baathist Saddam Hussein in 2003 , turned a blind eye to Islamist militants using its land to cross into Iraq to fight U.S. forces in the years that followed the war . 
Some of these violent Islamists stayed in Syria , activists noted . 
`` My fear is that they gave the regime the motive to use force , '' one of the opposition organizers said . 
Activists said the country 's nightmare would be a split within the army , whose top commanders are mainly from the Alawite minority . 
That could unleash sectarian tension and push the majority Sunni country into sectarian conflict similar to neighboring Lebanon 's 1975-90 civil war , or to Iraq 's turmoil . 
`` A division in the army definitely means that Syria will be divided ... because a split on a sectarian basis means each sect will be fighting for survival , '' said a rights activist in Syria . 
Reports have surfaced of some low-level defections within the army , but officials and some activists dismissed it . 
Assad 's initial response to the protests included steps toward reforms , including granting citizenship to some ethnic Kurds and lifting a 48-year-old state of emergency . 
But as demonstrations continued , he turned to the army two weeks ago to crush resistance . 
`` There are many people in the street who believe that Bashar is a reformist and now the protests are delaying him from achieving the reforms , '' Rihawi said , adding that Assad still retained popularity . 
Other activists said that even though he could deploy overwhelming force , the 45-year-old president would still have to frame a political answer to the country 's crisis : `` The security solution is not in the interest of the regime , '' one said . 
`` They have to resort to a political solution -- the result of the security solution is zero '' . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
