Swine flu and the lessons of 1918 The response to the Spanish flu pandemic of 1918 offers clues to how we should deal with swine flu And lo it came to pass . 
Four years ago , Sir Liam Donaldson predicted that a new pandemic was `` inevitable '' . 
`` It 's happened before , in 1918 , 1958 and 1969 , '' the chief medical officer informed Andrew Marr on the BBC 's Sunday AM program . 
`` These things come in natural cycles , once every 10 to 40 years . '' 
It will be little comfort to Donaldson that he is on the brink of being proven right and right on cue . 
The Mexican strain of swine flu now sweeping the world is a pandemic in all but name we are only awaiting the formal declaration from the WHO . 
As someone who has spent the last five years studying mutating strains of influenza first in the field as a correspondent for the Observer and the Guardian , latterly as a historian based at the Wellcome Trust , I take no pleasure in being proven similarly prescient . 
If history teaches us anything it is that the past is not necessarily a guide to the future . 
But based on the events of the last few days , the parallels with 1918 the last great pandemic may be unavoidable . 
Mexican swine flu is a H1N1 hybrid consisting of pig , human and avian genes . 
The 1918 pandemic virus was also a H1N1 hybrid containing a mix of avian and non-avian genes . 
It now appears that an unusual cluster of influenza-like illnesses which have been the index cases of Mexican swine flu erupted in La Gloria in Veracruz in early April , a highly unusual time of year for an outbreak of influenza in the northern hemisphere . 
In 1918 , the earliest reports of what would prove to be the pandemic strain also came from the Americas , from Haskell County , Kansas , where doughboys at a US army base were being fattened on chickens and pork grown on local farms before crossing the Atlantic to reinforce the allied lines . 
And in 1918 as now there were also reports of young adults , men and women in their early 20s and 30s , falling prey to unusual pneumonias . 
So what should we make of the reports of the growing morbidity and morality from Mexico , and should we be worried ? 
In recent days , I have found myself being asked this continually in interviews with CNN , the BBC and Sky . 
I do not have a good answer yet . 
Three thousand children die of malaria every day in Africa , I want to say . 
But that 's no good because malaria is hardly a disease that is likely to bite you in Britain . 
But once again HIV , rightly or wrongly , is only perceived as a threat to `` high risk '' groups . 
The point is that influenza is an aerosol infection , as ubiquitous as air and as hard to avoid as breathing itself . 
But we need to and must keep things in perspective . 
Some 10,000 people die of influenza every year in Britain during the normal winter flu season . 
So far the Mexican flu has killed a grand total of just 160 people worldwide . 
Even if Mexican swine flu does prove to be a so-called Armageddon strain and , as I write , that is still a very big if there is every reason to believe we will cope , as long as we learn from and can avoid the mistakes of 1918 . 
In 1918 , Britain did not have a national health service , nor was there a ministry of health to coordinate the national response to the Spanish influenza so-called because Spain , not being party to the war , saw no need to censor news of the spreading depredation -LRB- by contrast , British newspapers , perhaps for the sake of national morale , treated the `` Spanish Lady '' as something of a joke -RRB- . 
Nor in 1918 did we possess antiviral drugs , antibiotics or a vaccine hardly surprising given that in 1918 the scientific consensus was that influenza was caused by a bacteria , not a virus . 
We did , however , possess a highly militarised economy , one that , should the authorities have so desired , could have been drilled to take the threat more seriously . 
But there was a war to win and the government did not wish to panic the populace . 
Instead , Britain 's then chief medical officer , Sir Arthur Newsholme , decreed that national circumstances dictated that Britons should `` carry on '' a message that the Times and other establishment organs were happy to iterate . 
Today , of course , we live in a very different world . 
Thanks to the internet and 24\/7 rolling news channels , information about epidemic diseases travels far faster than a virus can ever hope to , and competition between papers means that hysterical , unscientific claims are ubiquitous . 
The result is a sort of media-induced collective dread a sickness of the soul far in excess of the actual threat to our bodies . 
So , to the return to the question that Simon Mayo posed to me on Radio 5 Live on Tuesday : what should we do ? 
Well , for starters , we could do worse than to follow Newsholme 's advice in 1918 to stay calm and to `` carry on '' . 
Secondly , for all our sophisticated drugs and medical technology , we may find that some of the most effective measures are the simplest . 
In 1918 , when the LGB was finally girded into action late on in the pandemic , Newsholme advised people to avoid sneezing and coughing in public , and to keep plenty of fresh handkerchiefs on hand -LRB- the handkerchief to be `` boiled , or burned if of paper '' -RRB- . 
Other simple hygiene measures included washing one 's hands and gargling with a disinfectant mouthwash . 
I have yet to see Donaldson or Alan Johnson issue the last item of advice , but in every other respect they have repeated Newsholme 's formulations to the letter . 
Now , the Department of Health is also taking a leaf from the book of an even more heroic 1918 figure . 
In June of that awful year , while the majority of his countrymen were doing their best to ignore the threat from Spain , James Niven , the medical officer of health for Manchester , had 35,000 handbills printed and distributed throughout the city spelling out in clear and easy-to-understand English the dangers of influenza and giving strict instructions for the isolation of the sick . 
In November , when the second deadly wave of the pandemic swept through Britain , he went a stage further , printing more handbills and posting warnings throughout the city urging people to avoid trams and unventilated assembly halls . 
Niven 's proactive measures delayed the onset of influenza in Manchester , buying the city valuable time . 
The result was that when the virus returned as Niven knew it would just 1,700 Mancunians lost their lives . 
By contrast , in London , where some boroughs closed their schools and others prevaricated , some 10,000 people died . 
There is no reason , as yet , to believe that we are on the brink of a similar disaster . 
Having said that if the Department of Health 's `` Catch it , bin it , kill it '' campaign launched today can prevent even one unnecessary death , then the further ratcheting up of public anxieties will surely be a price worth paying . 
Time for a ban . 
