In this photo released by the White House , President Obama talks with U.S. Coast Guard Commandant Adm. Thad Allen , second right , and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal aboard Marine One as they fly along the coastline from Venice , La. , to New Orleans on May 2 . 
-LRB- AP Photo -RRB- President Obama warned Sunday that the vast oil spill nearing the Gulf coastline is a `` potentially unprecedented '' disaster , as he and other top administration officials defended the government 's response and pledged a `` relentless '' federal effort to clean up the slick . 
The president visited Louisiana to survey the damage and hear from local officials , who told him the oil is about nine miles from the state 's coast . 
Obama warned that the spill could `` seriously damage '' the local economy and environment . 
`` We 're dealing with a massive and potentially unprecedented environment disaster , '' Obama said . 
`` It could extend for a long time . 
It could jeopardize the livelihoods of thousands of Americans who call this place home . '' 
But in the face of emerging criticism , Obama and other top officials said the federal government has brought all possible resources to bear , rejecting comparisons to the Bush administration 's handling of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . 
They said British Petroleum is ultimately responsible , but that the federal government will do its part to contain the damage and stop the leak . 
The president cautioned Sunday that the effort could take `` many days , '' and said the federal government would spare no resource in attacking the problem , though BP will foot the bill in the end . 
`` From day one , we have prepared and planned for the worst , '' Obama said . 
`` Your government will do whatever it takes , for as long as it takes , to stop this crisis . '' 
The federal response to the spill has fluctuated since the April 20 oil rig explosion that triggered the rupture . 
Earlier in the week , officials drastically increased their estimate of the size of the spill , from 1,000 to 5,000 barrels a day . 
The Department of Homeland Security then declared the spill an incident of `` national significance '' on Thursday , freeing up resources to tackle the spreading problem . 
And after the White House initially insisted that Obama would not travel to the region , the president flew into New Orleans Sunday -- traveling in his motorcade to Venice , La. , two hours away , while meeting with Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal . 
The White House also announced Sunday that it was canceling the president 's scheduled visit Wednesday to New Jersey to discuss the economy . 
White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said Sunday that Obama `` just believed it was important to get down there as soon as he could and the quickest we could get down was today . '' 
Speaking on `` Fox News Sunday , '' top security and environmental officials said the federal government has been doing all it can to try to contain the mess . 
`` The administration responded all hands on deck from day one , '' Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said , explaining that the response `` evolved '' from a search-and-rescue mission for 11 oil rig workers who are now presumed dead to the cleanup effort under way . 
She said any comparison to the federal response to Hurricane Katrina , in which hundreds of people were killed and the government had advance warning , is `` a total mischaracterization . '' 
She said BP is `` ultimately responsible '' for the disaster , an assessment echoed by Adm. Thad Allen , commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard . 
Allen said the federal government should not completely take over the cleanup because , `` by statute and by law , BP is the responsible party . '' 
He said the firm bears responsibility and costs in the aftermath of the spill . 
He said , though , that the cleanup effort will continue to be a collaboration . 
`` It 's a combination of BP and the federal government , '' he said . 
`` We both have to execute our responsibilities . '' 
The spill has already impacted the Gulf Coast economy . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on Sunday announced that it was closing commercial and recreational fishing along the coastline from Louisiana to the Florida panhandle . 
Tim Kant , mayor of Fairhope , Ala. , told Fox News that the federal government needs to step up its response , even if it means sending BP the bill later . 
`` This is too much for BP or any company to deal with , '' he said . 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar told `` Fox News Sunday '' that the federal government is doing all it can to help keep the spill from spreading . 
`` Every effort is being made to stop the source right now , '' he said . 
`` There has not been a minute of rest since this started . '' 
Salazar gave a dire warning about the potential size of the environmental and economic damage that the spill could cause . 
He said BP 's plans to drill a relief well near the original source in order to relieve pressure -- something he called the `` ultimate solution '' -- could take up to three months . 
`` There are scenarios that it could be worse than the Exxon Valdez . 
We 're not sugarcoating this thing , '' he said . 
