The Subsea Oil Recovery System is a large structure that can be placed over the largest leak source in the oil spill created by the explosion of the Transocean Deepwater Horizon Rig . 
BP In its efforts to minimize the widening oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , BP is deploying a large structure -- essentially a giant concrete funnel -- to capture leaking oil . 
Here 's how it works . 
Called the Subsea Oil Recovery System , the 125-ton structure is designed to be placed over the largest source of oil leaking 5,000 feet beneath the Gulf of Mexico . 
The system collects the leaking oil and pumps it through a funnel and pipe to a tanker at the surface , which stores it and ships the oil to shore . 
The structure is a 40-foot tall concrete chimney-like structure that conveys leaking oil to a ship on the surface , the Deepwater Enterprise . 
Once there , oil is separated from water and stored until the ship can return to shore , where it is offloaded and shipped to an on-shore terminal . 
The ship is capable of storing 139,000 barrels of oil , processing it at a rate of 15,000 barrels per day . 
BP hopes it will be able to collect as much as 85 percent of the oil leaking from the sea floor . 
Working in conjunction with contractor Wild Well Controls , BP built the system in Louisiana based on similar designs used during the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina . 
Containment systems used following the hurricane were in shallow water , however ; to deal with the muddy conditions at the bottom of the sea , BP is adding mud flaps to the base of the structure , that should more thoroughly seal off the leak . 
BP plans two additional containment structures that it will use to collect gas spilling from the other two remaining leaks . 
Last week officials drastically increased their estimate of the size of the spill , from 1,000 to 5,000 barrels a day . 
The Department of Homeland Security then declared the spill an incident of `` national significance '' on Thursday , freeing up resources to tackle the spreading problem . 
