PLEASE NOTE : REUTERS IS UNABLE TO INDEPENDENTLY VERIFY SOME OF THE CONTENT OF THIS VIDEO , WHICH HAS BEEN OBTAINED FROM A SOCIAL MEDIA WEBSITE Members of the Syrian army continue to defect - suggesting the popular uprising against President Bashar al-Assad - could slide into armed conflict . 
Amateur video that could not be independently verified by Reuters - purportedly shows men defecting from the Syrian military - and promising to protect civilians . 
In Morocco , the Arab League met after suspending Syria 's membership -- for failing to stop months of bloody crackdowns on government protesters . 
Qatar 's Prime Minister Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani . 
SOUNDBITE : Qatari Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani -LRB- Arabic -RRB- `` We can not accept that people could be killed the way it is happening in Syria without intervening to stop the bloodshed and to avoid more violence , more violence and more killings . 
This is why we took a difficult decision for all of us because we are responsible for preserving the blood of our brothers in Syria . '' 
The Arab foreign ministers called on Syria to implement the Arab peace plan - which includes : pulling troops from cities , releasing prisoners and dialogue with the opposition . 
Syria has said it is committed to the plan , but the bloodshed continues . 
More Amateur video purportedly shows a neighborhood in Homs - shelled by tanks . 
The Assad regime has blamed the violence on terrorist gangs who they say have killed 1,100 soldiers and police . 
The United Nations said more than 3,500 people have been killed since the protests erupted in March . 
Sarah Irwin , Reuters . 
Arab League meets after Syria 's suspension -LRB- 1:46 -RRB- Nov. 16 - Arab foreign ministers met in Morocco , calling for an end to violence in Syria , as amateur video purportedly shows more members of the Syrian military defecting . 
-LRB- Transcript -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
