RABAT | Wed Nov 16 , 2011 5:51 pm EST RABAT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Arab League moved a step closer to imposing economic sanctions on Syria on Wednesday and signaled it was running out of patience with President Bashar al-Assad 's failure to halt an eight-month-old crackdown on protests . 
Syrian army defectors attacked an intelligence complex on the edge of Damascus in a high-profile assault that showed how close the popular uprising against Assad 's rule now is to sliding into armed conflict . 
Further intensifying the international pressure on Assad to end his repression of protests , France withdrew its ambassador from Syria and Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said Paris was working with the Arab League on a draft U.N. resolution . 
Last month Russia and China vetoed a U.N. Security Council resolution condemning Damascus , but the Arab League 's decision last weekend to suspend Syria has given international moves new momentum . 
On the day the suspension came into force , the League 's foreign ministers met in the Moroccan capital with a Syrian flag next to an empty chair where the Syrian minister , who boycotted the meeting , would have sat . 
The League -- which normally shies away from decisive action against its own members -- decided at the meeting to ask its experts to draft recommendations on economic sanctions on Syria . 
The decision brought a plan announced at the weekend one step closer to implementation . 
At their meeting in Rabat , the Arab foreign ministers also gave Damascus three days to implement a road map agreed this month to end the bloodshed and allow in observers , though they did not say what would happen if Syria failed to comply . 
Asked if the ultimatum was a last attempt at diplomacy , Qatari Foreign Minister Sheikh Hamad Bin Jassim al-Thani told reporters : `` We do not want to talk about a last-ditch attempt because I do not want this to sound like a warning . 
`` What I can say is that we are close to the end of the road as far as the -LRB- League 's -RRB- efforts on this front are concerned . '' 
The Arab League has stopped short of calling for Assad 's departure or proposing any Libya-style military intervention , but its ostracism of Syria is a blow to a country whose ruling Baath party puts Arab nationalism at the center of its credo . 
In Damascus , Assad supporters threw stones at the embassy of the United Arab Emirates , in one of the most secure districts of the city , and smeared its walls with graffiti , witnesses said . 
Speaking earlier in Rabat , Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu compared Syria with Libya , where rebels captured , humiliated and killed Muammar Gaddafi last month . 
`` The regime should meet the demands of its people , '' he said . 
`` The collective massacres in Syria and ... the bloodshed can not continue like this . '' 
Turkey has spent years courting its neighbor , but is now leading regional efforts to pit pressure on Assad . 
In Tehran , Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi criticized the Arab League for `` acting in a way that will hurt the security of the region . '' 
He told the official news agency IRNA that Syria , an ally of Iran since 1980 , had repeatedly pledged to meet legitimate popular demands and enact reforms . 
`` Unfortunately , some countries believe that they are outside the crisis ... but they are mistaken because if a crisis happens they will be entangled by its consequences . '' 
Western countries have tightened sanctions on Syria and on Monday Jordan 's King Abdullah became the first Arab head of state to urge Assad to quit . 
In the early months of the uprising , attempts by security forces to crush mainly peaceful protests accounted for most of the violence . 
But since August there have been growing reports of army defectors and armed civilians fighting back . 
Activists said Free Syrian Army fighters fired machineguns and rockets at a large Air Force Intelligence complex on the northern edge of the capital at about 2:30 a.m. -LRB- 0030 GMT -RRB- . 
A gunfight ensued and helicopters circled over the complex , on the Damascus-Aleppo highway . 
There were no immediate reports of casualties . 
Syrian state media did not mention the attack . 
Washington said it had few details and no confirmation of the incident , but that Assad was courting trouble . 
`` It 's not surprising that we are now seeing this kind of violence , '' State Department spokesman Mark Toner said . 
`` We do n't condone it in any way , shape or form . 
But let 's be very clear that it is the brutal tactics of Assad and his regime in dealing with what began as a non-violent movement -LRB- that -RRB- is now taking Syria down a very dangerous path . '' 
A Western diplomat in Damascus described the assault as `` hugely symbolic and tactically new , '' saying that if the reported details were true it would be `` much , much more coordinated than anything we have seen before . '' 
`` To actually attack a base like this is something else , and so close to Damascus as well , '' said the diplomat , adding that fighting in recent weeks involving army deserters in the town of Rastan and the city of Homs resembled a localized civil war . 
`` It 's not a nationwide civil war , but in very specific locations , it is looking like that , '' said the diplomat . 
The Free Syrian Army was set up by deserters and is led by Colonel Riad al-Asaad , who is based in southern Turkey . 
It announced this week that it had formed a `` temporary military council '' of nine rebel officers , led by Asaad . 
The statement said the Free Syrian Army aimed to `` bring down the regime and protect citizens from the repression ... and prevent chaos as soon as the regime falls , '' adding that it would form a military court to try `` members of the regime who are proven to have been involved in killing operations . '' 
Syrian television showed thousands of Assad 's supporters rallying in Damascus and Latakia to mark the day his father Hafez al-Assad seized power in 1970 . 
It said the crowds were also voicing their rejection of the Arab League 's decision . 
`` God , Syria , Bashar , nothing else ! '' 
shouted demonstrators in central Damascus , who turned out in heavy rain to wave flags and posters of the president . 
Two large posters of Assad and his father hung from a building . 
`` Neither rain nor sanctions will stop us expressing our nationalism , '' the television said . 
Syrian authorities have banned most independent media . 
They blame the unrest on `` armed terrorist gangs '' and foreign-backed militants who they say have killed 1,100 soldiers and police . 
Hundreds of people have been killed this month , one of the bloodiest periods of the revolt . 
Syria says it remains committed to the Arab peace plan , which calls for the withdrawal of troops from urban areas , the release of prisoners and a dialogue with the opposition . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Let the people of Syria decide for themselves . 
Until the leader steps down and allows the democratic process to begin , we will never know what the majority of Syrians really want and demand . 
If many live in fear , things have to change . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
