-LRB- Oliver Munday for The Washington Post -RRB- The festive mood of Friday lunch at Galatoire 's did not seem changed since the first time I ate at the 105-year-old New Orleans institution in the late 1950s : the ladies resplendent in their hats and finery , the gents in their seersucker suits , the gin and bourbon flowing like water . 
The merriment belied the tragic reality of the day 's headline : P&J , the city 's 134-year-old oyster company , had stopped shucking that morning . 
I was in New Orleans to speak at a culinary conference , and of course we ate well , including a three-hour lunch of pig dishes at Cochon . 
I had a crabmeat omelet at Galatoire 's , which has issued a public statement about the oil-spill disaster in the gulf : `` Nearly 80 percent of Louisiana 's seafood comes from thousands of miles of coastline west of the Mississippi River , hundreds of miles away from the currently affected areas of the Gulf of Mexico . 
Galatoire 's has taken steps to support our seafood producers and ensure that the freshest , highest quality fish , shrimp , crawfish and crabs are available without interruption . '' 
Oysters are conspicuous in their absence from the statement , which you can read at Galatoires.com . 
As Brett Anderson reported in the Times-Picayune on June 13 , the dwindling supply of local oysters in the wake of the oil spill forced Galatoire 's executive chef Brian Landry to scour the restaurant 's decades of menus , looking for traditional dishes to replace those featuring the local bivalves . 
Chicken livers en brochette , however , just do n't appeal to me as much as oysters prepared the same way . 
As food writers , we were already lamenting this latest devastating blow to the vibrant cuisine . 
At the end of the conference and before the speakers ' dinner , I slipped away in a merciful rain shower with culinary scholar Jessica Harris and Latin chefs Maricel Presilla and Patricia Wilson -LRB- all three PhDs -RRB- to Dickie Brennan 's nearby Bourbon House , renowned for the quality of its oysters . 
We were reassured that the oysters were all from Area 9 in Plaquemines , west of the Mississippi River . 
It 's one of two areas that have been reopened temporarily as the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals tests gulf oysters and oyster waters . 
It was Saturday afternoon , about 5 o'clock . 
Bourbon House sits squarely on the corner of Iberville and boisterous Bourbon Street , in the heart of the French Quarter . 
The Beans + Rice conference -LRB- where we had lectured -RRB- , the Creole Tomato Festival and the Louisiana Seafood Festival were going on simultaneously in the Quarter , so there were even more foodies than normal in New Orleans , if that 's imaginable . 
But Bourbon House was n't half-full -- at happy hour on Saturday -- and several lesser-known oyster bars we passed were empty . 
I 'm the first to admit that I prefer the brinier East Coast oysters of the R months , if for no other reason than that 's what I grew up with . 
But , as Presilla noted , the plump , meaty oysters from Plaquemines that we ate on Saturday `` beg to be cooked and sauced . '' 
We ordered several dozen , both cooked and raw , tossing them back with champagne . 
-LRB- The best I had were the wood-fired ones at Cochon . -RRB- 
Wistfully , we snapped cellphone photos of what might well be among the last Gulf Coast oysters for a while . 
We walked back to the hotel in the rain . 
I do n't get to the Gulf Coast often , but no food writer can ignore the bountiful cornucopia of the New Orleans table . 
There 's noplace else in the world quite like the Crescent City , with its Creole and Cajun cultures , its sultry weather , its magnificent architecture , its self-proclaimed decadence . 
Mardi Gras , Jazz Fest and Friday at Galatoire 's are no more excessive than an ordinary meal in New Orleans . 
Mounds of beans and rice , sweetbreads , vegetables swimming in hollandaise and oysters Rockefeller are mere side dishes or appetizers . 
Courses that follow are stuffed with crabmeat , garnished with crawfish and invariably sauced , followed by gumbo , jambalaya or fried soft-shell crabs with sauce Choron . 
For as long as I can remember , I have eaten oysters , frog 's legs , shrimp , crawfish and drum . 
That 's because I was born a stone 's throw from the Mississippi , in Baton Rouge . 
When I was 3 , we moved to the very similar terrain of the South Carolina low country . 
I have lived through several hurricanes , including Hugo , which put me out of house and business for a year . 
When I was growing up , my mother would send me out in our sailboat 's dinghy to catch lunch . 
In autumn , I would cast our old circular shrimp net into the brackish waters of the salt marsh , pulling in several pounds of shrimp . 
At low tide in winter , I would gather oysters and clams from the then-pristine waters , my mother tossing back into the creek any oysters under 10 inches long . 
In spring , the crab trap offered up not only those luscious blue crabs , but flounder and eel as well . 
My older sister Nancy returned to Louisiana to attend LSU . 
On the rare occasion that she was home , she gloated about her meals at Galatoire 's : turtle soup , shrimp remoulade , crabmeat omelet , crawfish etouffee and , of course , those oysters . 
Shortly after Nancy went away to school , we began spending a lot of time on our sailboat down on the estuaries behind Hilton Head Island . 
For years ours was one of a handful of pleasure craft docked or moored there . 
We envied her restaurant meals in Louisiana , but we had a wealth of seafood a cast or trap away . 
These days , I drive a car , use air conditioning and leave all sorts of appliances and electronic equipment plugged in , their digital clocks constantly draining electricity and increasing our demand for cheap fuel . 
No matter what I think about BP , I know that I , too , am partly to blame for the oil spill , because I add to that demand . 
We are all incensed about the ecological damage to the gulf , but multinational oil companies have spilled many millions of gallons in the Niger Delta over the years , polluting the air , water and soil of millions of Nigerians who depend on fish from the rivers simply to sustain their lives . 
I can give you a ballpark estimate of how many turtles and dolphins have washed up dead in the oily mess in the gulf , but I can not tell you the name of a single one of the people who lost their lives in the rig fire . 
I am embarrassed by my own myopia and greed . 
I am livid about the gulf oil spill , and I worry about the seafood industry , but I also know that many of the thousands of jobs affected by the spill are for manual laborers who will never set foot in the temples of Creole cuisine about which I , with my bourgeois tastes and wallet , tend to wax poetic . 
I am angry and worried about the people of Louisiana . 
How much more can they take ? 
Do I continue to order oysters out of season in hopes of contributing to the demand for them , so that prices will go higher and help the Gulf Coast seafood industry if and when it is able to return to business ? 
Do I continue to write purplish prose about my favorite seafood dishes while fishermen are out of work ? 
This tragedy should present us all with moral dilemmas . 
I think we must demand change , but change begins at home . 
As President Obama noted in his June 15 speech about the disaster , `` we ca n't afford not to change how we produce and use energy . '' 
Boycotting BP will only hurt your local gas station owner . 
Instead , slow down , use public transportation , and carpool . 
Set your air conditioning a few degrees higher . 
Turn off your computer and cellphone when they 're not in use . 
And this weekend , forgo those bottles of champagne and imported wine and instead write a check to one of the nonprofit groups that are prepared to employ trained volunteers to help clean up the mess and restore the fisheries . 
