An enduring feature of the gulf oil spill is that , even when you think you 've heard the worst-case scenario , there 's always another that 's even more dire . 
The base-line measures of the crisis have steadily worsened . 
The estimated flow rate keeps rising . 
The well is like something deranged , stronger than anyone anticipated . 
BP executives last month said they had a 60 to 70 percent chance of killing it with mud , but the well spit the mud out and kept blowing . 
The net effect is that nothing about this well seems crazy anymore . 
Week by week , the truth of this disaster has drifted toward the stamping ground of the alarmists . 
The most disturbing of the worst-case scenarios , one that is unsubstantiated but is driving much of the blog discussion , is that the Deepwater Horizon well has been so badly damaged that it has spawned multiple leaks from the seafloor , making containment impossible and a long-term solution much more complicated . 
Video from a robotic submersible , which is making the rounds online , shows something puffing from the seafloor . 
Some think it 's oil . 
Or maybe -- look again -- it 's just the silt blowing in response to the forward motion of the submersible . 
More trouble : A tropical wave has formed in the Caribbean and could conceivably blow through the gulf . 
`` We 're going to have to evacuate the gulf states , '' said Matt Simmons , founder of Simmons and Co. , an oil investment firm and , since the April 20 blowout , the unflagging source of end-of-the-world predictions . 
`` Can you imagine evacuating 20 million people ? 
... This story is 80 times worse than I thought . '' 
The bull market for bad news means that Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , the government 's point man for the crisis , is asked regularly about damage to the well bore , additional leaks and further failures . 
`` Can you talk a little about the worst-case scenarios going forward ? '' 
a reporter asked Tuesday . 
`` What happens if the relief wells do n't work out ? '' 
`` We 're mitigating risk on the relief well by drilling a second relief well alongside it , '' responded Allen , possibly the least excitable figure in this entire oil crisis . 
He said he 's seen no sign of the additional leaks that have gotten so many bloggers in a lather . 
But Allen 's briefings offer plenty of fodder for the apocalyptic set . 
Allen repeatedly has acknowledged that there could be significant damage to the well down below the mud line . 
That 's why , he said , the top kill effort last month was stopped : Officials feared that if they continued pumping heavy mud into the well , they would damage the casing and open new channels for hydrocarbons to leak into the rock formation . 
`` I think that one thing that nobody knows is the condition of the well bore from below the blowout preventer down to the actual oil field itself , '' Allen said last week . 
`` We do n't know if the well bore has been compromised or not . '' 
And by the way , the blowout preventer is leaning , Allen said . 
`` The entire arrangement has kind of listed a little bit , '' he said . 
A government spokesman later said this development was n't new . 
Even the most sober analysts are quick to say that this is such an unpredictable well that almost anything is possible . 
Bruce Bullock , director of the Maguire Energy Institute at Southern Methodist University , said additional leaks are a possible source of deep-sea plumes of oil detected by research vessels . 
But this part of the gulf is pocked with natural seeps , he noted . 
Conceivably the drilling of the well , and\/or the subsequent blowout , could have affected the seeps , he said . 
`` Once you started disturbing the underground geology , you may have made one of those seeps even worse , '' he said . 
But Tadeusz Patzek , a professor who is the chairman of the department of petroleum and geosystems engineering at the University of Texas , argues that the discussion has been hijacked by people who do n't know what they 're talking about . 
`` There is a lot of fast talk , which has little relation sometimes to reality , '' Patzek said . 
`` And there is jumping to conclusions by the people who have no right to jump to any conclusions because they do n't know . '' 
Much of the worst-case-scenario talk has centered on the flow rate of the well . 
Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
, among the harshest critics of BP in recent weeks , generated headlines with a dramatic announcement Sunday . 
`` I actually have a document that shows that BP actually believes it could go upwards of 100,000 barrels per day , '' Markey said on NBC 's `` Meet the Press . '' 
`` So , again , right from the beginning , BP was either lying or grossly incompetent . 
First they said it was only 1,000 . 
Then they said it was 5,000 barrels . 
Now we 're up to 100,000 barrels . '' 
The 1,000 - and 5,000-barrel figures -LRB- 42,000 gallons and 210,000 gallons -RRB- , however , were estimates of the actual flow ; the 100,000-barrel figure -LRB- 4.2 million gallons -RRB- in the internal BP document was based on a hypothetical situation . 
The document stated , `` If BOP and wellhead are removed and if we have incorrectly modeled the restrictions -- the rate could be as high as -LCB- tilde -RCB- 100,000 barrels per day . '' 
The blowout preventer and wellhead have not been removed . 
Another undated BP document , released by Sen. Charles E. Grassley -LRB- R-Iowa -RRB- last week , has an even more dramatic worst-case scenario for the well 's flow rate , but again one based not on the well as it is but on a theoretical formulation arrived at before the drilling . 
Under the heading `` Maximum Discharge Calculation , '' the document states that , given the most `` optimistic assumptions '' about the size of the reservoir and the intensity of the pressure at depth and assuming a total loss of well control and no inhibitions on the flow , `` a maximum case discharge of 162,000 barrels per day was estimated . '' 
After the Deepwater Horizon rig sank , BP recalculated that estimate based on what was known about the well . 
BP executives in early May briefed members of Congress on their conclusion : that the absolute worst-case flow rate was 60,000 barrels , with a `` more reasonable worst-case scenario '' of 40,000 barrels a day , the document states . 
Today the official government estimate of the flow , based on multiple techniques that include subsea video and satellite surveys of the oil sick on the surface , is 35,000 to 60,000 barrels a day . 
In effect , what BP considered the worst-case scenario in early May is in late June the bitter reality -- call it the new normal -- of the gulf blowout . '' 
