KABUL\/ISLAMABAD | Mon Jun 27 , 2011 4:55 pm BST KABUL\/ISLAMABAD -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Fighting across the Pakistan-Afghanistan border will overshadow talks when the two countries meet along with the United States on Tuesday to map out plans for reconciliation with the Taliban . 
Pakistan on Monday rejected Afghan allegations it had fired 470 rockets into Afghanistan over the past three weeks , saying only that `` a few accidental rounds '' may have crossed the border when it pursued militants who had attacked its security forces . 
But the escalation of fighting on the border between Pakistan 's ethnic Pashtun tribal areas and Afghanistan has underscored the difficulties the three countries face in working to reach a political settlement to the 10-year Afghan war . 
`` I think the main thing on the agenda this time may be the situation on the border , '' said Waheed Mujhda , political analyst at the Afghan Analytical and Advisory Centre in Kabul . 
The meeting , between U.S. envoy Marc Grossman and top diplomats from Afghanistan and Pakistan , will be the first since President Barack Obama announced a faster-than-expected troop withdrawal last week , accompanied by talks with the Taliban . 
`` It 's a way to coordinate efforts on reconciliation but also a way for Afghanistan and the U.S. to state clearly to the government of Pakistan ... to end the support by Pakistan of safe havens , '' Grossman told a news conference . 
Pakistan blames Afghanistan for giving refuge to militants on its side of the border , particularly in eastern Kunar province , leaving it vulnerable to counter-attack when it chases them out of its own tribal areas . 
Badly bruised after U.S. forces found and killed Osama bin Laden in the Pakistani town of Abbottabad on May 2 , Pakistan is keen to show it has a constructive role to play in helping the United States to bring stability to Afghanistan . 
It has long wanted the United States to hold talks with the Taliban to seek a political settlement to the Afghan conflict which it says is fuelling its own domestic Islamist insurgency . 
The United States has come some way towards sharing that view , opening its own preliminary talks with the Taliban . 
It has also softened its stance on talks by saying its demands that insurgents renounce violence , sever ties with al Qaeda and respect the Afghan constitution are outcomes rather than preconditions for negotiations - a suggestion made last year by Pakistan . 
`` Strategically the two countries are on same page , '' a senior military official said last month . 
`` There are issues on operational and tactical levels . '' 
Karzai has also been pushing for reconciliation with the Taliban and for the first time in the 10-year war , Pakistan , Afghanistan and the United States all share - in theory at least -- a commitment to seek a political settlement . 
But deep distrust remains , both between the United States and Pakistan and between Afghanistan and Pakistan . 
Pakistan has so far been excluded from Washington 's early contacts with the Taliban , Grossman told a news conference in Kabul . 
`` Up to now , the government of Pakistan has not been involved in that particular process at all , as yet . '' 
Kabul accuses Pakistan of continuing to support the Afghan Taliban , whom it openly backed when they were in power from 1996 to 2001 , to maintain its influence in Afghanistan . 
It also says Islamabad is trying to manipulate peace talks to its advantage , to the point of sabotaging them if they do not go in the direction it wants . 
`` We expect practical steps from Pakistan in the weeks and months ahead to help sustain the peace process , '' a senior Afghan government official said . 
`` The ball is in Pakistan 's court . '' 
Mujhda , the political analyst , echoed widespread distrust in Kabul of Pakistan 's intentions . 
`` In each of these meetings the reconciliation issue is raised , promises are made and then the countries go home and nothing is done , '' he said . 
`` Pakistan has so far opposed attempts by the U.S. to talk to the Taliban . '' 
The United States is also reluctant to include all insurgents in a political settlement , limiting its talks to the Afghan Taliban led by Mullah Mohammed Omar , but excluding the Haqqani network - the most active group in eastern Afghanistan . 
It is pushing Pakistan to expand its military operations in its tribal areas to target militants who use them as a base to fight in Afghanistan . 
Pakistan says its overstretched military will give priority to fighting militants who are killing its own people . 
With the Taliban talks still at a preliminary stage , and vulnerable to ethnic and regional rivalries which could plunge Afghanistan deeper into civil war as U.S. troops withdraw , the cross-border shelling has added another complication to a fragile situation . 
The Afghan government said on Sunday that `` it strongly condemned the firing of 470 rockets over the past three weeks from the Pakistan side of the border in the eastern provinces of Kunar and Nangahar provinces . '' 
President Hamid Karzai expressed his deep concern , it said , and asked Pakistan to immediately stop firing into Afghanistan . 
A spokesman for Karzai said on Monday Pakistan 's ambassador to Kabul had been summoned over the issue , though adding : `` we are sure it can be resolved . '' 
Pakistan army spokesman Major-General Athar Abbas said no rounds had been intentionally fired into Afghanistan . 
In the last month , there had been five major attacks from the Afghan side of the border , in which 55 men in the Pakistani security forces had been killed and 80 wounded . 
`` The fleeing militants were engaged by the security forces and a few accidental rounds going across can not be ruled out , '' he said . 
Pakistan says militants , including Pakistani Taliban commanders , have taken refuge on the Afghan side after it launched military operations to drive them out of its Federally Administered Tribal Areas . 
It was angered by a U.S. decision to thin out its troops in eastern Afghanistan , including the Korengal valley in Kunar province , when Washington decided to concentrate on population centres in southern Afghanistan , the Taliban heartland . 
`` For quite some time we have been highlighting that there are safe havens across the border , '' Abbas said . 
`` Something should be done about these . '' 
Before the killing of bin Laden , the United States had been talking about improving coordination of military operations on both sides of the border so that they could work with , rather than against , each other , in fighting insurgents . 
That cooperation may have deteriorated in the breakdown of trust which followed the unilateral U.S. raid to get bin Laden , perhaps explaining the escalation in cross-border shelling . 
It is impossible to verify independently exactly what is happening on the remote mountainous border . 
