MANAMA | Mon Jun 27 , 2011 4:32 pm BST MANAMA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A leader of Bahrain 's second largest opposition group said the party would join a national dialogue next week but a sectarian crisis was inevitable unless talks led to genuine political reform . 
Four months after Bahrain 's Sunni Muslim rulers quashed pro-democracy protests led by the Shi'ite majority , King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa has set July 2 as the start of a national dialogue to discuss economic , political and social reforms . 
The opposition has said only deep political reform , not mere dialogue , can permanently end popular unrest . 
`` The government needs to develop progressive solutions . 
This crisis is political , '' Radhi al-Mousawi told Reuters in an interview . 
`` Without a permanent solution to reforming the constitutional monarchy , the crisis will return in a few years . '' 
Mainstream opposition groups such as Waad seek a more representative parliament with legislative powers that are not weakened by an upper Shura council appointed by the king . 
The government has said all types of political , economic and social reform can be discussed but the opposition is suspicious that the wide variety of issues will diminish the chances of agreeing on real democratisation . 
Participants in the dialogue will send their proposals for approval to Bahrain 's ruling family at the end of the talks . 
Waad , a secular leftist party run by Sunnis and Shi'ites alike , was the worst-hit during unrest this year . 
Both of its offices were set ablaze and the government banned its operations , a decision it reversed just last week . 
Waad members believe their non-sectarian voice made them a target by hardliners in support of the government , who they accuse of stoking sectarian tensions in the Gulf island kingdom . 
`` The government can not gain victory over people by sewing sectarian divisions . 
Sectarianism could destroy us . 
The wars in Lebanon and Iraq have shown us that , '' Mousawi said as he examined the charred walls of Waad 's offices in Manama . 
Mousawi has led Waad in the stead of Ibrahim Sharif , the party 's Sunni , secular leader who was sentenced to five years in prison last week on charges of assisting a `` foreign terrorist group '' in a coup plot . 
Eight prominent hardline Shi'ite opposition leaders received life in prison . 
Bahrain , which crushed demonstrations calling for democracy in March , accuses the opposition of a sectarian agenda and backing by Shi'ite power Iran , charges that Shi'ite groups deny and Waad said was contradicted by its secular approach . 
Some hardline parties had called for abolition of the monarchy , but Waad and its Shi'ite political ally Wefaq , the opposition 's largest bloc , stuck to calls for democratic reforms to Bahrain 's constitutional monarchy . 
That has not stopped government loyalists from accusing Wefaq of taking direct orders from Iran and Waad of accepting such plans for political gain , accusations both groups deny . 
Opposition groups say that to have its ban lifted , Waad was coerced into accepting the national dialogue and apologising publicly for criticising Bahrain 's invitation of Saudi and United Arab Emirates troops to help it crack down on protests . 
`` We paid the price with certain concessions in a statement last week in order to reopen , '' Mousawi said . 
`` But we felt it was important to do it so we could get back to work . '' 
Authorities last week handed back the keys to Waad 's burnt-out headquarters , which the party is now renovating . 
Mousawi warned Waad was ready to withdraw if democratic reforms to the monarchy were not addressed . 
Opposition parties complain the dialogue dilutes their voice -- they have only 35 of 300 seats at the talks . 
`` This was not the dialogue we imagined , we wanted direct talks between the government and the opposition , '' said Mousawi . 
`` If there is no serious move on political reform , we will walk . '' 
Mousawi criticised Bahraini officials ' arguments that the opposition must be patient as reforms are implemented gradually in Bahrain , which they say is new to democratic reforms compared to established constitutional monarchies in Britain or Denmark . 
Mousawi said : `` The people are ready for democracy now ... No country can progress if over half its population feels it is marginalised . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
