Syria ` truce agreed ' to evacuate Homs civilians Fighting has been continuing in the central city of Homs where hundreds of civilians are trapped The International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- says the Syrian government and rebel fighters have agreed a temporary truce to allow civilians to be evacuated from the city of Homs . 
The ICRC said that its teams - with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent - were ready to enter the worst-hit parts of Homs . 
However despite the agreement , aid workers have been unable to enter . 
Elsewhere in Syria , activists say that at least 20 soldiers were killed by rebels in the province of Latakia . 
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the fighting took place in a region known as Jabal al-Akrad near the Turkish border . 
Homs has been at the center of the 15-month revolt against President Bashar al-Assad . 
Beatrice Megevand-Roggo , the ICRC 's regional head of operations , said fighting had been raging for more than 10 days in parts of the city . 
`` Hundreds of civilians are stuck in the old city , unable to leave and find refuge in safer areas , '' she said . 
The ICRC said it had received promises from both sides that they would allow a two-hour pause in the fighting . 
The ICRC says it is essential it be given immediate access . 
But although aid workers stood ready on Wednesday , they were not able to enter the city . 
It was not clear whether the heavy shelling and gunfire had stopped . 
Heavy shelling by government forces in residential areas has killed hundreds of civilians and brought international condemnation . 
The Syrian government blames the deaths on `` terrorists '' backed by foreign powers . 
On Tuesday , the government said it was trying to evacuate civilians and blamed rebel fighters for obstructing its efforts . 
Earlier on Wednesday , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that at least 20 soldiers were killed in an overnight attack by rebels on an army barracks in Latakia . 
It said that dozens of soldiers had been wounded and others - including an officer - captured . 
The group added that 58 people had been killed in violence across the country on Wednesday . 
UN monitors were fired on in Haffa and have suspended operations Neither the reports of attacks nor the casualty figures can be independently verified . 
Latakia has recently seen some of the worst of the fighting . 
Last week , the Syrian government said it had taken control of the western mountain town of Haffa , in Latakia , after fierce fighting with rebels . 
It said Haffa had been `` purged of terrorists '' and calm restored . 
UN monitors were fired on and turned away by angry residents as they tried to enter the town amid fears of a massacre . 
They were able to return on Friday . 
The UN observer mission has now suspended its operations in Syria amid the worsening violence . 
Its leader , Maj Gen Robert Mood , told the UN Security Council that observers were targeted by hostile crowds and gunfire on at least 10 occasions , diplomats said . 
But he said his decision to suspend operations did not mean the mission was leaving Syria or abandoning the Syrian people . 
The UN mission has been observing the implementation of a peace plan brokered by UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan . 
However , a ceasefire that was supposed to have come into effect in April never took hold . 
Meanwhile , diplomatic efforts to end the violence have been continuing . 
At the G20 summit in Mexico on Tuesday , US President Barack Obama held separate talks with the leaders of Russia and China - both of which have blocked UN resolutions over Syria . 
He said later that the talks had failed to achieve a breakthrough . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
