Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Wednesday , October 15 , 2008 ; 1:00 PM Washington Post staff writers Jill Drew , Anthony Faiola and Ellen Nakashima were online Wednesday , Oct. 15 at 1 p.m. ET to answer questions about their story detailing the regulatory decisions that were made as long as a decade ago that contributed to the current financial crisis . 
Cleveland , Ohio : Among the key players , Born is the only woman and right all along . 
Is that a coincidence or do women in general see things differently and are they better at security issues ? 
Another question , how can banks not see the risk in lending money to someone who can not pay ? 
Did short - term , huge profit blind bank executives , so they did n't care what would happen as long as they got the money and still keep theirs today ? 
Colonial Heights , Va. : Will Congress repeal the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and the 2000 Commodity Futures Modernization Act ? 
Is fractional reserve banking also a problem that caused this crisis ? 
Chicago , Ill. : Hi guys ; great article . 
It seems one question\/issue is not being talked about . 
As I understand this , there is a huge market for Credit Default Swaps -LRB- $ 50 Trillion ? -RRB- 
, and they lie at the heart of the credit insecurity . 
Banks do not know if other banks have a ticking time bomb of CDS on their books . 
Is there any talk about setting up a CDS exchange\/clearinghouse ??? Jill Drew : Thanks . 
The idea of setting up a CDS clearinghouse is topic A now for most of the major players in this market . 
New York Fed chief Timothy Geithner has been hosting a series of meetings to encourage firms to come together and support a clearinghouse . 
There are now four separate entities interested in hosting the clearinghouse , including a team from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange -LRB- where stock index futures and other financial contracts are currently traded -RRB- and Citadel Holdings , a big hedge fund . 
Washington , D.C. : Do n't buy the deregulation mantra . 
This was about greedy politicians wanting to let the good times keep rolling . 
The deregulation spiel is just convenient ; and politicians know the average citizen will buy it . 
Suburban Detroit , Mich. : Great story and very frustrating . 
`` Easy credit '' for people who wanted to live beyond their means is often cited as a beginning domino in this crash . 
Here in Michigan , we feel like consumers like us are getting blamed when , in fact , the worst excesses seem to have been located where housing and living costs were the highest -- on the coasts . 
Yet , there is no question that we are suffering the consequences as fully as anyone else if not more so . 
My question : have you considered teasing out the consumer aspect in more detail ? 
Jill Drew : We did a few large graphics with the story that tried to make some of the connections you are mentioning , showing how years of easy credit fueled a lifestyle that people could only afford with more and more borrowed money . 
The Cove , Conn. : Why is n't anyone blaming Congress and Washington ? 
They are the rule makers and regulators . 
When Wall street fails , people clean out their desks . 
When the SEC or Fed fails , Bureaucrats just avoid the press . 
Congress is to blame too , easy credit for risky housing and risky mortgage-holders . 
Veiled threats of racism when people tried to investigate F&F . 
The Problem is not Wall Street , it is the Beltway . 
The Media can be considered a branch of the Washington establishment , rarely do they assail the power of the bureaucracy . 
big fan : Ellen - No question , just a comment . 
I just wanted to let you know that I very much enjoy your writing and even make sure to seek out articles with your byline . 
You are one of the very few writers who understands technology and related policy , and who can articulate these complex thoughts to the reader without dumbing them down to the point where the facts are lost . 
These issues are growing in importance every day , and without knowledgeable journalists such as yourself , the vast majority of people may never know these issues even exist . 
McLean , Va. : Do you have plans for another article of the same scope as part l , or follow-up ? 
Edina , Minn. -LRB- Minneapolis suburb -RRB- : I just finished reading your series . 
Congratulations on a great job . 
My question is , now that funding has been promised to prop up AIG and other institutions , where does the money come from ? 
I assume the Treasury will borrow it , but from whom ? 
Raleigh , N.C. : Good afternoon . 
With the most recent round of consolidations , I , as a taxpayer , worry that there is an ever-shrinking number of financial entities controlling ever-growing proportions of the market . 
And the reason this worries me is that now , they 're ALL `` too big to fail . '' 
Should the next administration seriously consider breaking them up into smaller , less risky pieces ? 
What would be the pros and cons ? 
Alexandria , Va. : Your story on derivatives and leveraged credit default swaps is interesting but incomplete . 
It fails to answer the fundamental question posed in the lede , `` how did the world 's markets come to the brink of collapse ? '' 
You even admit in the article that `` Derivatives did not trigger what has erupted into the biggest economic crisis since the Great Depression '' . 
If you want to ask the question `` How did we get here ? '' 
, you should do the homework necessary to provide an answer . 
I suggest you point your readers to a place where they can find the answer : Two shows done on NPR 's `` This American Life '' : Episode # 355 , `` The Giant Pool of Money '' , which explains how the huge pool of investment money available worldwide provided incentives via mortgage backed securities that led to riskier and riskier mortgages being written over the last decade , tying huge amounts of risk to investors who thought they had `` safe as money '' investments , and Episode # 365 , `` Another Frightening Show About the Economy '' , which explains how the derivatives and credit default swaps your article alludes to acted as an accelerant to the fire started by the mortgage crisis\/US housing bubble , and also discusses whether the recent bailout package will have a chance to unfreeze the credit market -LRB- this being the occurrence that made economic experts in the government and private sector sit up and take notice of what was happening -RRB- . 
Ellen Nakashima : Our piece was an effort to explore how the debate over derivatives regulation -- one element of the larger story of what went wrong -- got waylaid in 1998 . 
The parties , though well-meaning , essentially were talking past one another . 
And as a result , the debate was largely shut down . 
You 're right that there were other underlying causes and we did not attempt to analyze all of them in this one piece . 
An earlier series in The Post detailed the credit crisis and the housing bubble . 
There has been and still ought to be more reporting on the role of collateralized debt obligations , the credit rating agencies , the lack of strict and clear underwriting standards across the mortgage lending industry , to name a few . 
You might also want to check out two shows done on NPR 's `` This American Life '' : Episode # 355 , `` The Giant Pool of Money '' , which explains how the huge pool of investment money provided incentives via mortgage backed securities that led to riskier and riskier mortgages being written over the last decade . 
And Episode # 365 , `` Another Frightening Show About the Economy '' , which explains how the derivatives and credit default swaps added fuel to the fire . 
Fremont , Calif. : So all the folks that have responsibility for allowing this mess to happen , the people who created and sold the tainted securities , are they subject to any legal consequences ? 
Jill Drew : Lawyers say there could be legal consequences for those who packaged the securities , especially if there is solid evidence that the firms that sold these securities knew they would likely default and essentially lied about it , telling investors they were safe . 
The ratings agencies that gave these collateralized debt obligations AAA ratings , even calling many of them `` super senior , '' are being called onto the carpet by government regulators . 
These ratings agencies have always existed with a potential conflict of interest : they collect fees from the issuer for every batch of securities they rate . 
So , they had an incentive to give the bonds high ratings so they could collect their fees . 
These firms , the biggest are Standard & Poor 's and Moody 's Investors Service , have elaborate policies against conflicts of interest , but the effectiveness of those policies are now being scrutinized . 
Ellen Nakashima : And , as our colleague Carrie Johnson has reported , Justice Department officials have said they will generally seek criminal charges against individual brokers and bankers , rather than companies themselves . 
For instance , two former fund managers at Bear Stearns are fighting criminal charges that they misled investors about their unit 's financial health . 
Oakton , Va. : It seems like the two GSE 's Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae took on too much risk which has played a major role in the meltdown . 
As the recovery takes place would n't it be better to eventually privatize these two entities and get the government guarantee out of their decision making so they do not take on too much risk in the future and potentially cause another house of cards to come crashing down again ? 
Missoula , Mont. : Al Greenspan has been the Fed Reserve Chief who has led this economy into one bubble after another - He had the choice to keep interest rates higher causing more short-term pain for some and avoiding a big crash like we 've just seen . 
Why save $ when interest rates were so low ? 
Edina , Minn. -LRB- Minneapolis suburb -RRB- : I assume there is not an unlimited capacity to lend on the part of China , Japan and the Middle East countries . 
We are seeing the EU countries shoring up their budgets as well . 
Are n't we in danger of seeing inflation take off like what 's happening in Zimbabwe ? 
Anthony Faiola : You 're right - there is some doubt about whether the countries you mention will continue to sink their cash into the U.S. with the same gusto they have in the past . 
That said , U.S. treasury bonds still represent one of the safest investments on global markets today , making them , for the moment , still relatively desirable as investors run for cover . 
Washington , D.C. : in response to Suburban Detroit : If I take out a subprime loan to buy prime property , that property will still exist after I default . 
However , if I take out a bad loan to buy bad property , or a bad American car -LRB- I just replaced a transmission on a three-year old Buick -RRB- , the bad property or poorly made vehicle has no residual value when I walk out on the loan , and everybody pays . 
Oh , and I religiously followed GM 's maintenance recommendations . 
Committee and agency turf battles . 
A lack of political will . 
: I think you 're making the symmetry of sin error here . 
I am a sinner . 
You 're a sinner therefore we are equal in spite of the fact you are a litterbug and I killed 23 people with a chain saw . 
Behind this mess is the conservative philosophy that the `` free '' market knows best , that all regulation is bad , that the rich deserve more and more of the wealth of the country . 
To blame the Dems and the Repubs equally is simply wrong . 
Ellen Nakashima : Alan Greenspan as Fed chairman , and Sen. Phil Gramm -LRB- R-Texas -RRB- , while he was at the helm of the Banking Committee were very powerful forces and beat back efforts at regulation . 
So you 're right in that they drove the debate in the 98-2004 time period . 
But Democrats largely conceded that debate and were forced to work the margins . 
Great Falls , Va. : I find one of the huge disconnects today is that while the majority of investors measure the investment environment and general performance of the markets by focusing on one particular stat , the DJIA , this crisis is largely being driven by considerations that have little or nothing to do the equities market . 
Yet these instruments are driving down the value of portfolios so much that many are forced to re-think their retirement plans , higher education budgets , etc. . 
In the long run will these recent events lead to wholesale abandonment of the stock market ? 
Annandale , Va. : Were there lessons from the Savings & Loan Crisis of the 1990s that should have been learned that could have prevented the current banking crisis ? 
Alexandria , Va. : Why has n't anyone proposed eliminating the entire CDS market ? 
Questions of risk are supposed to inform every investment decision . 
Swaps delude investors and financial institutions into thinking that risks are lower than they really are and thereby distort our entire market system . 
Why on Earth would we try to reform these tools rather than just eliminate them ? 
What our story showed was that the Democratic Clinton administration did not see fit to push back hard against those forces at the time . 
: So what you 're saying is that the good guys were not able to beat the bad guys . 
That does n't make them bad guys . 
Augusta , Ga. : How about doing a story about people losing their homes because they relied on information provided to them by the people they should have been able to trust to get them the right house -LRB- in terms of price -RRB- and the right mortgage instrument -LRB- fixed rather than ARM -RRB- . 
Few people would opt to purchase a house that they could not afford . 
After looking at the buyers , work up the food chain -LRB- real estate agents , brokers , banks , etc -RRB- . 
Hopefully , your articles will make people understand that the consumer is not the first link in this economic downturn chain . 
They were\/are victims much more than we are -- they are homeless and have a foreclosure note on their credit report . 
Ellen Nakashima : You 've pointed out a critical part of the problem and one that government is belatedly addressing . 
The Fed in July finally issued a rule that would give consumers more protections in the suprime lending market . 
They include a ban on lending based on the collateral without regard to a person 's ability to repay the loan , and a ban on abusive servicing practices . 
But there are questions about the rule 's enforceability . 
Ellicott City , Md. : Just saw the article and have n't had a chance to completely digest it , but I do have one question . 
Clearly our nation 's housing policy has been to promote home ownership . 
I assume that the rate of home ownership is dropping or soon will be as a result of all this . 
Yet it 's still a noble goal to put as many people in their own homes as is reasonable and financially sound . 
What are your thoughts on the outlook for homeownership over , say , the next 3-5 years ? 
Or even a decade from now ? 
University Park , Md. : Thanks for the excellent reporting . 
Your article is just the type of longer-form , historical analysis I 've been hoping for . 
My question : Can you recommend a book or two that gives a more detailed description of the various financial instruments at play -LRB- derivatives , CDOs , CDSs , MBSs , etc. -RRB- , targeted at a layperson who is n't afraid of a fair bit of technical detail or even -- gasp -- math ? 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . '' 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
