ZURICH -- Of all the places in the world , this was supposed to be the safest to stash your wealth during times of calamity , war and financial panic . 
But here in the heart of Zurich 's financial district , anxious Swiss investors have been lining up to watch the stock tickers in front of the headquarters of UBS , a financial behemoth that has written off a stunning $ 43 billion in loser investments since 2007 , more than any other bank in Europe . 
`` The idea that this could happen in Switzerland is unbelievable , '' said Klaus Stoeckli , 55 , a food-products salesman who has withdrawn about $ 90,000 in investments from UBS , worried that its storied vaults might not be able to protect his money from the global credit crisis . 
UBS executives say the bank is not in danger of failure . 
It has cut 7,000 jobs worldwide and is still trying to unload billions of dollars ' worth of risky securities . 
But the bank has moved aggressively since December to reinforce its balance sheet with $ 25 billion in fresh private capital . 
It announced this month that it expects to report a small profit for the third quarter . 
But the scare has forced Switzerland for the first time to contemplate the disaster that would result if one of its champion banks failed . 
It 's been a shocking exercise for a country that has long cultivated a reputation for unsurpassed security -- and secrecy -- in its banking industry . 
If UBS were to collapse -- as has already occurred with banks in Britain , Germany , France and Belgium -- it is unclear if the Swiss government could amass enough money to rescue it , analysts said . 
UBS has more than $ 1.75 trillion in assets worldwide , a figure about four times as large as Switzerland 's gross domestic product . 
`` Swiss banks have always operated on the basis that they have an implicit guarantee of the state , '' said Manuel Ammann , director of the Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance in St. Gallen . 
`` But these large banks impose substantial risks on the Swiss economy , simply because of their size . '' 
UBS traces its roots to the mid-19th century . 
A combination of the former Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corp. , it prospered during the bank-merger boom of the past two decades and manages more private wealth assets than any other financial institution in the world . 
While UBS is the largest bank in Switzerland , it 's not the only giant affected by the credit crisis whose sheer size looms over the Swiss economy . 
One block away on the Bahnhofstrasse , Zurich 's main street for high finance and luxury shopping , is the headquarters of Credit Suisse , with $ 1.1 trillion in assets . 
Though Credit Suisse has also suffered in the past year , it has not been hit as hard as UBS , its longtime rival . 
So far , the Swiss government has had little to say about the financial turmoil , adhering to the national tradition of silence and discretion when it comes to money matters . 
On Oct. 6 , the Swiss Federal Council , the executive body that runs the Swiss government , issued a statement saying it was `` prepared to take appropriate measures should the need arise '' and was `` committed to ensuring the stability of the financial system . '' 
But it has said almost nothing about the travails of UBS , or commented on whether it has developed any contingency plans . 
`` One would like to have learned how a UBS would be saved , when it has become too big to be saved by little Switzerland alone , '' the Neue Zuercher Zeitung , a leading Swiss newspaper , wrote in an editorial . 
`` It was once again crisis management la Suisse : If it 's serious , say nothing . '' 
Multimedia reports on the struggle for equality around the globe . 
