The Financial Crisis And You : Planet Money on Crisis Basics Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Contributing editor for NPR 's `` Planet Money '' and producer for `` This American Life . '' 
Wednesday , October 15 , 2008 ; 11:00 AM Alex Blumberg of `` Planet Money '' and `` This American Life '' was online Wednesday , Oct. 15 at 11 a.m. ET to offer some `` Crisis 101 '' explanations about the current state of the economy and takes your questions about the proposals to improve the situation . 
Blumberg is a producer for Michigan : This might be a better question for the Project Money podcast , but here goes : Since you guys have been explaining everything so well , I was hoping you might explain this -- why , when the economy tanks , I can fill up my tank for less ? 
What is the pressure on oil prices ? 
I know it 's not the dollar , but I ca n't figure out what the lever is in a falling US economy that forces down oil prices . 
I 'm sure it 's fairly obvious , but I have n't heard it addressed . 
And thanks for all of the great podcasts . 
The Giant Pool of Money was one of my all time favorite This American Life shows . 
Anonymous : Does Bank intervention mean the beginning of the end for the free-market economy ? 
Lake St. Louis , Mo. : Can banks look at the balance sheets of other banks ? 
I 've read that the credit default swaps are not on the balance sheets , and from what I 've gathered , the banks are n't lending to each other because they fear bank failure . 
If credit default swaps are the unseen source of this fear , then could the world 's governments force the cancellation of all credit default swaps , at least temporarily , while figuring out how to regulate them properly ? 
Since netting appears to tie many institutions together like an unholy chain of dominoes , maybe this will set the dominoes further apart ? 
These risk management tools have put the whole system at risk , so why not make the sellers buy them back at a prorated price ? 
Alex Blumberg : From what I understand , this is the crux of the problem -- you ca n't really tell what 's going on in another bank by looking at its balance sheet . 
And credit default swaps are only one part of that . 
Entire classes in business schools are devoted to deciphering a balance sheet . 
And from what people tell me , there 's just a lot that 's opaque . 
Cologne , Germany : Hi Alex , I 'm a big fan of `` This American Life '' . 
you explained how you lost much money in the first `` Internet bubble '' by investing without understanding the first thing about stock market . 
It 's interesting how you became curious . 
How do you became the host of an show about economy . 
Or let us rephrase it : Do think it 's important to be an outsider in the financial market to find ou what went wrong ? 
And to explain it to the `` Main Street '' ? 
And in another episode of TAL , I found a text from Lee Sandlin about losing wars . 
He explains the refusal of the Germans and Japanese to surrender , because this would mean taking responsibility for the inescapable . 
Did something like this happen in the financial market ? 
Alex Blumberg : I think about that lee sandlin piece all the time now . 
I do think something like that is going on . 
It 's hard to admit to yourself that you 've screwed things up this badly . 
Virginia Beach , Va. : It appears that those of us with the bulk of our retirement assets in 401k accounts are really `` stuck . '' 
We ca n't move funds into the money market accounts because the funds are insured only up to deposits as of 9\/19\/08 . 
Bond funds are losing money , too . 
We ca n't take the funds out and put them into insured CDs or munis without paying a huge penalty . 
So , how are we ever to recover the massive losses we 've incurred over the last months ? 
Will we ever be able to retire comfortably ? 
Chicago : Planet Money and others have noted that the language allowing the Treasury Secretary to directly inject capital into banks by purchasing shares was inserted into the legislation at the last minute , using somewhat cryptic language . 
What is the likelihood that we will ever learned who exactly inserted this language ? 
It seems like this crisis would now be far worse if that language had n't been inserted . 
Reston , Va. : We were about to put a small chunk of money into an aggressive college fund for our toddler , but now are wondering if we should keep that money in our savings account instead . 
Since we have about 15 years until college , is it smart to put the money in and hope the market takes care of it by the time she 's ready to leave the nest ? 
Alex Blumberg : I 'm not a financial manager . 
But I 'll offer my two cents . 
Investing in stocks right now , you 're sure of one thing , you 're not buying at the peak . 
So , maybe you 're not buying at the absolute bottom . 
Chances are , over the next 15 years , they 'll grow to be worth more than they are right now . 
And the market will probably beat a savings account . 
Geneva , Switzerland : People talk a lot about the great losers in this crisis , the ones experiencing difficulties , leading to restructuring , mergers , etc. . 
But after the crisis is gone , whenever it may be , who do you think will win from this situation ? 
How will the world look after the storm is over -LRB- not just financially but also politically -RRB- ? 
In the program `` The Great Pool of Money '' I remember you mentioning that China had 1 trillion dollars in its Central Bank , but a few days ago I read in Bloomberg.com that they now have 1.9 trillion , and it does n't seem to stop . 
Santander is in a buying spree , getting advantage of the `` sale prices '' of institutions experiencing difficulties . 
Russia will probably lend Iceland billions so that it can have a significant influence in that delicious part of the globe . 
For me , it seems that some seem to be trying to get a -LRB- long-term -RRB- profit out of this situation ... Austin , Texas : Alex , I wonder if you can talk about the TED Spread . 
I 've been keep an eye on it since I heard you talk about it on TAL -- is it making real downward progress , or are the banks still scared you-know-what-less to lend to each other ? 
Ithaca , N.Y. : What changed , exactly ? 
... The money markets are still frozen and there is little or nothing to stop all the bailout money from being sucked right through the system and into the pockets of bank shareholders , bank executives , and all the Wall Street delinquents who got rich by inventing the voodoo financial instruments that caused the mess . 
What , in a fundamental way , is different now that the planet-wide bailout has been announced ? 
Houghton , Mich. : What would a Libertarian do ? 
-LRB- and would it better or worse than what is being done ? -RRB- 
washingtonpost.com : Hi Alex , thanks for coming on today . 
I 'm curious about what your emotions and reactions have been while reporting this story . 
Has your mood followed the ups-and-downs of the market ? 
Has anything made you particularly angry or depressed ? 
New York : Is it true that the Hoover administration made the Great Depression happen or made it worse by raising taxes and engaging in restrictive trade policy -LRB- Smoot-Hawley -RRB- , exactly what Obama is promising to do if elected ! 
Tulsa , Okla. : Congrats on Planet Money . 
You 're doing a great public service for those of us who have only a vague idea of how economics works . 
Boulder , Colo. : Hi Alex , Love the show ! 
It 's my only source for what 's really what . 
My question is : what is the likelihood that the markets are going to stay the way they are until after the election ? 
Cathy Washington , D.C. : Alex , I just wanted to tell you how much the Planet Money podcast means to me . 
This stuff is so complicated that even those of us working on financial issues from the policy perspective get lost . 
I am addicted to the podcast . 
One thing I 'm curious about is how we can prevent these problems in the future . 
Once we get through this crisis -- I know it will be a hard road , but eventually we will -- what kind of regulatory structure do you think needs to be set up so that this does n't happen again ? 
Thanks again for all your work on this ! 
San Rafael , Calif. : Alex , What 's your estimate of the total amount of money that the Fed , Treasury , and other governments have been putting into banks and other financial institutions so far ? 
New York : Alex , if you are an insolvent -LRB- or near-insolvent -RRB- bank and you take a bucketful of money from the Treasury in this stock-for-capital plan , why would n't you just make the riskiest bets possible ? 
If you fail , you and your shareholders lose little -LRB- as your bank was near insolvency to begin with -RRB- and if you succeed , you 've made a cool buck off of Uncle Sam 's generosity . 
Seems like Hank is just encouraging moral hazard here for small banks , no ? 
Somerset , Ky. : Alex , I have been following this crisis on your Planet Money blog . 
My question is how inflation will affect the economy in the long run ? 
Pretending inflation is n't a factor because of other short-term factors does n't change the facts . 
Charlotte , N.C. : Wells Fargo is reporting ` better than expected ' profits today . 
Does this mean they will still be able to qualify for help with the new bank capitalization plan ? 
Charlotte , N.C. : Alex , I own a condo in Charlotte that 's been on the market for about a month with only one low-ball offer coming in . 
Would you recommend biting the bullet and simply unloading it now , or waiting to see what happens over the next few months ?? Anonymous : What are these folks crying about with the free market economy and socialism fears ? 
They sound like a bunch of quacks . 
All our allies in this world are basically socialist governments . 
They still have freedoms , they still have wealth . 
One apparent thing they do have is a government that tends to understand it works for the people and provides base services in response . 
Lastly , is n't the true economic engine in this country government spending ? 
Frisco , Tex. : Could you explain what a credit default swap is and when did banks start doing this ? 
Alex Blumberg : I ca n't right here . 
But I did so on the radio . 
So you can listen here : Corvallis , Ore. : With 3-month Treasury bonds so low -LRB- 0.14 % last I checked -RRB- , I suppose there is a bright side to the crisis -- we can borrow our way out of it essentially for free . 
But how much longer can we borrow ? 
When do we hit the tipping point that investors decide the U.S. Government is no longer a safe investment ? 
How would we know if investor confidence in the U.S. were waning ? 
Piedmont , Calif. : Hi Alex , Over the weekend and Monday , the U.S. offered dramatic new capital injections to shore up banks . 
So why is the stock market still falling ? 
Boston : Do you know why the government did n't impose dividend restrictions and\/or share repurchases in the bank recapitalization ? 
Is it just because they needed to force the banks to accept the capitalization and adding more restrictions would have been too hard ? 
Chicago : In a post on Planet Money dated yesterday , Adam Davidson reports that Anil Kashyap is not happy with the way the bank recapitalization is being done by Treasury - `` he 's upset that Treasury will allow banks to give unlimited dividends to their shareholders . '' 
Can you explain a little bit about why this is bad , and is there anything we -LRB- as voters , maybe ? -RRB- 
can do about it ? 
Alex Blumberg : It 's bad because if they give dividends to shareholders , they wo n't be making the banks any healthier . 
Basically , the banks owe billions of dollars to cover bad bets they made . 
the government 's money is supposed to be covering that . 
If the banks take it and give the money to shareholders instead , then they 'll be in the same position they were in before . 
New York : My question is about the longer-term implications of the proposed rescue plans . 
Both candidates are talking about tax breaks in addition to the hundreds of billions in the rescue package . 
How are these things actually paid for ? 
Does the national debt actually matter to the real economy and what are the problems with too much debt ? 
Are we in danger of higher inflation rates because so much money is being pumped into the economy ? 
Alex Blumberg : It does n't seem like the debt matters that much . 
I mean , in a perfect world , we would n't be putting a trillion dollars on the line , but we 're borrowing it for free , and people do seem to think that we 'll get the money back eventually . 
Reading , Pa. : This crisis is partly due to unregulated firms lacking collateral for `` swaps . '' 
Are these swaps still being sold ? 
Will they be regulated in the future ? 
Cleveland : Is there any sort of equivalent to FDIC for businesses ? 
It seems to me that the potential of small\/mid size business failures and a subsequent need to withdraw their money from banks could be a big reason that banks are hording all this money and not lending it to other banks . 
Love all your work . 
Reading , Pa. : Back in September , Goldman Sachs and other firms announced they were going to become regulated banks . 
Would they have been ineligible for any government bailout had they not become a regulated bank ? 
Isla Vista , Calif. : LIBOR rates have been higher than they are now -LRB- although the TED spread is high , but if a bank is borrowing money from another bank , does the return of Treasuries really matter ? -RRB- . 
It seems like the problem is not high LIBOR rates , but simply that banks wo n't lend . 
Why do n't banks just raise the interest rate they 're willing to lend at -LRB- LIBOR -RRB- until the return justifies the risk ? 
Interest rates were at the 10-15 % level in the late 1970 's , much higher than now , but we did n't call that the crisis of the century . 
Why such a big deal now ? 
Ithaca , N.Y. : Suppose that the TED spread stays roughly where it is for awhile : has anyone calculated how long it will be before a significant fraction of U.S. businesses will start finding it impossible to make payroll ? 
How long can they breathe without oxygen ? 
Chicago : A question regarding the Community Reinvestment Act . 
Of late , I 've had some more conservative friends of mine point to this a `` the root '' of the financial crisis today , or more specifically , to changes made to the act in 1995 that in essence forced banks to make sub-prime loans -LRB- the wording I 'm hearing , not my own -RRB- . 
What 's the deal ? 
I 'm reading up myself , but I thought I 'd ask if you had any insight , or if this might get addressed on Planet Money . 
Glendale Ariz. : I know how weird and socialistic this sounds , but ever since Fannie and Freddie went down I 've been seeing more and more emails and blogs about nationalizing the US operations of the Big Five oil companies , although I 've never heard it mentioned in the media and I 'm wondering if you have . 
I 'm generally a capitalist , but this argument is making a lot of sense to me since oil should be considered a sunset industry . 
It would prevent geopolitical or speculative swings in oil prices from damaging the delicate process of recovery from the financial crisis . 
Prices could be managed to assist a gradual conversion to clean renewables , the profits -LRB- above a 5 or 6 percent annual dividend to shareholders -RRB- could be used to finance other recovery and bailout efforts , and in a certain number of years the government would return to the shareholders modern energy companies based on clean renewable fuels with a real future , so this would be a long term benefit for the shareholders as well . 
Fayetteville , Ark. : I would like to see expansion of the encouragement of savings through raised limits and expanded ways to contribute to IRAs . 
Would n't this help the banks with capital and individuals save in the long term ? 
Is anyone thinking or talking about this for the next Congress ? 
Let 's reward good behavior . 
Sherman , Tex. : Is there a short answer for why deflation is worse ? 
Washington , D.C. : When asked about the cost of the bailout , Congress and the White House are quick to point out that we may recover part of the $ 700 billion cost eventually , so it 's really not as high . 
But the reality is that we 'll be adding to our national debt ; we do n't have this money on hand , and because we need to borrow , to measure the true cost of the bailout , we also need to factor in the interest we are going to pay on this for decades to come . 
What do you think the true cost of the bailout is -LRB- considering that we may get part of the principal back but we 'll still have to pay interest -RRB- ? 
Thanks as always for the fantastic podcast and all your insights . 
Alex Blumberg : well , we wo n't have to pay that much interest , since we 're borrowing the money essentially for free right now . 
So , it 's basically like putting it on a credit card with a 0 % APR teaser rate . 
And I do think there 's a fair chance we 'll get the money back . 
We did with the Chrysler bailout . 
But you 're right , it does hamper our ability to borrow more . 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . 
To Refresh Page : Press the F5 key on your keyboard or click here . 
: Christless Christianity Guest : Dr. Michael S. Horton Viewpoint is a paid discussion . 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
