A decade ago , long before the financial calamity now sweeping the world , the federal government 's economic brain trust heard a clarion warning and declared in unison : You 're wrong . 
The meeting of the President 's Working Group on Financial Markets on an April day in 1998 brought together Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan , Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Arthur Levitt Jr. -- all Wall Street legends , all opponents to varying degrees of tighter regulation of the financial system that had earned them wealth and power . 
Their adversary , although also a member of the Working Group , did not belong to their club . 
Brooksley E. Born , the 57-year-old head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission , had earned a reputation as a steely , formidable litigator at a high-powered Washington law firm . 
She had grown used to being the only woman in a room full of men . 
She did n't like to be pushed around . 
Now , in the Treasury Department 's stately , wood-paneled conference room , she was being pushed hard . 
Greenspan , Rubin and Levitt had reacted with alarm at Born 's persistent interest in a fast-growing corner of the financial markets known as derivatives , so called because they derive their value from something else , such as bonds or currency rates . 
Setting the jargon aside , derivatives are both a cushion and a gamble -- deals that investment companies and banks arrange to manage the risk of their holdings , while trying to turn a profit at the same time . 
Unlike the commodity futures regulated by Born 's agency , many newer derivatives were n't traded on an exchange , constituting what some traders call the `` dark markets . '' 
There were now millions of such private contracts , involving many of Wall Street 's top firms . 
But there was no clearinghouse holding collateral to settle a deal gone bad , no transparent records of who was trading what . 
Born wanted to shine a light into the dark . 
She had offered no specific oversight plan , but after months of making noise about the dangers that this enormous market posed to the financial system , she now wanted to open a formal discussion about whether to regulate them -- and if so , how . 
Greenspan , Rubin and Levitt were determined to derail her effort . 
Privately , Rubin had expressed concern about derivatives ' unruly growth . 
But he agreed with Greenspan and Levitt that these newer contracts , often called `` swaps , '' were n't exactly futures . 
Born 's agency did not have legal authority to regulate swaps , the three men believed , and her call for a discussion had real-world consequences : It would cast doubt over the legality of trillions of dollars in existing contracts and create uncertainty over how to operate in the market . 
At the April meeting , the trio 's message was clear : Back off , Born . 
`` You 're not going to do anything , right ? '' 
Rubin asked her after they had laid out their concerns , according to one participant . 
Born made no commitment . 
Some in the room , including Rubin and Greenspan , came away with a sense that she had agreed to cool it , at least until lawyers could confer on the legal issues . 
But according to her staff , she was neither deterred nor chastened . 
`` Once she took a position , she would defend that position and go down fighting . 
That 's what happened here , '' said Geoffrey Aronow , a senior CFTC staff member at the time . 
`` When someone pushed her , she was inclined to stand there and push back . '' 
