National Incident Commander Adm. Thad Allen -LRB- FNC -RRB- Adm. Thad Allen took ownership of the government 's response to the oil spill Sunday , saying that he reports to President Obama and Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano but as the man on the ground in the Gulf of Mexico , he makes the calls on the day-to-day containment and cleanup effort Allen told `` Fox News Sunday '' that he consults with the secretary and the president and deals regularly with Interior Secretary Ken Salazar and Energy Secretary Steven Chu , but as the national incident commander , the buck stops with him . 
`` The final call has to be made to the federal on-scene coordinator by law , and that 's a Coast Guard officer , '' Allen said . 
Asked if that Coast Guard officer is him , the retired commandant said , `` Yes . '' 
BP announced Sunday that the cap it has put on the gushing well has enabled the oil giant to collect 10,000 barrels over 24 hours . 
But officials and scientists still do n't know for certain how much oil is spilling out each day -- estimates range from 12,000 to 25,000 barrels a day , so the containment cap could be collecting as much as 80 percent or as little as 40 percent of the oil . 
As thousands of marine animals die and the Louisiana marshland is polluted with the sticky slick , Allen said BP is responsible for getting out the resources to clean up the mess . 
`` We are accountable for oversight . 
BP is the responsible party , supposed to put the resources out there . 
In the long run the government is accountable . 
And frankly , I 'm accountable . '' 
Sen. John Cornyn , R-Texas , said that he is glad to hear Allen say that the U.S. has the `` human and physical assets '' to deal with the problem , but he 's still confused about who 's in charge . 
`` Is it the president of the United States ? 
Is it the CEO of British Petroleum ? 
Is it Admiral Allen ? 
So I think really , we need the president to step up and assert himself and to say , ` Let 's cut through the red tape , let 's cut through the chain of command , and let 's get the assets where they need to be in order to protect the beaches and the people of that important region , ' '' he said . 
But Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour said he could n't be happier to have Allen running the operation . 
`` You interviewed Admiral Allen , who , by the way , we think the world of . 
He came in here after -LRB- Hurricane -RRB- Katrina and did a great job , '' Barbour said on `` Fox News Sunday . '' 
`` You know , governors have a little bit different attitude about things like this than Washington . 
You know , Washington -- everybody 's playing the blame game . 
Who 's at fault ? 
... Governors -- we 're trying to solve a problem . 
We 're working the problem here . '' 
Barbour , who is the former chairman of the Republican National Committee and currently heads the Republican Governors Association , said when he asks Allen -- or BP -- for something , they try to get it done . 
He added that Americans want to see problems solved and `` do n't need Republican politicians like me piling on . '' 
`` The American people are making up their minds pretty clearly about what they think of the administration 's performance in this disaster . 
And I 'll let it stand at that . 
You know , Napoleon said never interfere with the enemy while he 's in the process of destroying himself , '' Barbour said , adding that a complete shutdown of the oil spill is the only truly satisfactory response to the spill . 
Sen. John Kerry , D-Mass . 
, said it 's fashionable to blame the Obama administration , but `` every major person in the administration '' has been to the Gulf coast and the `` best minds in the country '' are consulting on the cleanup . 
`` Here 's what 's important . 
Not to be throwing the blame around , but to put America on the course to true energy independence and self-reliance and to begin to wean ourselves from our addiction to oil , '' Kerry , who is leading the charge for a climate change bill on Capitol Hill , said on ABC 's `` This Week , '' where he appeared with Cornyn . 
Kerry , whose bill would tax carbon emissions while trying to promote alternative energy development , said the U.S. imports more oil now than it did before the Sept. 11 , 2001 , terror attacks , so the only way to prevent future catastrophes is to look for safe alternatives . 
But Barbour said if the U.S. wants to achieve energy independence it should continue to drill because a six-month moratorium on offshore drilling that has been instituted by the Obama administration means oil companies will start drilling elsewhere , putting the U.S. into a more dependent relatinship . 
`` If you shut this down , do n't kid yourself , you 're not shutting it down for six months . 
... In six months , these oil rigs are n't going to be sitting around the gulf waiting . 
They 're going to be in west Africa . 
They 'll be in Indonesia . 
They 're going to be in China . 
They 're going to be drilling oil wells elsewhere in the world . 
And the loss of production that we 're going to suffer will make us even more dependent on the Middle East , on Venezuela , on people that are n't our friends , '' he said . 
