June 4 : A crew picks up oil that washed up along Pensacola Beach , Fla. . 
Waves of gooey tar blobs were washing ashore in growing numbers on the white sand of the Florida Panhandle Friday as a slick from the BP spill drifted closer to shore . 
AP2010 In this May 22 . 
2010 photo , nesting pelicans are seen landing as oil washes ashore on an island that is home to hundreds of brown pelican nests as well at terns , gulls and roseate spoonbills in Barataria Bay , just inside the the coast of Louisiana . 
Oil from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill affected large stretches of the Louisiana Coast . 
AP NEW ORLEANS -- A device that 's now sucking up significant amounts of the oil spewing from the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico offered a measure of optimism Sunday even as the government 's point man on the spill warned problems would persist for months . 
Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen said on CBS ' `` Face the Nation '' that the spill , which is ravaging beaches and wildlife , will not be contained until the leak is fully plugged and that even afterward `` there will be oil out there for months to come . '' 
The disaster , which began with an oil rig explosion in mid-April , will persist `` well into the fall , '' Allen said . 
A containment cap placed on the gusher near the sea floor trapped about 441,000 gallons of oil Saturday , BP spokesman Mark Proegler said , up from around 250,000 gallons of oil Friday . 
It 's not clear how much is still escaping ; an estimated 500,000 to 1 million gallons of crude is believed to be leaking daily . 
BP chief executive Tony Hayward told the BBC on Sunday that he believed the cap was likely to capture `` the majority , probably the vast majority '' of the oil gushing from the well . 
The gradual increase in the amount being captured is deliberate , in an effort to prevent water from getting inside and forming a frozen slush that foiled a previous containment attempt . 
The next step is for BP engineers to attempt to close vents on the cap that allow streams of oil to escape and prevent that water intake , and Hayward told the BBC that the company hopes a second containment system will be in place by next weekend . 
Allen told CBS that the oil would stop flowing only when the leak was plugged with cement . 
Hawyard , who has faced criticism over his company 's response to the spill , told the BBC that he would n't step down and that he had the `` absolute intention of seeing this through to the end . '' 
`` We 're going to clean up the oil , we 're going to remediate any environmental damage and we are going to return the Gulf coast to the position it was in prior to this event , '' he told the BBC . 
Allen took issue on CNN 's `` State of the Union '' on Sunday with BP officials who said they were pleased with results of the latest effort . 
He said progress was being made , `` but I do n't think anybody should be pleased as long as there is oil in the water . '' 
He said on `` Fox News Sunday '' that he does n't `` want to create any undue encouragement '' and that `` we need to underpromise and overdeliver . '' 
While BP plans to eventually use an additional set of hoses and pipes to increase the amount of oil being trapped , the ultimate solution remains a relief well that should be finished by August . 
The urgency of that task was apparent along the Gulf Coast nearly seven weeks after the BP rig exploded April 20 , killing 11 workers and rupturing the wellhead a mile below the surface . 
Since then , millions of gallons of oil have been rising to the surface and spreading out across the sea . 
The oil is coating and miring waterfowl in the sticky mess , and dead birds and dolphins are washing ashore . 
Scientists say the wildlife death toll remains relatively modest , though , because the Deepwater Horizon rig was 50 miles off the coast and most of the oil has stayed in the open sea . 
The oil has steadily spread east , washing up in greater quantities in recent days . 
Small tar balls have washed up as far east as Fort Walton Beach , about a third of the way across the Florida Panhandle . 
Government officials estimate that roughly 23 million to 49 million gallons have leaked into the Gulf . 
A line of oil mixed with seaweed stretched all across the beach Sunday morning in Gulf Shores , Ala. . 
The oil was often hidden beneath the washed-up plants . 
At a cleaning station outside a huge condominium tower , Leon Baum scrubbed oil off his feet with Dawn dishwashing detergent . 
Baum had driven with his children and grandchildren from Bebee , Ark. , for their annual vacation on Alabama 's coast . 
They had contemplated leaving because of the oil , but they 've already spent hundreds of dollars on their getaway . 
`` After you drive all this way , you stay , '' Baum said . 
At Pensacola Beach , Buck Langston and his family took to collecting globs of tar instead of sea shells on Sunday morning . 
They used improvised chopsticks to pick up the balls and drop them into plastic containers . 
Ultimately , the hoped to help clean it all up , Langston said . 
`` Yesterday it was n't like this , this heavy , '' Langston said . 
`` I do n't know why cleanup crews are n't out here . '' 
With no oil response workers on Louisiana 's Queen Bess Island , Plaquemines Parish coastal zone management director P.J. Hahn decided he could wait no longer , pulling an exhausted brown pelican from the oil , slime dripping from its wings . 
`` We 're in the sixth week , you 'd think there would be a flotilla of people out here , '' Hahn said . 
`` As you can see , we 're so far behind the curve in this thing . '' 
At the mouth of Alabama 's Mobile Bay , hundreds of seagulls squawked on a beach dotted with countless small tar balls but not a cleanup crew in sight . 
