DUBAI | Fri Oct 21 , 2011 7:47 am EDT DUBAI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - For many Arabs , the humiliating capture and killing of Muammar Gaddafi , the longest-serving Arab leader , is a lesson to other tyrants in a region that has overthrown three long-serving rulers this year . 
But some said on Friday that Libya would have been better off if its former leader had been given a fair trial for abuses committed during his 42-year rule , which ended when rebels captured the capital Tripoli in August . 
`` The world now has one less dictator , '' said Ziad Khalil , a Beirut shopkeeper , a day after Gaddafi 's death . 
`` This is the end he deserves . '' 
In Cairo , Youssef Hammad , a 43-year-old business executive , said he was not surprised by Gaddafi 's gruesome demise . 
`` The way he was going to die , if caught , was sealed when he ignored his people 's calls for a more open and free society , '' Hammad said . 
`` Instead he vowed to hunt them down one by one , alleyway by alleyway , like rats . 
Ironically that 's how he met his maker . '' 
Gaddafi , a fugitive since August , was killed on Thursday after fighters for the National Transitional Council captured his last stronghold and hometown of Sirte . 
He tried to flee the city in a convoy , braving NATO airstrikes . 
His captors found him hiding in a drainage culvert , and cellphone video showed a bloodied Gaddafi being beaten . 
Libya 's Interim Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril said that Gaddafi was hit during `` crossfire '' while being taken to hospital , but most Libyans , including officials , seemed to have little doubt that he was probably killed by his captors . 
The Egyptian cabinet said after a meeting on Thursday it was looking forward to helping the Libyan people rebuild their country . 
But most Arab governments have yet to comment on Gaddafi 's death . 
Gaddafi was the third Arab head of state to be ousted this year , after Tunisia 's Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and Egypt 's Hosni Mubarak . 
But unlike Ben Ali and Mubarak , who were ousted by popular uprisings in January and February , Gaddafi was overthrown in a civil war that the new interim government says cost some 30,000 lives . 
Many Arabs said Gaddafi 's death was likely to scare Arab leaders still clinging to power in Syria and Yemen in the face of months of pro-democracy protests and crackdowns by security forces that have left thousands of people dead . 
In the Omani capital Muscat , banker Haji Ismail said Gaddafi 's death was a lesson to other Arab rulers . 
`` They will face such a fate if they keep oppressing their people . '' 
Cairo engineer Ibrahim Sabri said Arab leaders were afraid of meeting a similar fate . 
`` This was evident in the Syrian TV denial of Gaddafi 's news , they are afraid that they will share the same fate , '' he said . 
In Syria , where President Bashar al-Assad has faced seven months of popular protests opposing his rule , video footage of a demonstration on Thursday night in Homs province showed people chanting : `` Bashar , it is your turn next ! '' 
In the Syrian town of Houla , people carried placards saying : `` Syrian rebels congratulate the Libyan people for killing the rat Muammar Gaddafi , '' and `` Death is the fate of all oppressive rulers - first the rat Muammar Gaddafi , then the thug Bashar al-Assad . '' 
Some said the success of the Libyan uprising would have been more welcome had NATO forces not been involved . 
NATO deployed aircraft to protect Libyan civilians against Gaddafi forces in a U.N.-mandated operation . 
But the alliance took a visible role in the fighting that ousted Gaddafi . 
`` It would have been a triumph for all Arabs if Libyans themselves removed Gaddafi without NATO help , '' said Suleiman Al Sharji , an Omani political commentator . 
`` Now we have more questions on foreign interference as versus self-rule than ever before . '' 
Amr Moussa , a former Arab League Secretary General under whom the body asked for international intervention to help Libyan civilians , said he hoped that Libya will move forward quickly to achieve the goals of its people . 
`` I hope that Libya will transition after Gaddafi 's departure into a new phase toward the path of building a modern Libya and achieving stability and real democracy , '' the independent Egyptian daily al-Tahrir newspaper quoted Amr Moussa as saying . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Not that this development is n't great news to ordinary Libyans -LRB- at least those not part of Gaddafi 's patronage system -RRB- , but the notion that the real lesson here is to treat your populations well is patently absurd . 
Just ask the King of Bahrain , the latest recipient of a boatload of US military aid so he can viciously slaughter his own people . 
For nuanced coverage of the Libyan campaign , not just war cheerleading under the guise of promoting human rights , check out Democracy Now ! 
's archive of reports . 
I 'd recommend American style television and media as an ideal way to spread mass ignorance . 
The Arab leaders could be afraid of NATO intervention and not of their people . 
The rebels in Libya alone could do nothing against the Mad Dog , and they could have been eliminated in a short of time , with out the NATO help . 
GADDAFI was about to erase the city of Benghazi and its people . 
Hopefully the NATO was there in the right time . 
We hope the NATO will do the same thing with the other tyrants and dictators every where in order to stop the phenomena of ruling the countries by tyranny . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
