ON TAMBOUR BAY , LA. . 
-- In the next act of the drama of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , two of the most important heroes do n't look like heroes . 
They are just thin green stalks , sticking out of grass too wet to stand on . 
They are cordgrass and wiregrass , common species that wave in the winds in south Louisiana 's coastal marshes . 
Except , in some places , they are n't waving anymore : Where oil has sloshed into the marshes , their stalks are matted and gooey and on their way to death . 
What happens next -- whether these two grasses rebound or vanish -- will be a very important piece of the gulf 's larger environmental story . 
Now that the well has been capped , the next question is whether marsh and marine ecosystems can shrug off the oil 's damage , or whether it will leave them with lasting wounds . 
`` Many of us are much more worried about the marsh than we are about fish and shrimp and all that , '' said Denise Reed , a wetlands expert at the University of New Orleans . 
`` If those plants die , they do n't come back . 
And the marsh is gone . '' 
Louisiana 's coastal marshes are vital to ecosystems that extend far into deep , open water : They shelter `` juvenile '' shrimp , crabs and fish until these creatures are large enough to venture into open water . 
For these places , marsh grasses are as vital as water . 
Their roots hold the land together , giving support to loose , wet sediment that would otherwise erode . 
`` They are the marsh , basically , '' said Andy Nyman of Louisiana State University . 
`` Once they die ... it just floats away . '' 
Humans , too , depend on the grasses , since the marshes are a natural barrier against storm surges headed toward New Orleans . 
Already , there are about 200 square miles of oiled coastline in Louisiana alone , said Robert Barham , secretary of the state 's Department of Wildlife and Fisheries . 
He said most of that is marshland , which means around 5 percent of the state 's 3,900 square miles of marsh is oily . 
That number may not seem overwhelming , but Louisiana is already losing 24 square miles of wetlands to erosion every year . 
Scientists say the state can not afford to lose another large chunk all at once . 
The question now is : How much will die ? 
Humans will play some role in determining the answer . 
On a recent boat ride through the marshes south of Cocodrie , La. , some workers could be seen trying the delicate approach to marsh cleaning , using a long stick with a plastic mop on the end to dab oil out of grass . 
Some could be seen trying another approach . 
One crew was throwing white absorbent `` boom '' down onto a heavily oiled patch , then stomping it down to sop up the oil . 
There were also reports of damage from the boom itself , driven in by the most recent storm . 
Scientists say that it is hard to get all the oil out of an oiled patch , and that trying too aggressively could just mash oil deeper into the plants ' roots . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
