At the start of the Obama administration , Geithner tackled one of the most immense challenges ever to face an economic policymaker : pulling the U.S. economy out of the deepest recession in at least a generation and rescuing a financial system that was in utter disarray . 
As such , he became a punching bag for criticism of the aggressive Obama strategy to rescue the economy , with some critics even demanding his resignation . 
But at the start of 2011 , the economy disaster was averted and many of Obama 's top economic hands had departed while Geither , ironically , remained . 
As Treasury secretary , Geithner allocated the remaining $ 350 billion of the giant financial rescue package known as TARP green-lighted by Congress just days before Obama 's inauguration . 
He decided which banks and other financial companies to rescue and which to ignore and what conditions the government would attach to the rescue money . 
Geithner also played a significant role in shaping the administration 's $ 787 billion economic stimulus package , enacted in February 2009 . 
And he played a lead role in shaping the Dodd-Frank the July 2010 financial regulation overhaul package . 
As president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York from 2003 to 2009 , Geithner was one of the lead architects of the government response to the 2008-2009 crisis . 
It was his decision , along with those of Bush Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke , to bail out Bear Stearns in March 2008 , to let Lehman Brothers fail in September of that year , and for the government to take over insurance company American International Group . 
Before any of that , Geithner was a top Treasury Department official in the Clinton years , dealing with the international financial crises of 1995 to 1998 . 
He was a protege of Clinton administration Treasury Secretaries Robert Rubin and , especially , Larry Summers . 
Summers was the other leading candidate to be Obama 's Treasury secretary and instead served as a top White House economic adviser . 
After a flap about delinquent tax payments , the Senate confirmed Geithner , 60 to 34 , on Jan. 26 , 2009 . 
Amid all the gloom-and-doom , there was one piece of lighthearted news for the fledgling secretary in April 2009 when he was named to People 's annual list of the `` 100 Most Beautiful People . '' 
News From Around The Web WASHINGTON -- Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner says the government has begun borrowing from the federal employee pension fund to keep operating without surpassing its debt limit . 
WASHINGTON -- Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner is telling congressional leaders that the U.S. government will exhaust its borrowing limit as soon as mid-February , earlier than expected . 
WASHINGTON -- Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner is telling congressional leaders that the U.S. government will exhaust its borrowing limit as soon as mid-February , earlier than expected . 
News From Around The Web WASHINGTON -- Interior Secretary Ken Salazar will leave the Obama administration in March , an Obama administration official said Wednesday . 
Career History : President and CEO , Federal Reserve Bank of New York ; Vice Chairman , Federal Open Market Committee -LRB- Nov. 2003 to Jan. 2009 -RRB- ; Director , Policy Development and Review , International Monetary Fund -LRB- Sept. 2001 to Nov. 2003 -RRB- Alma Mater : Dartmouth College , Bachelor 's Degree , 1983 ; Johns Hopkins School for Advanced International Studies , Master 's , 1985 Geithner was born in New York City in 1961 , but he spent most of his youth abroad , living with his family in a variety of countries including India , Thailand , and what is now Zimbabwe . 
His nomadic childhood inspired an interest in language and culture . 
An amateur photographer , his travels allowed him to capture unique subjects . 
While living in Thailand , he took photographs of refugees and `` turned our bathroom in Bangkok into a darkroom , '' his mother has said . 
Geithner went from Dartmouth to the Johns Hopkins School for Advanced International Studies , where he received a master 's in international economics and East Asian studies in 1985 . 
Geithner was then hired at Kissinger Associates , the prominent international and business consulting firm founded by former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger . 
In 1988 , Geithner joined the Treasury Department as a career civil servant , working on issues involving Japan as a special assistant to an undersecretary . 
He worked there through the George H.W. Bush administration and into the Clinton years , when then-Under Secretary Summers was deeply impressed by the young staffer who had the same intellectual intensity as Summers . 
But Geithner had a more affable manner than the often brusque Harvard economist . 
`` In Geithner , Summers recognized the perfect complement , '' The New Republic reported . 
Indeed , Geithner was one of the few officials who had the brains and self-confidence to stand up to Summers in internal debates . 
`` He 's the only guy that would walk in and say , ` on this one , Larry , you 're full of it , ' '' Summers said . 
Summers promoted Geithner to be a deputy assistant secretary in 1994 , and later to assistant secretary and then under secretary for international affairs . 
In those jobs , Geithner helped manage the Treasury 's response to the Meixcan peso crisis in 1995 , the East Asian crises of 1997-1998 , and the Russian debt default in 1998 and near-collapse of the hedge fund Long Term Capital Management . 
Geithner was the first career civil servant to serve as a Treasury under secretary . 
At the end of the Clinton administration , Geithner moved to the International Monetary Fund , where he was director of policy development . 
That period led to a blot on his personal record . 
The IMF does n't pay the employer match on Social Security and Medicare taxes , meaning Geithner was responsible for paying those taxes himself . 
He did n't do so , however , until he was audited in 2005 , and even then only paid the back taxes for 2003 and 2004 . 
Geithner did n't pay the back taxes for 2001 and 2002 until after Obama tapped him to be Treasury secretary at the end of 2008 . 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York In 2003 , after a long search , Geithner was named president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York . 
In that job , he was the Fed 's eyes and ears on Wall Street , the primary regulator of some of the largest U.S. banks , and one of its lead crisis managers . 
In the years before the financial crisis began in 2007 , Geithner delivered many speeches discussing weaknesses in the financial regulatory system , especially frailties in the market for credit default swaps and other over-the-counter derivatives . 
Those warnings turned out to be prescient , as those markets contributed to the deep crisis underway . 
However , Geithner 's speeches often argued that as a whole the financial system was becoming more stable , and he did not take aggressive action to rein in the risk-taking of Wall Street firms . 
In August 2008 , financial markets began a wrenching crisis as losses mounted on securities tied to subprime mortgage loans . 
The crisis had spread to all types of credit products , with transactions freezing up , financial instiutions incurring huge losses and lending drying up throughout the economy . 
As chairman of the New York Fed , Geithner was a lead architect of the government 's response , including a campaign of interest rate cuts starting in September 2007 that pushed the federal funds rate to near zero by December 2008 . 
In internal Fed debates , Geithner reliably pushed for more active intervention to guard the economy than did some of his colleagues further from Wall Street . 
He negotiated the deal to sell failed investment bank Bear Stearns to J.P. Morgan Chase in March 2008 , ultimately putting $ 29 billion of Fed assets at risk to get the deal done . 
Six months later , when Lehman Brothers was on the verge of failure , Geithner was more open to saving it than Bush Treasury Secretary Paulson , but Paulson 's hardline position prevailed and it went under . 
Just days later , Geithner engineered the takeover of AIG , the single largest of the government bailouts so far . 
In February 2009 , Geithner announced his first initiative in stabilizing the financial system . 
Called the Financial Stability Plan , Geithner outlined what he would do with the $ 350 billion remaining from the TARP fund , including direct capital injections to banks . 
But Geithner went much further than his predecessor . 
He announced an initial $ 250 billion to $ 500 billion `` bad bank '' program that would be a joint effort between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury to buy toxic assets that banks were n't able to sell . 
Also included was up to $ 1 trillion in financing for consumers and student loans , including for small businesses , car payments and tuition . 
Geithner fought hard for these initiatives , as the New York Times reported that many in the administration , including Obama senior adviser David Axelrod , wanted tougher restrictions on executive pay and how banks spend taxpayer money . 
But the final copy of the plan had Geithner 's fingerprints all over it . 
In May 2009 , the administration released the results of stress tests that financial regulators , including the Fed , FDIC and Treasury 's Office of the Comptroller of the Currency , performed on struggling banks that were deemed `` too big to fail . '' 
The tests were designed to measure what the banks needed , in terms of capital , to withstand a prolonged recession . 
For three months , regulators examined the bank 's financials , deciding how each company would react if the economy worsened , jobless rates rose and home prices continued to fall . 
Many analysts predicted the banks would need to raise more than $ 100 billion in capital , to pass these tests . 
But when the Treasury announced the final figures , many of the banks fared much better than expected . 
Ten of the 19 banks would need to increase their capital holdings by $ 75 billion dollars , collectively . 
Bank of America needed to raise the most capital at nearly $ 34 billion . 
With the stress tests showing an overall positive outlook for the financial system , banks with sufficient capital could start paying back TARP funds . 
`` With this support , and with the clarity provided by today 's announcement , banks should be able to get back to the business of banking , '' said Geithner when releasing the results of the stress tests . 
Two weeks after the results of the stress tests were announced , Geithner testified in front of the Senate Banking Committee . 
He announced that the 10 banks that needed to increase capital had raised or announced plans to raise over $ 48 billion . 
Geithner said in his written statement to the committee that `` there are important indications that our financial system is starting to heal . '' 
Geithner took a lead role in revamping financial regulation , which was shepherded through Congress by Sen. Christopher J. Dodd -LRB- D-Conn . -RRB- 
and Barney Frank -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- . 
It was enacted in July 2010 . 
The bill would allow for the orderly dissolution of big financial institutions whose destruction would threaten the entire U.S. economy at no cost to taxpayers ; for the first time , regulate the derivatives market that was blamed for helping to cause the 2008-2008 meltdown ; create a financial council overseen by the Treasury Department to coordinate and monitor risk in the financial markets ; create an independent consumer watchdog inside the Federal Reserve to give U.S. consumers clear information regarding financial products like credit cards and mortgages ; and imposes regulations on derivatives trading , requiring most of it to take place in open marketplaces . 
In written 2009 remarks to the Senate Finance Committee , Geithner signaled a more aggressive approach to negotiating trade policies with China . 
The Chinese government artificially deflates its currency , the renmibi or yuan , which leads to cheap exports . 
Ahead of Chinese President Hu Jintao 's January 2011 state visit to the U.S. , Geithner delivered a speech arguing that China must move more aggressively to increase the value of the yuan , as well as address intellectual-property theft . 
`` We believe it is in China 's interest to allow the currency to appreciate more rapidly in response to market forces . 
And we believe China will do so because the alternative will be too costly - both for China and for China 's relations with the rest of the world , '' Geithner said . 
In 2010 , the House approved a special tax to offset what lawmakers believed was China 's `` currency manipulation , '' although the Senate did n't vote on the issue . 
Geithner has spent more years in public service than many of the former Street veterans he works with , but his connections tie him to the slew of Goldman Sachs alumni that have recently populated the Treasury Department , including Rubin and former Bush Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson , both former Goldman chairmen . 
It was Rubin who gave a young Geithner his shot at bigger things at the Treasury , and the New York Times says Geithner ` slack of work experience in the financial sector , `` has left him reliant on Wall Street chiefs to guide his thinking and that Goldman alumni have figured prominently in his ascent . '' 
Geithner is also a member of the Group of 30 , a nonprofit that brings together thirty of the most influential people from the public and private sectors . 
Members include Nobel-prize winning economist Paul Krugman , and Larry Summers , a former high-profile Obama economic adviser . 
Geithner spent six months of 2001 as a senior fellow on the Council on Foreign Relations and is still a member of its advisory board , along with Stephen Friedman and former secretary of state Madeleine Albright . 
