We all want President Obama to succeed in reviving the economy , but that should n't obscure the long odds he faces . 
We need to recognize that we 're grappling with three crises that , though interwoven , are also quite distinct . 
The solution to any one of them wo n't automatically resuscitate the larger economy if the others remain untreated and unchanged . 
First : the collapse of consumer spending . 
American consumers represent 70 percent of the economy . 
Traumatized by plunging home values and stock prices -- which have shaved at least $ 7 trillion from personal wealth -- they 've curbed spending and increased saving . 
That 's led directly to layoffs . 
In December , vehicle sales were down 36 percent from levels a year earlier . 
Second : the financial crisis . 
Lower lending deprives the economy of the credit to finance businesses , homes and costly consumer purchases -LRB- cars , appliances -RRB- . 
The deepest cuts involve `` securitization '' -- the sale of bonds . 
Investors have gone on strike . 
In 2008 , the issuance of bonds backing credit card loans fell 41 percent and those backing car loans 51 percent . 
Third : a trade crisis . 
Global spending and saving patterns are badly askew . 
High-saving Asian countries have relied on export-led growth that , in turn , has required American consumers to spend ever-larger shares of their incomes . 
Huge trade imbalances have resulted : U.S. deficits , Asian surpluses . 
As Americans cut spending , this pattern is no longer sustainable . 
Asia is tumbling into recession . 
Overcoming any of these crises alone would be daunting . 
Together , they 're the economic equivalent of a combined Ironman triathlon and Tour de France . 
The proposed remedy is the `` economic stimulus '' plan . 
If government does n't offset declines in consumer and other private spending , the economy might spiral down for several years . 
Last week , House committees considered an $ 825 billion package , split between $ 550 billion in additional spending and $ 275 billion in tax cuts . 
But in practice , the stimulus could disappoint . 
Parts of the House package look like a giant political slush fund , with money sprinkled to dozens of programs . 
There 's $ 50 million for the National Endowment for the Arts , $ 200 million for the Teacher Incentive Fund and $ 15.6 billion for increased Pell Grants to college students . 
Some of these proposals , whatever their other merits , wo n't produce many new jobs . 
Another problem : Construction spending -- for schools , clinics , roads -- may start so slowly that there will be little immediate economic boost . 
The Congressional Budget Office examined $ 356 billion in spending proposals and concluded that only 7 percent would be spent in 2009 and 31 percent in 2010 . 
Assume , however , that the stimulus is a smashing success . 
It cushions the recession . 
Unemployment -LRB- now : 7.2 percent -RRB- stops rising at , say , 8 percent instead of 10 percent . 
Still , a temporary stimulus ca n't fuel a permanent recovery . 
That requires a strong financial system to supply an expanding economy 's credit needs . 
How we get that is n't clear . 
The pillars of a successful financial system -- the ability to assess risk ; adequate capital to absorb losses ; and trust among banks , investors and traders -- have crumbled . 
Underlying these ills has been the consistent underestimation of losses . 
Economists at Goldman Sachs now believe that worldwide losses on mortgages , bonds , and loans to consumers and businesses total $ 2.1 trillion . 
In March , the Goldman estimate was about half that . 
All the new credit programs -- the Treasury 's Troubled Asset Relief Program -LRB- TARP -RRB- and various Federal Reserve lending facilities -- aim to counteract these problems by providing government money and government guarantees . 
Obama probably will expand these efforts , despite some obvious problems : If government oversight becomes too intrusive or punitive , it might deter much-needed infusions of private capital into banks . 
Again , let 's assume Obama 's policies succeed . 
Even then , we have no assurance of a vigorous recovery because the economic crisis is ultimately global in scope . 
The old trading patterns simply wo n't work anymore . 
If China and other Asian nations try to export their way out of trouble , they 're likely to be disappointed . 
Any import surge into the United States would weaken an incipient American recovery and probably trigger a protectionist reaction . 
Down that path lies tit-for-tat economic nationalism that might harm everyone . 
Indeed , if the rest of the world does n't buy more from America , any U.S. recovery may be feeble . 
What 's needed are policies that correct the imbalances in spending and saving . 
As Americans save more of their incomes , Asians should save less and spend more , so that they rely more on producing for themselves rather than exporting to us . 
The great trade discrepancies would shrink . 
But this sort of transformation would require basic political changes in Asia . 
Whether China and other Asian societies can make those changes is unclear . 
The implications are sobering . 
The success of Obama 's policies lies , to a large extent , outside his hands . 
