Cheney to U.S. : ` Stuff Happens ' In case you thought former vice president Dick Cheney 's unhinged interview with Politico six weeks ago was an aberration , along comes more of the same . 
CNN 's John King did the honors , live , on Sunday . 
-LRB- Here 's the video . -RRB- 
Cheney again accused President Obama of making the nation less safe -- without providing a stitch of reliable evidence . 
He also ducked responsibility for the financial crisis his team left behind , declared victory in Iraq , and confirmed earlier reports that he found himself at odds with former president George W. Bush after failing to secure a pardon for his onetime chief of staff , Scooter Libby . 
Cheney said that in rolling back some of the Bush administration 's anti-terror tactics , Obama `` is making some choices that , in my mind , will , in fact , raise the risk to the American people of another attack . '' 
King then offered him the opportunity to back that statement up . 
`` I want to give you a chance -- and take as much time as you want -- to prove it ... I know some of this is classified intelligence , but now that you 're out of government , to the degree that you can , tell the American people , because of those tactics , because of those , yes , sometimes extreme tactics , we stopped this . '' 
Cheney 's eventual reply : `` John , I 've seen a report that was written based upon the intelligence that we collected then that itemizes the specific attacks that were stopped by virtue of what we learned through those programs . 
It 's still classified . 
I ca n't give you the details of it without violating classification , but I can say there were a great many of them . 
The one that has been public was the potential attack coming out of Heathrow , when they were going to have several American planes with terrorists on board , with liquid explosives , and they were going to blow those planes up over the United States . 
`` Now , that was intercepted and stopped , partly because of those programs that we put in place . '' 
But here 's a shocker : What Cheney said is n't remotely true . 
The Heathrow liquid explosives plot is n't even one of the ones the Bush administration historically claimed credit for -- not that any of its claims actually held up under even modest scrutiny . 
Indeed , the Heathrow plot -- in which British prosecutors presented no evidence that a viable bomb had been made , that any airline tickets had been bought or that any attack was imminent -- was undone by a British investigation . 
And the only U.S. role I know of was that , once U.S. officials heard about what the Brits had found out , they messed it all up . 
On the disastrous budget picture left behind , Cheney had this to say : `` Eight months after we arrived , we had 9\/11 . 
We had 3,000 Americans killed one morning by al Qaeda terrorists here in the United States . 
We immediately had to go into the wartime mode . 
We ended up with two wars in Afghanistan and Iraq . 
Some of that is still very active . 
We had major problems with respect to things like Katrina , for example . 
All of these things required us to spend money that we had not originally planned to spend , or were n't originally part of the budget . 
And the administration has to be able to respond to that , and we did . '' 
Did you get that ? 
We `` ended up '' with two wars . 
And : `` Stuff happens . '' 
As for Iraq , Cheney said : `` I guess my general sense of where we are with respect to Iraq and at the end of now , what , nearly six years , is that we 've accomplished nearly everything we set out to do ... `` The defeat of al Qaeda in Iraq , the writing of that democratic constitution , a series of elections that involve power sharing among all the various groups , the end of sectarian violence . 
I think a major defeat for the Iranians living next door to Iraq , who tried to influence events there . '' 
Do please keep in mind that there was no al Qaeda in Iraq until after the invasion ; that the al Qaeda that attacked us on 9\/11 has regrouped in Afghanistan and Pakistan ; that sectarian violence is arguably just in a lull ; and that Iraq is virtually an Iranian client state . 
So , were his arguments with Bush about Libby angry ? 
`` Those kinds of details , I think , are best left to history . 
Maybe I 'll write about it in my book , '' Cheney said . 
`` I was clearly not happy that we , in effect , left Scooter sort of hanging in the wind , which I did n't think was appropriate . 
I think he 's an innocent man who deserves a pardon . '' 
By Dan Froomkin | March 16 , 2009 ; 12:20 PM ET The single most incompetent foreign-policy strategist of the last 100 years sounds off irrationally about this administration 's policy changes ? 
Cheney has the courage of his convictions and nothing more . 
The man is Richelieu -LRB- to Bush 's Louis XIII -RRB- without the political savvy . 
And the disingenuous nonsense about Katrina breaking the bank . 
That stands up until you realize that his administration had budgeted no money at all for natural disaster response . 
Too bad the Red Cross leak had n't happened a day earlier ! 
I 'd love to see that thing 's reaction when named a war ciminal . 
I do n't recall Clinton ever commenting on Bush . 
I also do n't recall Bush number 1 commenting on Reagan either . 
Was that just a gentleman 's agreement ? 
I find Cheney 's behavior rather odd to say the least . 
That has never stopped him before . 
He never failed to use his unilateral declassification powers to release information when he thought it would bolster his arguments . 
It 's truly terrifying to realize how close he came to making the US a dictatorship . 
Even though there is absolutely no evidence to support his contention that Obama 's policies will lead to an `` increased danger '' of terrorist attack , when the inevitable attack does occur he and all his neo-con co-conspirators will be able to trumpet `` I told you so ! '' 
Why does CNN think anyone wants to hear Cheney 's endless lies ? 
Surely John King could have offered at least one intelligent rebuttal , since it was pretty clear what he would say way ahead of time ... Posted by : jl33 | March 16 , 2009 1:38 PM | Report abuse Because I do n't believe in hell or the existence of equality under the law , I do not believe this man will ever be punished for his atrocities against humanity and the constitution . 
However , I am certain that his name will live in infamy . 
Cheney obvious knows something the he can not tell . 
So let Cheney be given the this-is-not-torture water boarding , in a reality show , and see if Cheney will spill the beans . 
If he does , then perhaps he proves his point that Obama 's not not-torturing people may be a wrong headed policy . 
On the other hand , what the heck , stuff happens . 
their idealogies , mentalities , or policies . 
that being said , they hold the trumping `` yeah , but '' on this conversation . 
He knows that his Administration was wrong about virtually everything -- but do we expect him to admit it ? 
I expect nothing less from VP Cheney than that he will continue to distort and muddy the record to the best of his ability , evading any honest accounting of the past eight years , so that he might squeak out a win in the history books . 
It 's long odds but it 's the only game left for him to play . 
Now why would anyone want to hear from Cheney or Bush ever again ? 
Did John King feel some responsibility to dredge up the dead just because the GOP has no credible voice any more ? 
We 've heard enough lies and denials for a lifetime . 
What competition does he have ? 
That s been going on , in the name of all of us . '' 
Apparently , JSOC reported neither to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs nor the Secretary of Defense , but directly to the Vice President himself . 
We 'll see what Hersh has , but at any rate , it 's clear we have n't heard the last from Dick Cheney -LRB- lucky us -RRB- . 
Let us all move on and upward with an objective voice -- the truth ! 
No one believes him & have n't since he worked for Nixon . 
Unfortunately for America and the rest of the world , Cheney and Bush happened . 
I have heard no man sees himself a villain in his own eyes , but this man is totally AMORAL . 
I have also heard that if evil showed on a man 's face there would be no mirrors . 
Hence , Bush and Cheney do not have any problems looking into mirrors . 
Neither he nor Bush would recognize their own evil if it bit them on their own derrieres . 
Not that I 'm suggesting anyting ... Posted by : dem4life1 | March 16 , 2009 2:13 PM | Report abuse This endless campaigning aligns with the twilight war lurking everywhere - and well-surveilled by us and our minions worldwide . 
Our military is no longer led by , nor beholden to , this cynical draft-dodger 's `` world view . '' 
he validates what cramer does to wall street icons ; gives them a podium but never takes them to task . 
he really had an opportunity -LRB- like jon stewart -RRB- , but king has no cajones and let cheney peddle his misinformation once again . 
i really thought jon stewart 's smack down of jim cramer would wake up other `` reporters '' ; how sad the minute slipped by Posted by : mrlee2 | March 16 , 2009 2:17 PM | Report abuse Cheney immerges from his cave to again spout out his nonsense . 
He reminds me of Nicolae Ceau escu of Romania who was so out of touch with his people , that he failed to recognize a revolution happening right under this nose . 
Cheney lives in a dreamworld where he is the hero and the man who saved the day . 
I expect he 'll go to his grave believing that . 
But he 's no longer our problem ; I just wish that the newspeople who feel the need to interview him would stop throwing him softballs . 
Anything decisions of consequence the bush\/CHENY administration made were the result of Dick Cheny 's influence . 
Seeing as though he was nominally # 2 , it takes more than one exit interview for him to fully express his denouement of the last eight years . 
I would imagine Fox News is in line for the last one of these BS sessions with Cheny . 
It is clear that incompetence alone can not explain the WTC attacks in 2001 -- not in the face of the PNAC call for something on the order of Pearl Harbor to get the changes implemented which were set forth in their papers . 
Therefore , by repeating this `` Obama is making the U.S. more unsafe '' , tripe , it is also clear that it should surprise no one that another attack will have the odor of the neo-cons . 
Call it a conspiracy theory if you will . 
But the legal definition of a conspiracy is where two or more individuals agree to do an illegal act . 
The only point worth debating would be whether the neocons see commiting what amounts to treason as an illegal act -- particularly if it allows them to move their policies -LRB- and come so very close to setting up a dictatorship -- although a fascist state is n't a bad second showing for them -RRB- ; and , if they get to say `` I told you so '' . 
Their long term goal has always been to establish a `` permanent GOP majority '' . 
Or a dictatorship controlled by right-wing , religion using , zealots . 
They would even be satisfied with a theocracy if they were in control . 
You think you are a journalist by providing a venue for a cruel and terrible human being , a possible war criminal to utter lies ? 
And you sit there and offer no rebuttals , no cross questionings ? 
Amazing - you ought to get canned , along with the rest of CNN . 
All it does is to prop up the sense of his legitimacy . 
Will we ever be rid of the Evil Emperor ? 
He 's running around yelling ` Obama wo n't keep you safe ' so that when and if there is another terrorist attack , he can claim it 's not his fault ; when in reality , he and Bush had 8 years to solve this problem , and they only made it worse . 
This is cover-your-a \*\* time for all of their failures . 
Why ca n't Cheney crawl back under the rock he slithered out of ? 
He did not make the country better . 
He should shut up and let the new president to do something for this great country . 
Maybe it is a reaction to Bush foreign policy . 
Why did they attack the World Trade Center ? 
Maybe it is a reaction to the policies and greed of Corporate America . 
You know the very people whom history will show created this Global economic mess . 
The same people whom have kept most of the world in poverty . 
The people that kept the minumin wage stagnet for years . 
The people whom amassed massive fortunes , the ones whom got the billions if not trillions in the Bush tax cuts . 
You know the actual people behind the Republican party pulling the strings . 
Cheney should n't fear the terrorist in the Middle East . 
He should fear the anger growing in this country as a result of his actions . 
Dan Froomkin 's hate for Cheney and the Bush administration is palpable . 
I suppose Adolph Hitler would have not been challenged or rebutted by John King either . 
Cheney 's lackey , Yoo , advocated crushing the testicles of little boys in front of their parents to get information . 
Why did John King not step up ? 
I can only surmise that King has an ideological perspective to promote on CNN , and Cheney must have fit right into it . 
America is having a difficult enough time without Mr. `` Deficits do n't matter '' running his yap . 
Has n't he taken enough from our country ? 
The Republicans really have a lot going for them with Cheney , Steele , Rush , and Palin leading the charge . 
Mr. Cheney , face it , you ruined your legacy . 
Your like an aging prize fighter who should 've never come out of retirement and that whole deal about how you did n't want to be vice-president ... . 
In the interim go back to Wyoming and hang-out with the treasonous Scooter Libby and just be happy that you are n't ' visiting him in the place he really belongs , prison . 
Cheney asserts , `` I 've seen a report that was written based upon the intelligence that we collected then that itemizes the specific attacks that were stopped by virtue of what we learned through those programs . '' 
Let 's parse this into what it really means : `` Doug Feith 's team fantasized what a terrorist might do , passed it over to David Addington who edited it into language that projected everyone in Gitmo had done those things , and Scooter Libby then classified it so nobody could question our assertions . '' 
He is the Republican 's latest version of Spiro Agnew ... both crimminals ... one convicted , the other in waiting ... John King ... . 
what can one say ... A well paid Republican shill ... an embarrasing disgrace ... but then agin , how many reporters have any guts ... oh well , America 2009 ... ... The Republicans must be preparing us for their next gem ... Michael Savage ... ... Posted by : kenb5 | March 16 , 2009 2:42 PM | Report abuse If there were any justice in the world , Cheney and the entire Bush Crime family would be given a fair trial , and sent to prison where they belong . 
He was a vice-president who was out of sight for almost 8 years , only appearing before partisan groups for the most part . 
I was pleased about one thing : Cheney did not come over to me as nearly as hostile as he sometimes does . 
I guess we are going to see a cuddly teddy bear image in the making . 
Then I had a second thought : his doctor told him to cool it lest his ticker have irreversible failure . 
It is sad what he helped to do to this country for the last 8 years . 
If he can offer no concrete suggestions , may he keep his mouth shut . 
King left out the $ 5.1 TRILLION in new debt during the first 7.65 years of Bush\/Cheney . 
I will magnanimously exclude the TARP and events after September 2008 . 
What Cheney could have said , as he said in the first days of the Bush\/Cheney regime , `` Reagan proved deficits do n't matter . '' 
This was recounted by Bush Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill who was concerned about $ 500 billion annual budget deficit . 
King did n't ask a follow up . 
I suggest King has earned a spot on The Daily Show . 
I suggest that next time Mitch McConnell , John Boehner or Eric Cantor stand up to complain about the budget deficit , Obama should merely quote Cheney , `` Stuff Happens . '' 
What Ceau escu got is too good for Cheney . 
It is always surprising to observe such enmity and vitriol directed at public figures merely because they entertain different , and almost certainly better informed political views than the haters . 
It is likely that none of those foaming at the mouth and spewing hate here against Mr. Cheney know anything except what they read in the newspapers . 
There is a tendency to make allegations that are unsupported by facts or even refuted by facts . 
I sometimes wonder who these virulent haters of political opponents actually are . 
One finds them everywhere on the web , usually sounding alike , sometimes indistinguishable . 
They often sound like teenagers and seldom really communicate anything besides personal , usually profane insults in a `` Me too ! '' 
The level of malice and ill will is striking . 
Is it altogether impossible that Mr. Cheney -LRB- or anyone with whom they disagree -RRB- might at times be right and they wrong about something ? 
Is it necessarily the case that public figures they hate are ALL BAD , with no redeeming qualities ? 
And if it is not clear who is right and who wrong about something , is it really necessary , mature , wise or even useful to HATE and demean and libel someone just because they think differently ? 
Are those who post hate-fulled messages like those here absolutely certain that they know everything , that their morals are superior to everyone who differs from them , and that people who do differ from them are fools or even criminals ? 
The irony is that it is the Left that prides itself on being `` against hate '' - which of course means endorsing their ideology . 
But for sheer , raw , naked , undisguised and frequently frightening malicious hatred , one need look no further than posts such as we see here and elsewhere . 
The only consolation I can find is to think -LRB- hope -RRB- that most of the haters are teenagers and not grownups - though even there , one has to worry . 
In any event , such posts prove Aristotle right when he cautioned that young people have no business trying to think or talk about or understand politics , for they are ruled by their emotions and lack the necessary experience and wisdom of practical matters that the subject requires . 
-LRB- See Nicomachean Ethics for further reading -RRB- . 
The country now seems to be as `` biased '' as he is . 
Dick Cheney should have been impeached but , since he was n't , he should now be held and tried as the war criminal he is and not given one more minute of air time to spew his tripe . 
The man would not know the truth if it sat on him . 
He lives in his own reality ; how else could he say the things he says with such conviction . 
He sounds like one of the defendants at the Nuremberg trials . 
Please spare the American people any more of this man 's BULL ! 
His assertions are based on the faulty concept that `` George Bush kept us safe since 9\/11 '' . 
Ok , we 've had no attacks . 
But what 's the connection ? 
Give us a shred of proof that Bush had anything to do with it . 
If I walk to work in the morning , and the sun comes up , can I say I caused the sun to come up by walking to work ? 
Using Republicans ' faulty logic , I certainly could . 
How powerful I am !! The only thing we know for sure is that we had no attacks and Bush was in power , just as I walked to work and the sun came up . 
Please indicate how the two situations are connected in either case . 
Nobody can pretend to be surprised by Cheney 's behavior -- it has been quite consistent for many years . 
However , we should all be saddened that Mr. King has joined the majority of reporters and pundits in the Mainstream Media that do n't seem to understand the consequences of their enabling behavior during the past 8 years ; most of the Mainstream Media still refuses to realize the damage such `` journalism '' does to democracy in America . 
Some of that is still very active . 
We had major problems with respect to things like Katrina , for example . 
All of these things required us to spend money that we had not originally planned to spend , or were n't originally part of the budget . 
None of costs for the Iraq war were ever part of the Bush administration budget . 
They never paid one cent during their time in office . 
It was all funded by borrowing from China . 
My day will finally be made when he and Bush are arrested for war crimes . 
My day will be made even that much better when they are convicted . 
I do n't recall Clinton ever commenting on Bush . 
I also do n't recall Bush number 1 commenting on Reagan either . 
Was that just a gentleman 's agreement ? 
I find Cheney 's behavior rather odd to say the least . 
I suppose this does n't apply to the Messiah 's administration ? 
And you ca n't have a talking head show without someone slinging BS . 
In a way , its good to continue hearing from a man perceived so negatively presenting the Repub view . 
He represents their failed past , so we can conclude they have nothing to say in the present and no vision for the future . 
His on-going lies will continue to motivate us Dems to support President Obama , the party and our local and congressional candidates . 
In addition , as long as he makes unverifiable -LRB- claiming national security -RRB- statements about what happened in his admin , it will motivate those who want to get to the truth of whether or not he committed crimes . 
I am now convinced that John King is a republican . 
Since Saddam had helped terrorists kill American citizens , we picked his place to stage a challenge to Al-qaeda . 
BTW Pres. Obama does not criticize Cheney , and Cheney boasts he has no fear of being put on trial since his actions were justified . 
Until that changes you are all just bloviating ie blogging . 
, and made our nation less secure by enacting misguided and idiotic policies that have turned us into the most hated country on earth . 
Now , we are almost bankrupt because the Bush administration let Wall Street and the mortgage industry run amok , while squandering countless billions on a war that Cheney said `` would pay for itself . '' 
The human cost has been terrible for us in terms of our brave soldiers who were killed or injured for life , not to mention the staggering loss of life on the Iraqi side . 
Time and again , Cheney claimed the insurgency was in its last throes , even just as short a time as two years ago . 
Basically , misplaced policies , flawed strategy and incompetent execution has brought us to the brink , yet there is no sign of anyone in the Bush\/Cheney administration taking any responsibility for the fiasco of their eight years in office . 
My advice to Cheney is to stop using the usual scare tactics which wo n't work anymore and let the duly elected Obama administration do their job to help us dig out of the hole that we are in . 
Take a long holiday , Mr. Cheney Posted by : SaminLA | March 16 , 2009 3:15 PM | Report abuse Dick Cheney will always be George W. Bush 's first and worst decision . 
Choosing a cardiac patient as his vice president ! 
What a warning we had : `` DANGER ! 
This guy does n't know shinola from the other stuff ... no idea what a VP is for ! '' 
I guess that by the time Sarah Palin was nominated , people wanted to find out if the veep knew anything about the Constitution . 
But Dick seems to think that we will all forget what really happened if he just keeps making these idiotic claims of saving us from `` a great many '' attacks . 
Well , the elder Bush said , `` Saying is believing . '' 
That must be the official party line . 
The effects of which might give him apoplexy in the entirety of it 's meanings . 
Obama has the power to release those notes to the public and should do so . 
Start a campaign demanding that the secret meeting between DICK and the ENERGY COMPANIES BE MADE PUBLIC , NOW . 
Obama , unable to keep the simplist facts straight in his head uses a teleprompter to cover his dumbness . 
On the other hand , Cheney can discuss virtually any topic with confidence and competence for any length of time without visual mental crutches . 
Obama is a south Chicago poverty pimp and half-baked , phoney liberal who worshipped Jeremiah Wright for twenty years . 
Only gullible , self-loathing liberals are following him now . 
The rest are hunkering down waiting for 2010 to uses their votes and rid America of the pelosi\/Reid nightmare . 
After 2012 , Obama can go pick peanuts with carter ... Posted by : lclifton | March 16 , 2009 3:19 PM | Report abuse Fact - Energy costs -LRB- Home and gasoline -RRB- were the breaking point in the American economy . 
Cheney , in his famous nose thumbing to the American people on this policy formulation , was the man who came up with the plan . 
The energy companies therefore stuck it to us all . 
People were faced with either keeping their houses inclimate and gasoline in their tanks so they can drive to work , or pay their mortgages . 
I totally remember the pre election $ 5.00 + per gallon prices Dick . 
This started the house of cards to topple . 
So Cheney owns this whole mess . 
For him to sit in his armchair and criticize the current people for anything is amazing . 
Why does n't he just take a bow for wrecking the American economy and being the torture guy , and let the elected officials do their job of mopping up all his messes . 
I so hope Cheney faces treason charges , he has done more to mess America up than anyone else in history . 
This dude should either be in jail , or on the Rush show . 
Here is news for you Cheney . 
The majority of people simply have found you out . 
More you speak , more we are going to be absolutely disgusted with you . 
Go home to your maker , Cheney . 
Does that make them an untruther ? 
Lets just call it what it is , lies , and the people who tell them are liars . 
Let him explain himself before the entire world , not just to journalist who mask the truth with their pointless questions , and to many of whom helped him in perpetuating his evils through their inability to write the truth instead of what their editors and publishers dictated . 
Ask not , journalists , for whom the bell tolls , for it also tolls for thee as well as for the lawyers and politicians . 
I say to hell with you all . 
That 's Jon King 's integrity swirling in the Loo ... '' If David Gregory 's experience is any indication , the flushing noise is actually a wave of undeserved good fortune pushing Mr. King up to a new level of journalistic prominence . 
@Teleologicus : good job carrying the GOP 's water in a post that pretends to be neutral . 
I especially enjoyed the non sequitur about the left being `` against hate '' which has certainly never come up in one of these discussions before . 
Cheney evokes visceral hatred not because of his views , as you would have everyone believe , but primarily due to the unprecedented degree to which the Bush administration prosecuted character attacks against its opponents . 
Karl Rove 's `` Democrats want to offer therapy and understanding to the terrorists '' speech immediately comes to mind as one of those attacks . 
Distorting your opponents ' position so thoroughly that it could be seen as treasonous - that 's bound to create some bad feelings , do n't you think ? 
Dan Froomkin 's hate for Cheney and the Bush administration is palpable . 
If you ca n't , then do n't make the claim . 
The story is about Cheney and what he said to King . 
Froomkin points out that nothing Cheney said can be verified . 
Point out \* exactly \* what is biased . 
That you do n't like the article 's conclusions does n't count ... I already assume you are biased . 
Cheney and his bozo-boss for the sake of thousands in the world who suffered and us here in US having to put up with these criminals now pray that they disappear somewhere like Sudan never to be seen again ! 
We are the biggest , richest , baddest , free-est , most liberal , most conservative , most envyed , most everthing , nation in the world , and need not feel guilty about anything ? 
If someone criticizes us , we should bloody their nose . 
If someone crosses us we should soundly thrash them . 
If someone questions anything we do , as the migthiest we should do whatever we want . 
We earned that right by being who we are and owe noone nor anything an appology . 
And until someone knocks us off our perch , let them all be jealous and wish they were us . 
What 's wrong with being a bully ? 
Dan , stop being a verbologist and show some spine . 
As a history major I avoid party labels and vote for good government - when given the chance . 
Reading the comments to Fromkin 's Cheney article is both depressing and frightening . 
Depressing that so many are so irrationally hate-filled people out there , and frightening that they can vote . 
I feel that the responsibility for these people not being rebuked , but actually encouraged , lies with the politicians who distort the truth for political advantage -LRB- lie -RRB- and the MSM which has completed abdicated its responsibility for making democracy work by creating a well-informed electorate when it abets such politicians . 
We are gettng very close to Nazi and Commumist agit-prop here . 
Please note , I an calling no one either Nazi or Communist , I am merely pointing out that they used the technique of distortion , half-truth , and omission repeated endlessly to arouse the sorry kind of emotion expressed in many of these comments . 
To help put Cheney 's actions in perspective - what US president put 100,000 United States citizens , -LRB- CITIZENS ! -RRB- 
into detention camps without any charges ever being brought against them , or without them ever having been giving the opportunity to challenge their imprisonment , which lasted almost four years ? 
Hint : his initials were FDR . 
Lets keep to rational discussion of issues and results based on fact and stop vilifying individuals . 
This is a great country and we do n't want to see it fail because of hate-mongering Posted by : gedgara | March 16 , 2009 3:39 PM | Report abuse @Nuc9901 : `` Dick Cheney will always be George W. Bush 's first and worst decision . 
Choosing a cardiac patient as his vice president ! '' 
A lot of people seem to have forgotten this tidbit , but Bush actually chose Cheney as the chairman of his VP search committee . 
After weeks of careful screening and contemplation , Cheney nominated ... himself ! 
Talk about your missed signs ... Posted by : BigTunaTim | March 16 , 2009 3:40 PM | Report abuse Idiots like Froomkin from the Post should be tortured as well I think . 
Let 's not bash a few brave politicians who did something about the Islamo-Nazi scum who will cut off your head without blinking an eye . 
Let 's free all the Gitmo `` victims of torture '' and enroll them in Columbia . 
Put the Lib Commie educators and op editors in Gitmo instead . 
No wonder we are in the mess he helped put us in . 
Now lets get George to answer some questions or even see if he agrees with Cheney . 
For a guy who plans to make lots of money giving speaches George has been very quiet lately . 
He 's in the news more now than he was when in office . 
You did n't do any good while in office ... leave us alone and let us try to heal in peace . 
As for FDR , anyone on my side would say the internment of the Japanese Americans was his worst decision , while you are defending torture . 
You sir , are un-American . 
lclifton - Cheney is a proven liar , and I 'm guessing you are a partisan idiot . 
Cheney has been proven 100 % wrong numerous times - suck it up - your side lost and will be out of power a generation or three . 
bubbaright - all patriotic Americans have no use for Cheney . 
He is a traitor and deserves a traitor 's punishment . 
wonder why your the only one here that ca n't see the truth in front of you . 
Leave the hackery to people like Bill Kristol who have no reputation to maintain . 
But for sheer , raw , naked , undisguised and frequently frightening malicious hatred , one need look no further than posts such as we see here and elsewhere . 
The only consolation I can find is to think -LRB- hope -RRB- that most of the haters are teenagers and not grownups - though even there , one has to worry . 
In any event , such posts prove Aristotle right when he cautioned that young people have no business trying to think or talk about or understand politics , for they are ruled by their emotions and lack the necessary experience and wisdom of practical matters that the subject requires . 
-LRB- See Nicomachean Ethics for further reading -RRB- . 
Good grief , I doubt it 's possible to be more transparent in one 's ideology . 
The haters are mostly kids ? 
Who do you think your `` kidding '' ? 
The haters are Americans like me , who love our country and who , in my 50 + years , never heard or expected to hear an executive branch leader say , `` So ? '' 
to legitimate questions about his patent mendacity . 
Deficits do n't matter ? 
Truth does n't matter ? 
They absolutely do in a democracy and future aspirants for these jobs need to understand that accountability for illegal actions extends beyond the voting booth to the jury box . 
Or we will see worse . 
He has done more damage to the United States than Osama dreams of . 
I do n't recall Clinton ever commenting on Bush . 
I also do n't recall Bush number 1 commenting on Reagan either . 
Was that just a gentleman 's agreement ? 
I find Cheney 's behavior rather odd to say the least . 
In fact all of US lost , now that we have Communists in charge . 
Our enemies are free now to do whatever they want . 
Let 's close all the prisons and give out tulips to all the terrorists that want us dead . 
Me , with a son in the Marine Corps ... Cheney and his criminal ilk marginalized people like me for 8 long years . 
Do I want payback ? 
Teleologicus Teleo : I really depends on whose ox is being gored . 
I 'm 53 with 2 grown kids and 22 years of a succesful business career behind me . 
As far as I 'm concerned , key members of the past administration are proven liars and subverters of the constitution . 
You may disagree with Obama and call him a Socialist . 
His moves thus far have been out in the open for all to see and cheerlead or chriticize . 
So far we have n't had a `` Secret Energy Cabal '' a la Cheney . 
The guy really lives in a universe of his own making . 
It would be laughable , were it not for the fact that this creature is utterly noxious and dangerous . 
Anyway , the interview with King was predictable . 
King is a GOP puppet . 
Why producers at CNN , however , believe that anyone -- aside from the know-nothings fundamentalists fringe and the AIG cultists -- would want to hear from Cheney , is beyond my understanding . 
Most Americans believe that Cheney is the Hitler of the 21st century . 
And they made it very clear in the past two elections ... Posted by : Gatsby1 | March 16 , 2009 4:24 PM | Report abuse Dick Cheney is a proven liar . 
Thank you for pointing out his lies yet again . 
I ca n't believe anyone is still listening to that horrible excuse for a person . 
That guy should go back into the hole in the ground that he came out of . 
Thank you also for pointing out how wrong he -LRB- and the entire Bush administration -RRB- is\/was on Iran . 
How was it a `` major defeat for the Iranians '' to remove Saddam Hussein and the Sunnis from power and allow the Shiite majority to take over the country ? 
Iraq was Iran 's biggest enemy and the Bush administration `` fixed '' that ! 
I am not a huge fan of Cheney , but he is right when he says `` Stuff happens . 
And the administration has to be able to respond to that , and we did . '' 
He is n't using it as some flippant excuse , he is merely stating the truth . 
Stuff does happen and the administration does have to adjust to handle what happens . 
Obama inherited a horrible economy . 
It was n't Obama 's fault . 
Stuff happened and will happen , and Obama 's administration will what needs to be done to handle those things too . 
On another note , everyone is blaming the Bush administration for the financial crisis and forgetting that it was Bill Clinton who forced Fannie Mae to start giving out loans to people who REALLY were not qualified to have loans . 
Was n't it the housing market that started all this . 
When Obama 's count gets that high , the Republicans get to make a comment . 
Until then , they get to take responsibility for their mistakes . 
Cheney is a terrorist who has inflicted grave damage on the US . 
He and his accomplices must face justice . 
Other potentially-unfriendly states exist which may , in the future , have missile capabilities : Syria comes quickly to mind . 
In addition , Froomkin 's statement , `` Iraq is virtually an Iranian client state '' is inaccurate to the point of being laughable . 
The man 's `` thoughts '' are , again , a waste of time . 
Please force him to go somewhere and hide . 
Eight years of his policies and the country is almost ruined . 
Bush and Cheney a couple of idiots ! 
Garbage bags are not made big enough for these rotters . 
By the by , Cheney advised he drives his own car now . 
Goody goody for him Well I am a woman 82 years old , a cancer survivor , and I drive my own car . 
My only advise is if you are near where this guy is driving , go the other way . 
Dead Eye was not too great with a gun in his hand , and a car is considered a lethal weapon ! 
I 've never seen a bigger waste of oxygen . 
Obviously it was because he feared another conviction in a retrial if his appeal was successful , with no chance that a different president would commute his sentence like Bush did . 
Not exactly the actions of a man who knows he is innocent . 
But now I know that CNN is the new Bush administration media venue . 
I have watched CNN for a long time , but the fact that they would give this guy another shot at taking a pot shot at the new administration and not even counter some of his bogus claims makes me think twice before I consider anything at CNN as valid . 
I guess I am done watching CNN . 
Cheney , George and the gang belong behind bars for the rest of their days here , Nothing would be too great of a punishment for these rats . 
A little dunking might do some good . 
Word has gotten around that Georgie isthinking of doing hiomself in . 
GO TO IT BOY SO WE CAN DANCE IN THE STREETS Posted by : LOONYBIN2000 | March 16 , 2009 4:55 PM | Report abuse BOB DYLAN said it best : `` And I hope that you die And your death 'll come soon I will follow your casket Posted by : mynamesyow | March 16 , 2009 4:55 PM | Report abuse Regarding the right wingers who condemn the hate and vitriol the left is spewing and foaming ; The difference here and now is that the hate is based on facts and realities that have happened in time and space and are objectively verifiable . 
Right wing hate is based on fantasy -LRB- OBama is a Muslim , Hillary is gay , Bill Clinton ran drugs out an Arkansas airfield , Michelle said `` whitey , '' etc. -RRB- You just know that Cheney , Limbaugh , Bolton and the RNC are salivating over the prospect of a terrorist attack on US soil so they can prove their point that Dems are weak on national defense . 
OK , maybe that is a left wing hate fantasy , they are praying , not salivating . 
Remember , on 9\/11 , when no one knew where George Bush was , Dick Cheney ordered the military to shoot down two civilian airliners AFTER the four hijacked planes already crashed . 
Fortunately , by then all planes were grounded . 
I think Bush would have been a better president with a different VP . 
Bush seemed to display a reasonable skepticism over some of the things the Cheneyites were telling him about protecting America and going to war -LRB- `` Is this all you have ? '' 
he asked of Tenet when the case for Iraq war was being drawn up . -RRB- 
For Republicans to succeed , America must now fail . 
He has disgraced America . 
Bush would have been remembered as a better President if he was n't hanging on Cheney 's coat tails for the last 8 years . 
Bush acted like Cheney 's Stooge !! Posted by : gatorsn09 | March 16 , 2009 5:09 PM | Report abuse `` What Cheney said is n't remotely true . 
The Heathrow liquid explosives plot is n't even one of the ones the Bush administration historically claimed credit for -- not that any of its claims actually held up under even modest scrutiny . '' 
Cheney has got to be the most delusional , pathological liar of our country 's leaders in its entire history !! How can anyone think that what this man claims he has done has been good for America and has any merit whatsoever . 
I live in New Orleans , my house was 4 feet under water . 
I 'm better off than most , but this city still has miles and miles of vacant , rotting homes . 
My only complaint is we entrusted our safety , like the the folks in the midwest , to levees built with our tax dollars to keep us from drowning . 
1000 people drown in N.O. , 4000 US soldiers killed in a senseless misguided war , 20,000 plus , maimed , thousands of innocent Iraqi 's -LRB- not counting the enemy , got what they deserved -RRB- so to Cheney 's remark , stuff happens ... I pray you burn in hell . 
This to me amounts to treason . 
Dick Cheney , at the least , deserves to be prosecuted for his role in various scams against the American people -LRB- the so-called California energy crisis comes to mind -RRB- but IF there is another terrorist attack on our country , we also need to see who actually called the shots and is behind it ... Dick Cheney ? 
Why is an evil man like him allowed on National TV ? 
The funny thing is , he believes he 's liked by some people in this country ... His hat must be to tight or Rush shares his drugs !! Posted by : gatorsn09 | March 16 , 2009 5:17 PM | Report abuse Two wars ... the one in Iraq was an attack by the US on an innocent state . 
AND how in the world can this guy say anything about the Katrina Hurricane . 
The bush administration did practically nothing to help those who suffered , floods , winds , and lost of their home and jobs . 
AND by the way what did they do about the lost of US citizens jobs that bush 's administration let go overseas . 
All they did was give tax breaks to big business who SENT the jobs overseas . 
And did nothing to regulate the fisaco that was taking place on Wall Street . 
Someone should stuff a sock with what he is spewing and give it to him in the mouth . 
Those two total , ultimate failures have nothing truthful to say to the American people . 
No intelligent American ever wants to hear either of them speak another word in public about their `` successful handling of the economy , Iraq , Afghanistan , Katrina , torture , etc. '' The only thing Americans want to hear Bush and Cheney say is this : `` Your Honor , I plead guilty to all charges made against me and accept the Court 's sentence of imprisonment for life '' . 
What has made our people much more vulnerable to longterm hatred is the torture policy Cheney promulgated and considers worthy . 
He should be prosecuted along with the president he dominated and used . 
He and the other Republican conservative apologists fail to recognize that the GOP has disgraced itself by Watergate , by failure to follow-up after Kuwait , by election fraud in Florida , by failure to act on the intelligence prior to 9\/11 , by Swift Boat lies and more election fraud in Ohio , and by selecting Sarah Palin instead of an intelligent , experienced and competent Olympia Snowe , who would never stoop to character assassination . 
The GOP is no longer the party of Eisenhower and Dirksen , and certainly not Lincoln . 
Bush , Cheney , Rove , Bolton , Abrams , Kristol , Stevens , Coulter , Gingrich , DeLay , Limbaugh and a host of others have all placed their own greedy interests and those of their big business supporters ahead of their country . 
Hopefully , we will never see them in positions of power and authority again . 
We do n't hate them BubbaRight , but we do not admire or respect them either . 
Good riddance , Bush-Rove-Cheney . 
How many people have died because of him and his warmongering ? 
He is a disgraceful human being who keeps spouting the same garbage hoping to change our minds . 
It only makes me madder to think this guy was VP for eight years . 
He had 8 years to help improve the US economy . 
And I suspect he would love Obama and his attempt at repairing the American economy to fail . 
History no doubt will confirm him to be the evil person he is . 
The Bush administration was doomed with this shameful criminal type as a V.P. I 'm a Republican who voted for Obama ! 
Is n't that the clinical definition of paranoid schizophrenia ? 
From the Mayo Clinic website : Paranoid schizophrenia is one of several types of schizophrenia , a chronic mental illness in which reality is interpreted abnormally -LRB- psychosis -RRB- . 
The classic features of paranoid schizophrenia are having beliefs that have no basis in reality -LRB- delusions -RRB- and hearing things that are n't real -LRB- auditory hallucinations -RRB- . 
Would seem to fit , given some of the statements he 's made -- and all this time , I thought it was just Karl Rove 's BAD PR management . 
Turns out Cheney really ca n't see what is real , and what is not ... Posted by : thegreatpotatospamof2003 | March 16 , 2009 5:51 PM | Report abuse Cheney is a Grade A d-bag and an embarrassment to the executive office of the Vice President . 
I 've never seen such petty interactions with the rest of the country . 
Well not since Nixon anyway . 
No wonder he acts like he does ... . 
2 , Any claim that he would make would be open to substantial debate since there were in fact no terrorist attacks . 
What I mean by this is that any discussion would hinge on the intent of potential terrorists , and ability . 
Both of these things are hard to quantify . 
Two criminal egomaniacs got ` elected ' to the highest offices in our land . 
We 're trying to undo the damage these morons did to the country . 
That includes all of those who did the torture , all those in the chain of command for those commiting these crimes , the lawyers that concocted opinions to provide cover for these crimes , and the White House team that provided detailed approval for each of the atrocies committed ! 
The latter includes Dick Cheney , Condi Rice , George Tenet , Rumsfeld , George Walker Bush , Addington , Card , Alberto Gonzales , Meirs ; and John Yoo and Jay Bybee ! 
This changed in 1996 , and now former presidents and first ladies are only entitled to this protection for ten years after their service to the country . 
The protection can , however , continue especially if ordered by the current president in office . 
Vice presidents typically do not have secret service protection after their term of service is up , unless some threat or danger exists . 
However if the vice president runs for the office of president , he or she , and all other major candidates in the primary and general presidential election are likely to receive secret service protection . 
Just how soon this is provided may be based in part on the profile of the candidate and any possible early threats , which are not that uncommon , to a candidate s life . 
First Bush lied about firing those involved in the criminal activities around the Plame outing . 
Then he commuted Libby 's sentence . 
The American people have spoken about what happened from 2000 to 2008 , and it is n't exactly a ringing endorsement of what these two criminals did . 
It looks like we wo n't have to wait as long to watch Cheney come unhinged . 
The man is a kook who lives in a make believe world where everyone is evil , except him . 
Step 3 : Dissonance drives us to restore consistency . 
Cognitive dissonance theory : The theory suggests that conflicts between behavior and beliefs create a sense of discomfort , or cognitive dissonance , that the individual subconsciously attempts to eliminate by modifying his beliefs . 
For example , a religious man who believes in nonviolence may strike someone in anger . 
The theory states that the man will either modify his beliefs about nonviolence to justify the violent behavior or will believe his action to be something other than violence . 
He may convince himself that he was acting out of self-protection rather than a desire to inflict harm , or that the provocation was so extreme that even a nonviolent person like himself would have no choice but to respond . 
Individuals often seek reassurance from external sources that their behavior is not in conflict with their beliefs . 
Antigone of Sophocles : `` All men make mistakes , but a good man yields when he knows his course is wrong , and repairs the evil . 
The only sin is pride . '' 
In any event , such posts prove Aristotle right when he cautioned that young people have no business trying to think or talk about or understand politics , for they are ruled by their emotions and lack the necessary experience and wisdom of practical matters that the subject requires . 
-LRB- See Nicomachean Ethics for further reading -RRB- '' . 
I recently received a very nasty email from Karl Rove citing exactly the same phrase ... either the post if from one and the same or the neo-cons are sending out talking papers with phrases to post . 
At least former President Bush has the sense -LRB- so far -RRB- to remain silent and not make himself appear `` ex post inaugural '' ridiculous . 
I have always voted as a moderate , am not affiliated with either party , but Cheney needs to heed the words of General Douglas Mac Arthur , who , during his farewell address to Congress in 1951 , declared his intention to `` simply fade away '' . 
If the GOP ever wants to win an election , it must disown him . 
He is lucky to be a free man ... not that he deserves to be . 
What has happened to our news media ? 
They did everything short of nailing Nixon to the cross ... and let Georgie Boy and Company commit treason and totally impugn the constitution ... it 's beyond belief ... and I 'm sure our new President is beside himself trying to figure out how to fix the mess he walked into ... I seriously doubt that Bush 's note to the new President included a tube of KY Jelly ... Posted by : constwkr | March 16 , 2009 7:18 PM | Report abuse Does n't it seem like too much of a coincidence that Cheney gives a major interview on the same day the story comes out about the ICRC 's report on torture ? 
Cheney is just trying to distract from the coverage of the ICRC report , because the press is too easily distracted by even the most basic magic tricks . 
He does n't care what he says as long as it fills air time and keeps the ICRC report off the air . 
It needs to purge itself of idiots like Cheney , the Bush dynasty , Limbaugh , Hannity & Coulter . 
Self-serving , clueless and otherwise unemployable radicals who belong in prison - for treason . 
So as you 're leaving office , leaving behind a nation involved in 2 wars , and in the midst of a total financial melt-down and collapse ... we as a Nation should not forget how poorly Scooter was treated by our legal system and the constitution ... he 's a multi-convicted felon ... who only got his prison sentence commuted ... too bad Burney did n't get clocked during Bush 's years ... I 'm sure he 'd have gotten a full pardon ... Millions of folks in this country are unemployed ... have lost their retirement and savings ... their homes ... and everything that meant something to them ... and the only person Dick 's concerned about is poor mis-treated , wrongly prosecuted , wrongly convicted Libby ... there is simply nothing else to say ... Go to H \*\*\* Dick ... Posted by : constwkr | March 16 , 2009 7:35 PM | Report abuse ... and ride Scooter to get there ... . . 
Well , it is the Post , what more is there to say ... Posted by : cecil91 | March 16 , 2009 7:44 PM | Report abuse Sheesh . 
I just scanned these posts , my oh my , what are all you pie-eyed teeth-gnashing moonies going to do when the quicksands of Gomorrah finally wash over the Post 's last bilious report ? 
Oh , excuse me , I forgot about the Kos -- enough bile there to float all of you clean through the portal to Nirvana . 
I guess that was another lie from the convicted perjurer . 
Oh , I forgot . 
They passed their bogus telecon immunity bill before the truth about domestic wire tapping had been disclosed . 
He is perhaps the most dangerous person ever elected to Executive office . 
He makes Aaron Burr look like a patriot . 
Cheney & company stole HUNDREDS of BILLIONS . 
Madoff killed no one directly . 
Cheney & company got 5,000 US soldiers killed and 50,000 wounded in order to steal HUNDREDS of BILLIONS . 
Finally , Madoff took the fall for his family and friends . 
Cheney , on the other hand , sacrificed a member of his inner circle so Cheney would n't have to take the rap . 
Bernie Madoff , Republican for vice-president in 2010 . 
Bernie 's more honest than ALL the other Republican candidates . 
it was really concerned about Scooter , let him admit that he , Dick Cheney , was the center of the conspiracy to feloniously out a covert CIA agent . 
To set Dick up with wimpy questions that perfectly stage his deceitful replies then make no attempt to hold him accountable . 
Instead they show utter respect and deference . 
That is insulting and revolting after the damage done to this country and the countless lives forever impacted . 
The more likely reason was explained in a published letter to the editor of Foreign Policy magazine by researcher Laura Garces -- `` Why no attacks in America ? 
-- no reason now to expose himself -LRB- Bin Laden -RRB- and expend resources when he already accomplished exactly what he wanted : billions of U.S. dollars spent launching wars , total neglect of American infrastructure ... Decay and bankruptcy are what he sought , and fear is what he wanted to instill . 
Can anyone doubt that he succeeded ? '' 
It seems that no one wants to give Osama credit for the smarts to bring down the American economy , but his stated objective is exactly what has happened . 
It also seems that he knew the Bushies better than they knew themselves . 
In 2002 , Dick Cheney said , `` Deficits do n't matter '' . 
On Jan 20 , ' 01 , when Bush\/Cheney took office , the National Debt was $ 5.7 Trillion . 
On Jan 20 , ' 09 , when Obama\/Biden took office , it had risen to $ 10.7 Trillion , an increase during their 8-year term of $ 5 Trillion ! 
Is there any doubt now that , clearly , Dick Cheney DOES NOT know what he 's talking about ? 
He should just SHUT UP !!! Posted by : donaldeasley | March 16 , 2009 9:34 PM | Report abuse Cheney has a weak heart and likely poor circulation . 
It 's likely that he is a among those inactive , unhealthy elderly that are as crazy as an outhouse rat . 
The up side is , he will pass soon and nobody will have to listen to him anymore . 
Of course , Hell is in for one big unpleasant ... Posted by : dlkimura | March 16 , 2009 9:42 PM | Report abuse I think it is a game . 
Throw these monkey 's a quarter and watch Froomkin and Gibbs dance . 
It is all so predictable and laughable . 
i 'm sure somewhere tonight there are legal experts -LRB- if there are such -RRB- and congressional , and senate aides looking at ways to get this traitor . 
i hope that one day this guy has his day in court the american people deserve nothing less . 
Please , please prevail upon the editors to allow you to follow up with articles discrediting the various claims . 
`` The defeat of al Qaeda in Iraq , the writing of that democratic constitution , a series of elections that involve power sharing among all the various groups , the end of sectarian violence . 
I think a major defeat for the Iranians living next door to Iraq , who tried to influence events there . '' 
`` Do please keep in mind that there was no al Qaeda in Iraq until after the invasion ; that the al Qaeda that attacked us on 9\/11 has regrouped in Afghanistan and Pakistan ; that sectarian violence is arguably just in a lull ; and that Iraq is virtually an Iranian client state . '' 
Cheney and Bush are NOT the enemy . 
THE ENEMY and the only threat to this country is the spread of fanatical Islamo-terrorism . 
You should pray that there were those in charge that tried to kick some ass . 
Your piss-boy Obama is the WRONG man for the job of defending us . 
History will show it . 
He had plenty of opportunity to read the article before the interview . 
He could have asked about it if he were n't a complete Republithug . 
His next show will probably be on Fox . 
How sad to watch him go down hill . 
He is obviously under pressure from someone . 
See you on the home shopping channel ... Posted by : PeterIII | March 16 , 2009 11:08 PM | Report abuse Just more evidence that Cheney lives in a dream world . 
Suppose he packs six-shooters ? 
With his record , we 've got to hope they 're not loaded . 
Two thoughts : it 's a relief that he 's nowhere near that button anymore , and , as it 's also a relief that W is out , I wonder whether W is more or less lost in la-la land than Cheney . 
Suppose he packs six-shooters ? 
With his record , we 've got to hope they 're not loaded . 
Two thoughts : it 's a relief that he 's nowhere near that button anymore , and , as it 's also a relief that W is out , I wonder whether W is more or less lost in la-la land than Cheney . 
sheesh , ca n't those lovers of cheney and bush get a little more creative ? 
still w\/the messiah comments ? 
no wonder the republicans are in the tank . 
if you have no respect for others , you clearly have none for yourself . 
you sound like one of those who hopes for a disaster . 
you sound aroused by it . 
another mental case who votes republican . 
The election of Obama was a pretty clear indicator that Americans completely reject his and Bush 's opinions on governance . 
Of course , Bush should have pardoned Libby , that would be the `` honorable '' thing to do according to Cheney 's warped sense of honor , but Bush did not and Cheney will not let Bush get away with his actions , at least to Cheney . 
Cheney is sending that message to Bush . 
He seems terrified of `` terrorist attacks '' to the point where he is willing to nullify our constitution in a misguided effort to protect himself . 
I do n't think the majority of US citizens are as frightened as he is . 
Right now Cheney seems to be the best the Posted by : George20 | March 17 , 2009 2:05 AM | Report abuse cheney is a narcissistic turd . 
May those bastards remember every day the blood on their hands for such a needless war and the loss of mine and 4.000 + other childern ... Posted by : lostitall | March 23 , 2009 1:46 PM | Report abuse The comments to this entry are closed . 
