The Officer Should Eat Last As a sign of how much the financial crisis and now economic recession has upended our world , we are now talking about volunteered pay cuts . 
Just imagine the reaction to a sports coach or company manager demanding less pay , not more , at the height of a winning season or the financial bubble . 
Ludicrous or worse might have come to mind , perhaps enough to question the leader 's fitness for the job . 
How much the world has changed . 
Now , some executives are foregoing pay raises and even bonuses , though shocking executive payouts at Merrill Lynch and AIG remind us that the forgoers are yet the exceptions who have not disproved the first rule of unfettered capitalism : more is better . 
At a time when millions of non-executives are facing wage reductions , forced furloughs , and outright dismissals , all amounting to a sharp if not complete loss of income , company executives would be wise to take their pay lumps too , for two reasons . 
First , equity is a defining quality of our workplace culture , which translates into the widely shared perception that a person should be fairly paid for the work performed . 
When corporate performance crashes , as a matter of equity those most responsible for it should give back much of their compensation - and not wait for a claw back . 
Second , selfless behavior is a defining quality of effective leadership . 
The `` officer eats last , '' is the Marine Corps ' way of saying so , as was the Civil War adage for cavalry commanders , `` feed your horses , feel your men , then feed yourself . '' 
Too many executives fed themselves first , questioning their credibility in good times and destroying it now in bad times . 
This is a good moment for company executives to take a pay cut for both reasons . 
When Warren Buffett agreed to take the helm at Salomon Brothers in 1991 , after it was rocked by an enormous trading scandal , he insisted on an annual salary of one dollar . 
He did not personally need the money , of course , but was making a more powerful statement about his leadership than words could ever convey . 
If his leadership proved successful , he stood to gain , but he would only gain if it proved successful . 
Please report offensive comments below . 
Unfortunately the message falls on deaf ears in some corners . 
