BEIRUT | Wed Apr 27 , 2011 7:44 am EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The unrest sweeping Syria may whip up sectarian divisions that could spill across the border and threaten to destabilize Lebanon , a small neighbor where Damascus has both strong allies and enemies . 
Tension already smolders in Lebanon , where the powerful Shi'ite militant movement Hezbollah , supported by Syria and Iran , is at odds with caretaker Prime Minister Saad al-Hariri , backed by the West and the Sunni Arab kingdom of Saudi Arabia . 
Tiny Lebanon , with around four million people , has always been a battleground for bigger regional powers . 
Syria , which had a military presence for 29 years until 2005 , remains the most influential external player in Lebanon 's sectarian politics . 
`` We have sides here who are linked to Syria and others who are enemies of it -LRB- who -RRB- would drag us into the crisis . 
God forbid if something happened there , Lebanon is not going to be immune , '' analyst Nabil Bu Monsef said . 
The upheaval in Syria , where a rights group said on Tuesday 400 people have been killed by security forces , has sectarian undercurrents because of President Bashar al-Assad 's minority Alawite rule in a mainly Sunni Muslim country . 
Alawite loyalists occupy pivotal positions in the Syrian military and Assad family insiders run the crucial security bodies , tying senior officers closely to Assad 's own fate . 
`` If there is sectarian tension between Alawites and Sunnis in Syria this will definitely spill over to Lebanon , '' said a Lebanese analyst , alluding to past fighting between Alawites and Sunnis in northern Lebanon . 
`` We have growing numbers of Sunni hardliners , this is clear , and it is all over the Middle East , and from the other side we have the Shi'ites getting more hardline -- because of the conflict between Iran and the Gulf states . 
All of this is growing , so we should be scared . 
We are not immune , '' he said . 
`` When these countries were stable , we were paying a heavy price because of their interference , so imagine now that there is trouble there . 
We will pay an even heavier price . '' 
For security reasons many Lebanese analysts declined to comment or be quoted by name for this article . 
Underlining the tension , a little known Sunni militant group staged an anti-Assad demonstration in Lebanon 's northern city of Tripoli on Friday and chanted demands for an Islamic caliphate . 
Some analysts said Hezbollah might tighten its already strong grip on Lebanon 's political fortunes if it felt that its main ally in Damascus was weakening . 
A cosmopolitan Mediterranean country with 18 sects , Lebanon endured a 15-year civil war characterized by ethnic and sectarian bloodletting between Muslims and Christians . 
The war ended in 1990 but many Lebanese felt justice was not served and many households still keep guns to hand , including AK-47 assault rifles and even rocket-propelled grenades . 
`` There is already plenty of tension in Lebanon and the Syria unrest will complicate relations in Lebanon , especially between the -LRB- Sunni -RRB- Future Movement led by Hariri and Hezbollah , '' a political science professor at a Lebanese university said . 
Syrian authorities , trying to crush five weeks of protests against Assad 's authoritarian rule , have accused a Lebanese lawmaker from Hariri 's bloc of stirring up the demonstrators and providing them with weapons to attack security forces . 
Legislator Jamal al-Jarrah denied this . 
But , in a sign of the hairtrigger tension , pro-Syria Lebanese and Palestinian parties held a news conference immediately after the Syrian accusations and denounced what they called `` foreign interference in Syria . '' 
Some accused Hariri himself of being behind the demonstrations . 
`` Lebanon is stable when Syria is stable . 
There is no security in Lebanon without security in Syria , '' Hezbollah lawmaker Nawaf al-Mussawi said at the conference . 
Nabih Berri , the parliament speaker and head of Lebanon 's Shi'ite Amal group , a Hezbollah ally and very close to Syria , said on Tuesday Lebanese had to `` care for Syria 's security and stability more than the Syrians themselves . '' 
He added , `` We warn against any attempt to export strife and chaos in Syria because it will ignite a fire in the Middle East that can not be extinguished . '' 
Hariri has not commented on the events in Syria . 
`` What I see in these coming weeks is that Syria will fight by putting pressure on their opponents in Lebanon via their allies to try to contain their opponents in Lebanon , '' said Nicholas Noe , a Beirut-based analyst . 
Lebanon has been without a government since Hezbollah and its allies toppled Hariri 's unity coalition in January in a dispute over a U.N.-backed tribunal investigating the 2005 assassination of statesman Rafik al-Hariri , Saad 's father . 
Hariri accused Syria of killing his father and although he mended fences to a certain extent with Damascus in 2009 , relations between them remain edgy . 
The toppling of Hariri 's government after Hezbollah and its allies resigned from it , and their support of businessman Najib Mikati to replace him angered Sunnis , who saw it as flagrant Shi'ite interference . 
Mikati insists he is politically neutral . 
`` As if Lebanon does not have enough fire , Syria -LRB- unrest -RRB- will be like a spark for many of the problems that have been buried for the past two years , '' said another political commentator . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
