BEIRUT | Wed Apr 27 , 2011 10:32 am EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - From Israel to Iran , Syria 's neighbors are starting to contemplate the possibility of a future without the Assad family as Lords of Damascus , and , whether friends or foes , some do n't like what they see . 
Indeed , some are in denial about what they are witnessing . 
Hezbollah , the Lebanese Shi'ite movement widely seen as an Iranian proxy in the Middle East , purports to believe the government of President Bashar al-Assad is putting down an insurrection by armed gangs of Salafi or Sunni Muslim fanatics . 
In its report of the Syrian army 's assault on the southern city of Deraa , epicenter of the revolt which began last month , Al Manar , Hezbollah 's television , stuck to the official version that the army responded to citizens ' pleas to put an end to `` killings and terrorizing operations by extremist groups . '' 
Hezbollah greeted with glee uprisings that overthrew dictatorships in Tunisia and Egypt and championed the rights of Bahraini protesters against Saudi military intervention to quash Shi'ite demonstrations . 
But it is distinctly unenthusiastic about the risk of losing the support of a Syrian government which is not only its main protector but the conduit for arms supplies from Iran . 
Tehran , which regards Syria as a close ally in a mainly Sunni-dominated region suspicious of non-Arab Shi'ite Iran , has called the revolt in Syria `` a Zionist plot . '' 
Yet Israel too seems deeply uneasy about any change in the status quo . 
Although they are still formally at war , Syria under the current president and his late father , Hafez al-Assad , has maintained a stable border with the Jewish state since 1973 even though Israel still occupies the Golan Heights . 
Israel 's fear -- voiced more openly by commentators plugged in to its security establishment than by politicians -- is that a successful uprising might replace firm Baath party rule with a more radical government , or one less able or willing to keep radical forces on a leash . 
Although Assad sponsors Hezbollah guerrillas in Lebanon and Palestinian militant groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad , he has played a cautious hand . 
Behind the strident Arabist rhetoric and ties with Tehran he has kept the option of peace with Israel in play and sought acceptance by Western powers . 
`` The implications are enormous and totally unpredictable , '' said Lebanon-based Middle East analyst Rami Khouri . 
`` What makes Syria distinctive is that the regime and the system have close structural links with every conflict or player in the region : Hezbollah , Hamas , Iran , Lebanon , Israel , America , Iraq , Turkey . 
In all these -LRB- cases -RRB- there is a Syrian link . '' 
Demonstrations have spread across the country and grown in intensity , he said , and protesters who began calling for reform of the system were now demanding `` the overthrow of the regime . '' 
At the back of many minds is the experience of Iraq , plunged into years of chaos and sectarian savagery after the US-led invasion in 2003 and removal of Saddam Hussein . 
`` Everybody in the region is concerned about the destabilization of Syria , even those who do n't like Assad , because there is one thing he brings to the region : a certain kind of predictability and stability , '' Khouri said . 
`` He maintained the truce along the Syrian-Israeli border , people know how his government behaves . 
Nobody knows what will happen afterwards . '' 
Alex Fishman , a military affairs journalist for Israel 's best-selling daily Yedioth Ahronoth , summed up Israeli apprehension after the Syrian army stormed into Deraa . 
`` However odd it may sound , the Israeli establishment has a certain sentiment for the Assad family . 
They kept their promises throughout the years and even talked about an arrangement with Israel on their terms , '' he wrote . 
`` It 's hard to part with a comfortable old slipper , but the top members of the political and security establishment believe that the Syrian regime , in its current format , will change within weeks or months , '' Fishman said . 
He added : `` The sole interest guiding Israel 's conduct is : if what is happening in Syria will ultimately weaken the Damascus-Iran-Hezbollah axis -- we 'll come out ahead . '' 
For Hezbollah and Iran , losing Assad would certainly be a big blow . 
`` If it -LRB- Syria -RRB- splits into mini-satellite states that will be bad news for everybody , '' Khouri said , suggesting that as in Iraq this might provide an opening for al Qaeda militants . 
Across the border in Lebanon , arena of a sectarian civil war in 1975-90 that sucked in regional and world powers and left Syria in control for 29 years , people are also worried . 
Any prospect of a new sharpening of tensions between Sunnis and Shi'ites , Arabs and Kurds , or Christians and Muslims , all simmering across the region after being brought to the boil by Iraq , produces shudders . 
`` I do n't think any wise man is not worried about what happens in Syria because it is a neighbor , '' said Talal Salman , editor of Beirut 's daily as-Safir . 
`` Any earthquake in Syria will shake Lebanon with its fragile make-up . 
Syria 's stability is in our interest . '' 
For now , Assad has decided to follow in the footsteps of his father and resort to military force , not reform , to put down the protests at a cost so far of more than 400 lives , according to human rights groups . 
Monday 's deployment of tanks in Deraa looks like an indicator of what is to come . 
A source close to the Syrian military said Assad and his security establishment had taken a decision to wage war on protesters across the country . 
But Ali al-Atassi , a prominent Syrian activist whose father was a former president jailed for 22 years by the elder Assad , said `` another Hama '' was impossible . 
In 1982 , Hafez al-Assad sent in the army to crush an armed lslamist uprising , killing of up to 30,000 people . 
`` Syria has reached a turning point . 
It can not go back to where it was , '' said Atassi . 
He said the Western habit of accommodating dictatorships in return for stability was no longer valid . 
`` In Tunis , Egypt and elsewhere for years , Arab leaders and the West gave the Arab people a binary choice : stability or chaos ; despotism or Islamism . 
`` After what happened in Tunis and Egypt , we discovered that there is a third option which is the democratic way . 
Sure , the Islamists will play a role in it , but they will not have the leading role , '' Atassi said . 
While many analysts argue that life after Assad would be hazardous or that he may prove impossible to remove , others say a relatively smooth transition is imaginable over time because Damascus has institutions that can shoulder responsibility . 
They include the army , whose backbone is Sunni although key posts are controlled by members of Assad 's Alawite minority . 
What most observers now dismiss is the possibility of reforms substantial enough to meet popular demands . 
Even if Assad wanted to enact wide-scale reforms , they argue , he lacks the power to prevail over entrenched interests in the security forces and military intelligence . 
`` He is the prisoner of a certain structure and at the same time part of it , '' Atassi said . 
`` The next 2-3 weeks are really critical . 
They will determine whether he will remain in power or whether his regime will collapse , '' Khouri told Reuters . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The reluctance to shed ` stability ' will be widespread , as the internet-savvy Arab youth persists with its demand for a fair say in government , whether under the more obviously despotic regimes or unelected regimes which are currently supporting some of the revolutions against other unelected regimes ! 
However , youth is owed its say , as it has its whole life ahead of it . 
I guess that Hazballah has lost its popularity among syrians as resistance movement after describing protesters as infiltrators and conspirators . 
When it comes to Israel , I guess that the next political system in Syria will be truely against israel and will work to get back its occupied land . 
And syria will get back to its normal arab circle but will keep good relations with Iran in order to work as a mediator between Iran and the arab nations but if a conflict arose , it will for sure take the side of the arabs . 
Governments such as Syria and Iran will never fall . 
They have the military on their side and decades of experience in putting down peoples opposition by para military troops whom are trained just for this scenario . 
As long as they are willing to kill and kidnap their own people they will be in play forever . 
Syria and Iran are no Egypt , the military fears the paramilitaries such as Basij in Iran and the Basij fears the Qods army and so forth ... This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
