BEIRUT | Wed Apr 27 , 2011 10:19 am EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian President Bashar al-Assad , who had boasted his country was immune to the unrest lashing the Arab world 's autocrats , is now fighting for political survival . 
The 45-year-old leader has tried economic carrots , political concessions and brute force to try to quell a popular upheaval that rights groups say has cost over 450 lives in six weeks . 
Syria , mired in its gravest crisis since Assad 's father crushed an armed Islamist revolt in 1982 , risks international opprobrium and sanctions for its repressive response . 
The Assad family 's grip on power looks at its shakiest in 30 years . 
Instability in Syria , fulcrum of several Middle Eastern conflicts , carries huge but as yet uncertain implications for its neighbors , notably Lebanon and Israel , and for the region . 
Here are some of the key risks to watch . 
What sparked the revolt was the arrest of 15 youngsters for scrawling anti-government slogans in the southern town of Deraa , where the first three deaths occurred on March 18 . 
Protests gradually spread across Syria as people demanded freedom from three decades of Baath Party rule , against a background of grievances over economic hardship and corruption . 
Assad , portraying unrest as the work of armed gangs paid by malign powers , replaced his government and coughed up a series of concessions that did not mollify protesters increasingly enraged by the bloodshed inflicted by security forces . 
Their initial chants for reform soon gave way to the battle cry of Arab uprisings that had already unseated the rulers of Egypt and Tunisia : `` The people want the downfall of the regime . '' 
On April 21 Assad ended 48 years of emergency law and scrapped a hated state security court , but the killing of 100 protesters the next day seemed to make these moves a mockery . 
Similarly , limited prisoner releases were counterbalanced by the detention of hundreds of other dissenters and protesters . 
Economic handouts and job creation promises failed to calm the resentment of many Syrians who believe only a small group of crony capitalists has benefited from Assad 's reforms , ostensibly aimed at overhauling an inefficient socialist-style economy . 
So far the armed forces and security services , many of whose commanders belong to Assad 's family and his minority Alawite community , appear to have remained loyal -- unlike in Egypt and Tunisia where the military helped usher presidents from power . 
Assad 's ousting is no foregone conclusion . 
His opponents may have breached the barrier of fear that has long underpinned Baathist rule , but ruthless repression could re-erect it . 
The president can also play the `` me-or-chaos '' card which resonates with many Syrians . 
Some fear that militant Islamists could fill any power vacuum , others that civil war might engulf their country , as in next-door Lebanon and Iraq in the past . 
-- Any signs of mutiny among the army and security forces -- Any signs of protesters taking up arms The United States has condemned Assad 's use of force -- he sent army tanks into Deraa and two suburbs of Damascus on April 25 -- but Western nations which launched air strikes on Muammar Gaddafi 's Libya have not acted against the Syrian leader . 
The Arab League , which swiftly suspended Libya 's membership over Gaddafi 's efforts to quell opposition , has remained silent on Syria , although it issued a blanket condemnation on April 26 of the use of force against pro-democracy Arab protesters . 
Western criticism of Assad 's crackdown was initially muted , partly because of fears that a collapse of his minority Alawite rule might lead to sectarian conflict with the Sunni majority or bring to power Islamist militants hostile to Israel . 
The United States , which had sought to isolate Syria after the 2005 assassination of Lebanese statesman Rafik al-Hariri , has more recently attempted to engage it , hoping to loosen its alliance with Iran and move it toward a peace deal with Israel . 
Neither policy proved very successful . 
Israel is in two minds . 
The removal of Assad , a foe who is allied with Iran and backs Lebanon 's Hezbollah and Palestinian Hamas and Islamic Jihad , would seem a bonus . 
Yet Assad and his father have kept the border mostly quiet since the 1973 war , even though Israel still occupies Syria 's Golan Heights . 
No country has much leverage over Syria . 
Even Turkey , which has developed close links with Damascus in the last few years , has seen Assad ignore its advice to enact reforms . 
The United States has kept sanctions on Syria since 2004 . 
Its European allies may now impose travel bans or asset freezes on the Syrian leadership . 
Any move for U.N. sanctions is likely to be opposed by veto-wielding Russia , an old ally of Syria . 
Iran could be a big loser if Assad 's rule collapses because Syria , its main Arab ally since 1980 , has facilitated Tehran 's efforts to build a Middle Eastern `` axis of resistance '' to Israel and the United States via Hezbollah , Hamas and Islamic Jihad . 
Lebanon , Iraq and other countries will worry that any ethnic or sectarian conflict in a destabilized Syria could spill across their borders , fuelling regional tensions between Arabs and Kurds , Christians and Muslims , or Sunnis and Shi'ites . 
\* Any Arab League position on Syria The turmoil will hit an economy grappling with unemployment , poverty , and water and power shortages , along with falling oil output and rapid population growth of 2.5 percent a year . 
The International Monetary Fund said on April 27 Syria was set for 3 percent growth in 2011 versus 3.2 percent in 2010 , with inflation reaching 6 percent against 4.4 percent last year and the fiscal deficit widening to 6.8 percent of GDP from 4.8 . 
The unrest has ravaged the tourism industry , one of Syria 's fastest-growing sectors , and may scare off foreign investors -- Syria has delayed bidding for its third mobile operator license , Saudi Telecom , one of the bidders , said on April 27 . 
A government goal of luring more than $ 40 billion in private investment to overhaul creaking infrastructure and create jobs over five years had looked implausible even before the protests , given corruption levels and uncertainty about the rule of law . 
Foreign direct investment fell to $ 1.4 billion in 2009 from $ 2.4 billion in 2008 , according to the World Bank . 
Syria , now a net oil importer , needs to invest in refineries to cut fuel import costs in a country that produces 380,000 barrels per day of crude , down from a 590,000 bpd peak in 1996 . 
Despite fiscal strains , Syria has opened the spending taps to try to calm discontent , cutting taxes on some foods , giving cash to poor families , reducing income tax , raising the minimum wage and extending health cover to civil service pensioners -- measures the IMF says will cost about 2 percent of GDP . 
Unemployment is officially 10 percent . 
Independent estimates say it is closer to 25 percent . 
The International Labor Organization says 60 percent of those aged 15 to 24 lack jobs . 
Tougher international sanctions would inflict more economic pain -- without necessarily swaying Syrian policy-makers . 
U.S. sanctions bar the export of certain goods with over 10 percent of U.S.-produced components , restrict dealings with the Commercial Bank of Syria and ban the U.S. financial system from dealing with individuals linked to militant groups . 
Any punitive measures by the European Union , which accounted for 36 percent of Syria 's exports and 29 percent of its imports in 2008 , would probably target Syrian leaders , not trade . 
\* Worsening budget deficit , pressure on Syrian pound An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
