Secret document said UK seen as ` crusader state'Read the document here The Foreign Office 's top official warned Downing Street that the Iraq war was fuelling Muslim extremism in Britain a year before the 7 July bombings , The Observer can reveal . 
Despite repeated denials by Number 10 that the war made Britain a target for terrorists , a letter from Michael Jay , the Foreign Office permanent under-secretary , to the cabinet secretary , Sir Andrew Turnbull - obtained by this newspaper - makes the connection clear . 
The letter , dated 18 May 2004 , says British foreign policy was a ` recurring theme ' in the Muslim community , ` especially in the context of the Middle East peace process and Iraq ' . 
` Colleagues have flagged up some of the potential underlying causes of extremism that can affect the Muslim community , such as discrimination , disadvantage and exclusion , ' the letter says . 
` But another recurring theme is the issue of British foreign policy , especially in the context of the Middle East peace process and Iraq . 
` Experience of both ministers and officials ... suggests that ... British foreign policy and the perception of its negative effect on Muslims globally plays a significant role in creating a feeling of anger and impotence among especially the younger generation of British Muslims . ' 
The letter continues : ` This seems to be a key driver behind recruitment by extremist organizations -LRB- e.g. recruitment drives by groups such as Hizb-ut-Tahrir and al Muhajiroon -RRB- . 
The FCO has a relevant and crucial role to play in the wider context of engagement with British Muslims on policy issues , and more broadly , in convincing young Muslims that they have a legitimate and credible voice , including on foreign policy issues , through an active participation in the democratic process . ' 
Al Muhajiroon , formed by Omar Bakri Mohammed , the radical preacher who fled Britain after the 7 July bombings , was a recruiting organization for young Islamic extremists in Britain . 
Attached to the letter is a strategy document , also obtained by The Observer , which reveals further concerns . 
It says Britain is now viewed as a ` crusader state ' , on a par with America as a potential target . 
` Muslim resentment towards the West is worse than ever , ' the document , ` Building Bridges with Mainstream Islam ' , says . 
` This was previously focused on the US , but the war in Iraq has meant the UK is now seen in similar terms - both are now seen by many Muslims as `` Crusader states '' . 
` Though we are moving on from a conflict to a reconstruction phase in Iraq , there are no signs of any moderation of this resentment . 
Our work on engaging with Islam has therefore been knocked back . 
Mr O'Brien -LRB- then a Foreign Office minister -RRB- has expressed his concern . ' 
However , all mention of the Iraq connection to extremism was removed from ` core scripts ' - briefing papers given to ministers to defend the government 's position on Iraq and terror . 
The document begins : ` We do not see the Muslim community as a threat . 
Muslims have always made , and continue to make , a valuable contribution to society . ' 
The lines to be used by ministers include measures designed to address Muslim concerns , such as the introduction of religious hatred legislation and tackling educational underachievement among Muslims . 
But there is nothing to address the concerns raised by Jay eight months earlier . 
The documents reveal deep divisions at the heart of government over home-grown religious extremism and its connections to British intervention in Iraq . 
The Prime Minister has consistently said that the bombers were motivated not by a sense of injustice but by a ` perverted and poisonous misinterpretation of Islam ' . 
Although Iraq was clearly used as a pretext by extremists , he said he believed it was ideology that drove them to kill . 
To press home the point , Downing Street issued a list of atrocities carried out before intervention in Afghanistan and Iraq . 
The claim was later undermined by the MI5 , which said that Iraq was the ` dominant issue ' for Islamic extremists in Britain . 
Jack Straw , the Foreign Secretary , also rowed back from his comments immediately after the bombings that there was no connection with Iraq and the terror threat after it became clear that the public remained unconvinced . 
But Jay 's letter shows that the Foreign Office was convinced that foreign policy played a key role in radicalising young Muslims . 
The letter outlines a list of 11 ` work streams ' to discourage extremism . 
They included delegations to the Islamic world , ministerial briefings for key members of the Muslim community and receptions to mark key Muslim festivals . 
It is not known how Turnbull responded to the letter , although it is clear that , by January , there was a significant difference between what was being said within the Foreign Office and what ministers were officially being permitted to say in speeches . 
Liberal Democrat home affairs spokesman Mark Oaten last night called on the government to come clean about the link between extremism among British Muslims and anger about Iraq : ` For the government to deny a link between the war in Iraq and dismay among the Muslim community is ridiculous . 
But to try to cover it up , when senior civil servants have recognized the seriousness of the resentment , is even worse . ' 
