Depression cut the naturalist Richard Mabey off from the natural world . 
He charts his slow process of recovery in Nature Cure 244pp , Chatto & Windus , # 15.99 From ancient Greece , Rome and China to the present , there has been a persistent belief in the restorative power of nature . 
That belief has formed the bedrock of the passion for gardening , the enduring literary genre of pastoral , the concept of a national park and the philosophy of Romanticism -LRB- together with its successors such as the Arts and Crafts movement -RRB- . 
It also underpins the profitability of vast segments of the tourist and heritage industries . 
The English are particularly susceptible to the lure of nature : witness our gardens , our anglers , birdwatchers and ramblers . 
There is a long tradition that defines Englishness by way of landscape and what William Wordsworth called `` local affections '' as opposed to more brazen manifestations of national identity such as flags , anthems and a written constitution . 
One of the wonders of English language and culture is the richness of our regional dialect words for natural phenomena : we have as many words for woodland as the Inuit supposedly have for snow , while almost any species of wildflower can be identified by a score of evocative local names . 
The most comprehensive and engaging encyclopedia of those names and the customs associated with them is Richard Mabey 's Flora Britannica , published in 1996 , the product of years of research that drew not only on the author 's own deep botanical learning but also on hundreds of contributors from around the country who provided him with an abundance of local knowledge and lore . 
The hardest task in any writer 's life is to start again after coming to the end of the book they know they will be remembered for . 
So it was that Mabey fell into severe clinical depression some time after the publication of Flora Britannica . 
Being a man so deeply rooted in his locality -LRB- the Chilterns -RRB- that he had lived almost all his life in the very house he was brought up in , he also experienced a sense of radical dislocation upon moving house . 
He went eastward to the haunting but sometimes oppressive landscape of East Anglia - home to a great tradition of literary melancholia that runs from George Crabbe to WG Sebald . 
Upon moving , Mabey packed away most of his library . 
But among the couple of hundred essential books he kept with him was `` most of John Clare '' . 
Nature Cure is several books in one : an honest memoir of the experience of mental illness , a gentle but firm manifesto for a greener way of life , a compendium of delicate observation and curious nature lore . 
It is also a love song to Clare . 
The opening chapter is called `` The Flitting '' , the title of Clare 's great poem about his sense of disorientation on moving from the house in which he had lived as both boy and man . 
For Clare , relocation to a village just three-and-a-half miles further into the Great Fen was enough to unleash his `` blue devils '' and start him on the road to the lunatic asylum . 
Mabey actually spends a brief period as a patient in the St Andrew 's mental hospital in Northampton , where Clare was consigned for more than 20 years . 
But the late 20th-century naturalist -LRB- who writes prose of a lyric poise that could almost be called poetry -RRB- was luckier than the early 19th-century poet-naturalist . 
Clare 's depression was compounded by lost love in the shape of a girl called Mary Joyce , whereas Mabey 's cycle of desolation is broken by the arrival of new love in the shape of a woman called Poppy , whose passion is `` helping to make a facsimile of a Benedictine herb garden in the heart of Norwich '' . 
Both name and occupation seem almost too good to be true : the Romantic poets sought to drown their melancholy in the fume of the opium poppy , while Mabey 's new partner offers love , hope and herbal tea . 
The book begins with an exquisite description of how the author once found a fledgling swift in an attic , lying `` with its crescent wings stretched out stiffly , unable to take off '' . 
There is poetry in the juxtaposition of `` swift '' and `` stiffly '' - consonance of sound to highlight dissonance of sense , the swift being the least stiff and most aerodynamic of our summer visitors . 
Mabey picks up the bird and hurls it out of the window . 
Instinct kicks in and instantly the swift is racing on its first flight . 
And then the naturalist 's knowledge is used to breathtaking literary effect : `` It would not touch down again until it came back to breed in two summers ' time . '' 
The perpetual aerial motion , the sheer life , of the swift becomes a leitmotif throughout the book , a contrast to the living death of deep depression rendered in the image of an outdoorsman curled foetally in his bed all day , face to the wall . 
Yet it is not the swift but Poppy - assisted by other good friends - who cures Mabey . 
He cheerfully admits that his title is somewhat misleading . 
The book actually reverses the pattern of the traditional English nature cure . 
This is not a story in which a bracing morning walk or the sight of a diving marsh harrier restores the author 's faith in life . 
It is a book about the terror of losing that connection to the natural world that had previously centred Mabey 's very being . 
The depression and the slow process of recovery are played out against the distant backdrop of the build-up to the Iraq war and - closer to home - the relentless march of soil-destroying agribusiness and soul-destroying land development in East Anglia . 
Mabey 's experience of severance from the `` common ground '' thus becomes a little allegory of the larger-scale ecocide that pervades modern capitalism and geopolitics . 
If pushed too hard , this kind of analogy between the personal and the political runs the risk of terrible hubris - one thinks of reactions such as `` how dare Sylvia Plath compare her little psychodramas to the Holocaust , or Martin Amis speak of his family problems in the same breath as Stalin 's purges '' . 
But the Iraq connection is by no means exiguous : the migration route of swift and house martin takes our avian asylum seekers over the war zone . 
Mabey can make such connections because he is a writer who never shouts . 
In its quiet way , Nature Cure moves between the nervous breakdown of an individual and the madness of the modern world with a prescience akin to that of TS Eliot 's Waste Land . 
Jonathan Bate 's books include The Song of the Earth and John Clare : A Biography Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Review : Nature Cure by Richard Mabey This article appeared on p10 of the Guardian review section of the Guardian on 01.41 GMT on Saturday 5 February 2005 Latest news and views from the Guardian 's books team paullaity : Read this : clever and funny and rightly cutting . 
