cents BP shares fall 2.5 % and oil prices rise on news cents Pipe carries 12 % of America 's oil output cents Leak could push up petrol prices for motorists A group of motorcyclists ride past the Trans-Alaska pipeline system , operated by BP Photograph : Al Grillo\/AP BP shares slid nearly 2.5 % this morning after closure of a major Alaskan pipeline that carries around 12 % of America 's oil output . 
The Trans - Alaska pipeline system , which transports oil from the Prudhoe Bay field , was closed on Saturday following the discovery of a leak . 
The incident is expected to drive up oil prices , and could mean motorists face even higher costs at the pumps . 
Prudhoe Bay is America 's largest oil reserve . 
BP is the largest shareholder in the company which runs the Trans-Alaska pipeline , called Alyeska Pipeline Service . 
The leak occurred at a pumping station at Alaska 's North Slope , and forced 95 % of oil production at the site to be cut off . 
A BP spokesman based in America described the leak as `` a significant event '' and it is not clear how long it will take to restart production . 
Prudhoe Bay will typically produce 630,000 barrels of oil each day equivalent to around 40 % of the UK 's daily consumption . 
The price of a barrel of US crude oil rose by almost 1 % to $ 89.92 this morning , as traders reacted to the unexpected drop in supplies . 
BP was the biggest faller in the FTSE 100 when trading began , with shares dropping as much as 12p to 480.7 p. This eroded some of the recovery since the Deepwater Horizon disaster last April , which sent BP 's shares tumbling from 650p to 296p . 
The cost of insuring BP 's debt against default also rose by over 10 % , according to Gavan Nolan at Markit . 
Prudhoe Bay is a major resource for BP , with the company planning to build a new pipeline to tap Alaska 's gas reserves . 
BP Pipelines owns nearly 47 % of Alyeska , with ConocoPhillips Transportation owning 28 % , ExxonMobil Pipeline owning 20 % , and smaller shareholders controlling the remainder . 
There have not been any reports of environmental damage because of the leak . 
Alyeska said yesterday that around 10 barrels of oil had been recovered from the basement of a booster pump room , and that around one barrel of oil remained . 
However , the incident is likely to put the oil industry 's safety record under renewed scrutiny , just nine months after the Gulf of Mexico disaster . 
Bob Dudley , who replaced Tony Hayward as chief executive , announced the creation of a new safety unit last September with the powers to audit the company 's operations around the globe . 
A BP spokesman declined to comment on the leak this morning , referring inquiries to Alyeska . 
Its president Tom Barrett said : `` Our goal is to engineer and implement a solution so that we can safely return the pipeline to service as quickly as possible . '' 
Last summer , Alyeska was accused of putting safety at risk by cutting maintainance and safety budgets . 
Kevin Hostler , the company 's chief executive who had previously worked for BP for 27 years , was criticised by congressman Bart Stupak , a member of the US House Energy and Commerce Committee which investigated the allegations . 
Hostler subsequently retired from Alyeska . 
The Trans-Alaska system was completed in 1977 . 
The 48-inch diameter steel pipeline runs for 800 miles , carrying `` hot oil '' from northern Alaska to the port of Valdez . 
The pipeline is either buried underground or lifted above the surface to prevent the permafrost melting . 
Oil experts have warned that temporarily closing the pipeline is a tricky procedure , as BP must ensure that the lines do not freeze once the flow of oil stops . 
