ATLANTA | Thu Oct 21 , 2010 12:25 am EDT ATLANTA Oct 21 -LRB- Reuters Legal -RRB- - U.S. environmental groups filed a suit on Wednesday against British-based oil giant BP Plc saying the world 's worst offshore spill inflicted `` ongoing unlawful '' harm on endangered wildlife in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The suit is one of thousands of damages cases to stem from the spill from BP 's blown-out undersea Macondo well , which between April and July dumped millions of gallons of oil into the sea , fouling coastlines in Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
The well was capped in mid-July . 
But while the bulk of the cases have been brought by affected individuals , like fishermen , hoteliers and companies , this one brought by conservation groups focuses on endangered sea turtles , whales , birds and Florida manatees . 
The case was filed in federal court in Louisiana six months after the DeepWater Horizon rig explosion that triggered the spill . 
It says that these species were harmed by the leaked oil but also that oil in the ocean continues to do them harm . 
`` The harmful effects of the BP oil well blowout on endangered and threatened wildlife will continue for many years , '' said Gregory Buppert , attorney for Defenders of Wildlife , one of the plaintiffs in the case . 
`` We ask the court to compel BP to provide the resources necessary to ensure -LRB- that -RRB- imperiled species in the Gulf recover from this disaster , '' said Buppert , whose organization filed the suit along with the Southern Environmental Law Center -LRB- SELC -RRB- , the Gulf Restoration Network and the Save the Manatee Club . 
Since harm to the species can not immediately be remedied , the plaintiffs would like BP to set up a fund to help Gulf wildlife as a whole , said SELC lawyer Catherine Wannamaker . 
The suit did not estimate a total value for the fund . 
But some environmental experts say proving continuing and ongoing harm -- as opposed to simply past harm -- will not be easy for the specific species described in the suit , paving the way for a legal battle . 
BP has consistently said it will consider all legitimate claims for damages related to the spill . 
The disaster spawned a plethora of lawsuits against BP and partner companies involved in drilling the Macondo well . 
Gulf Coast fishermen , hoteliers and others who sustained economic losses through the spill have filed suits because their losses stemmed from environmental damage . 
One remedy for this group is the $ 20 billion compensation facility set up by BP and administered by Kenneth Feinberg but victims can also sue BP and many of those cases are consolidated into a multi-district litigation suit in New Orleans . 
The Gulf Coast Claims Facility administered by Feinberg has paid $ 1.45 billion in claims since it took over the claims process from the company on August 23 . 
A second group of suits was filed by states and the federal government over harm to their natural resources . 
Louisiana sustained the most damage and could eventually receive billions of dollars in compensation , according to one environmental lawyer . 
Lawyers have also filed suits over the terms under which the government has issued permits to oil companies , including six cases filed in federal court by the environmental group Earthjustice , said David Guest , a lawyer with the group . 
The suits challenge permits issued by the government 's former Minerals Management Service bureau that waived requirements of oil companies to disclose plans in the event of a worst case scenario or a requirement to say how they would deal with the failure of a blowout preventer . 
This preventer mechanism is designed to avert catastrophic blowouts of wells . 
Since the spill , the bureau has been renamed the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement . 
The effect of the Earthjustice suit and others will be to sharpen scrutiny on government handling of drilling permits , said Adam Babich , director of the environmental law clinic at Tulane University . 
Before the spill , `` the environmental community was not paying as much attention as they should have . 
If there are no challenges to government action ... the government gets lazy , '' he said . 
The case is Defenders of Wildlife et al v. BP P.L.C. et al , filed in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana as case no. 2:10 - CV-03879 . 
The suit lists John Timothy Suttles of the Southern Environmental Law Center in Chapel Hill , North Carolina as the attorney for the three animal defense organizations . 
-LRB- Reporting by Matt Bigg ; Additional reporting by Jeff Roberts of Reuters Legal -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
