GAZA | Fri Apr 15 , 2011 12:49 pm BST GAZA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Palestinians in the Gaza Strip are used to violence , but not the brutal murder of a foreign sympathiser shown blindfolded in the hours before his execution . 
Hamas , which runs the enclave , espouses an Islamist agenda focussed on the Palestinian nationalist conflict with Israel . 
So , unlike Islamists in Iraq , Afghanistan or Saudi Arabia who have kidnapped and killed Westerners , Hamas 's leadership has sought to build support and sympathy for its cause in the West . 
A British journalist kidnapped by a fringe Islamist group in Gaza four years ago was released unharmed days after Hamas won a brief civil war and took control . 
An Israeli soldier captured by Hamas and its Palestinian allies during a border raid in 2006 is still believed to be alive in captivity . 
There is genuine outrage here over the cold-blooded killing of Vittorio Arrigoni , an Italian activist who lived in the enclave for two years helping Gaza fishermen deal with Israel 's tight maritime blockade . 
`` I was about to cry when I heard the news . 
That man quit his family for us , for Gaza , and now Gazans killed him . 
That was so bad , '' said supermarket owner Abu Ahmed . 
Samira Ali , a teacher , said : `` Those who killed him are not Muslims and certainly not Palestinians . '' 
Hamas spokesman Fawzi Barhoum denounced the crime as an attempt `` to harm international solidarity with besieged Gaza and to damage the image of the Palestinian people . '' 
But there was also a shiver of fear that extremists who want Gaza to be an Islamic theocracy are bold enough to challenge Hamas over what they consider its lack of religious fervor . 
Friends and fellow pro-Palestinian activists said Arrigoni , a blogger , was well known in Gaza and well liked . 
His captors , calling themselves Jihadist Salafi , saw him as an infidel who `` entered our land only to spread corruption . '' 
They seized the 36-year-old to force Hamas to release their leader , Hesham al-Sa ` eedni , who was arrested last month and identified by Gaza sources as an Egyptian senior member of the Tawheed and Jihad group linked to al Qaeda . 
This group denied responsibility , but observers said the message of the kidnappers bore all the hallmarks of the Jihadist Salafi and could be an autonomous cell of this movement . 
`` They knew Hamas was not going to agree to their demands and so they killed him in order to send a message , '' said political analyst Hani Habib . 
`` It is a sign of doubts over the security situation in Gaza and whether it is stable as Hamas says . '' 
Hamas security forces arrested two men and were seeking others suspected of involvement , as senior figures in the movement scrambled to condemn an `` ugly crime '' totally alien to their beliefs and insist that Hamas 's grip remains intact . 
Hamas , which has run the enclave since 2007 , said Arrigoni 's abductors `` had the intention to kill the Italian from the beginning , and the proof was that they had killed him hours after the announcement of their demands . '' 
Interrogation of one of the group disclosed the location where he was being held , but he was already dead . 
Habib believes radical splinter groups ready to defy Hamas are now competing to demonstrate who is the more extreme . 
Hamas itself is an Islamist political movement which places religion at the center of its mission to end Israeli occupation of Palestinian land . 
Hamas was founded in 1987 as an offshoot of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood . 
An Israeli security official , who did not wish to be named , said : `` We 've been watching these kind of challenges to Hamas for a while . 
The obvious relevance to us is the question of whether Hamas is still in charge . '' 
But for Israel , Hamas was still answerable for any violence from Gaza , and recent fighting in which at least 36 Palestinians were killed in Israeli strikes in response to rocket fire `` made clear that it was in Hamas 's interest to assert order . '' 
There are half a dozen radical Islamist groups in Gaza with membership numbering in the hundreds . 
The differences between them are unclear . 
Some analysts believe they work in cells to evade Hamas pressure . 
All want to end Western influence and establish an Islamic state across the Middle East . 
Hamas wants a Palestinian state , albeit an Islamic one . 
It has largely refrained from imposing Islamic law since taking control of Gaza in 2007 and has also condemned al Qaeda attacks in Western cities . 
Hamas , with some 25,000 men under arms , has said its more radical rivals are simply misguided offered them `` re-education . '' 
Palestinian analyst Hani Masri said it was premature to say Hamas has lost control of Gaza . 
`` Such incidents can happen anywhere , '' he said . 
But this would have an impact on Hamas . 
`` If Hamas is trying to show an image of moderation and could not get something in return from the international community , this will leave a vacuum for more radical groups , even within Hamas itself , '' Masri said . 
George Giacaman , political analyst at Birzeit University in the West Bank , saw Arrigoni 's murder as `` a tremendous challenge for the authority of Hamas ... a huge embarrassment for them . '' 
The movement , armed by Iran and shunned as a terrorist organization by the West , is trying `` to make their authority in Gaza acceptable for the Arabs and foreign countries , '' he said . 
It had succeeded to a certain extent in stopping the firing of rockets and mortars into Israel over the past two years , and it would now be most intent on restoring control with rigor . 
But there were risks attached to that course , he said . 
Hamas forces in August 2009 killed 28 people , mostly Salafis , in the storming of a mosque where a radical cleric who supported al Qaeda surrounded himself with armed men and declared an Islamic emirate . 
`` They can not do that every day , '' Giacaman said . 
