CAIRO | Sat Nov 12 , 2011 6:48 pm EST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Arab League suspended Syria and called on its army to stop killing civilians in a surprise move on Saturday that some Western leaders said should prompt tougher international action against President Bashar al-Assad . 
Hours after the League 's decision , hundreds of Assad supporters armed with sticks and knives attacked the Saudi Arabian embassy in Damascus and Turkish and French consulates in the city of Latakia , residents said . 
U.S. President Barack Obama praised the League 's move and France said it was time for international bodies to take more action against Syria 's government . 
The Arab League will impose economic and political sanctions on Damascus and has appealed to member states to withdraw their ambassadors , said Qatar 's Prime Minister Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani . 
It will also call a meeting of Syrian opposition parties , he said . 
`` We were criticised for taking a long time but this was out of our concern for Syria , '' Sheikh Hamad told reporters at the League 's headquarters in Cairo . 
`` We needed to have a majority to approve those decisions . '' 
Syria 's representative at the Arab League said the decision was `` not worth the ink it was written with . '' 
The League 's announcement was a sharp rebuke for Syria 's leadership which sees itself as a champion of Arab nationalism . 
Hopes among Western powers that Assad would be isolated by his Arab neighbors were repeatedly dashed until now . 
Some Arab leaders have been reluctant to turn against one of their peers given their own restive populations , Middle East diplomats say . 
But Assad has pressed ahead with the crackdown on protesters against his rule despite an Arab peace plan brokered on November 2 . 
The United Nations says more than 3,500 people have been killed in seven months of violence . 
Syria blames armed groups for the violence and says 1,200 members of the security forces have been killed . 
Assad , from the minority Alawite community which has held power for four decades in mainly Muslim Syria , has said he has used legitimate means to confront a foreign conspiracy to sow sectarian strife . 
Activists said six people were killed in Syria on Saturday . 
Sheikh Hamad said the suspension of Syria from the regional body would take effect on November 16 , but did not detail the sanctions . 
`` We ask the Arab Syrian Army to not be involved in the violent actions and killing of civilians , '' Sheikh Hamad said , quoting from an Arab League statement . 
Syria 's Arab League representative , Youssef Ahmed , said suspending Damascus violated the League 's charter because it could only be done by consensus at a summit of Arab leaders . 
It was clear that `` orders were issued to them from the United States and Europe to hasten a decision against Syria , '' Ahmed told Syrian state TV . 
As news of the suspension spread in Syria , hundreds of men shouting pro-Assad slogans broke into the Saudi embassy in the Syrian capital , residents told Reuters . 
Angry crowds also attacked the French and Turkish consulates in Latakia , 330 km -LRB- 210 miles -RRB- north of Damascus on the Mediterranean coast , locals said . 
The Saudi Foreign Ministry said in a statement demonstrators `` gathered outside the embassy , threw stones at it , then stormed the building . '' 
It said Syrian security forces did not react fast enough and held the Syrian government responsible for protecting Saudi interests . 
A French Foreign Ministry spokesman said he was unaware of any attacks on French interests in Syria . 
There was no immediate confirmation from Ankara . 
A senior diplomat in Damascus confirmed the attacks . 
`` We do not have the full picture from Latakia , but the attacks there appear to have been really bad . '' 
Syrian TV reported a demonstration outside the Qatar embassy in Damascus . 
Assad 's opponents hailed the League 's new resolve . 
`` This gives a lot of strength to the position of the Syrian National Council . 
This is now an Arab position , '' said Basma Qadmani , a member of the executive committee of the Syrian National Council , the most prominent opposition group . 
Qadmani said that now that the Arab League had taken its decision `` we believe there is no justification for international reluctance '' to take tougher steps against Assad 's government . 
Obama praised the Arab League and said he would continue to pile pressure on the Syrian leadership . 
`` These significant steps expose the increasing diplomatic isolation of a regime that has systematically violated human rights and repressed peaceful protests , '' he said in a statement . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton repeated her call for Assad to step down . 
`` International pressure will continue to build until the brutal Assad regime heeds the calls of its own people and the world community , '' she said in a statement . 
German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said the decision sent an important signal to those in the U.N. Security Council who had up to now prevented a clear resolution on Syria . 
`` We will urge this to be seen as a chance for a change of heart , '' he said . 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said it was time for international bodies to take more action . 
`` France appeals to the international community to hear the message sent by the Arab states , to take its responsibilities and to thus act without further delay , '' he said in a statement . 
Freezing Syria out of the 22-member League of Arab States carries extra symbolism in the wake of events in Libya , where Muammar Gaddafi was ousted and killed in a rebellion that benefited from NATO air support . 
The NATO mission got U.N. Security Council approval after Libya was suspended by the Arab League . 
`` This step introduces a possibility of foreign intervention and opens the door for engaging the international community in the case , '' said Nabil Abdel Fattah , a political analyst at the Al-Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies in Cairo . 
Sheikh Hamad held out the possibility that the League may ask the United Nations to help protect the rights of Syrians . 
`` If the violence and killing does n't stop , the Secretary General will call on international organizations dealing with human rights , including the United Nations , '' he said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
So I checked and the headline should have used `` laid '' instead . 
`` Laid '' is the past tense of `` lay '' and `` lain '' is the past tense of `` lie . '' 
Lie , Lay ... they are confusing . 
He is a butcher who appears to be nothing more than another self-destructive dictator . 
Syria 's representative to the Arab League said suspending Damascus violated the organization 's charter and showed it was `` serving a Western and American agenda . '' 
If a Western and American agenda is to stop another dictator from murdering its own people then yes I support such an agenda . 
A civil government such as those in the West and America would never murder its own citizens . 
Italy proves it !! SLAP This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
