BP took one step back Saturday in order to take two steps forward in its struggle to tame the gushing Macondo oil well at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico , removing a cap that was catching some of the oil in the hopes of replacing it with one that would capture most or all of the leaking crude . 
The effort was broadcast live via Web video cameras attached to remotely operated vehicles at the sea floor , revealing movements as frenetic as the final minutes of a close soccer match and as slow-motion as a space walk . 
Ungainly robotic arms and claws lassoed tools , wrestled the first of six giant bolts off a piece of broken pipe and nudged devices into position while a brightly illuminated brownish geyser of oil and gas surged upward . 
The stakes are high for BP , the Obama administration and the Gulf of Mexico . 
For a day or two , the damaged wellhead will gush anew -- with the estimated 15,000 barrels of oil a day that had been captured by the old cap now flowing freely . 
But if all goes well , said BP senior vice president Kent Wells , additional ships and a sturdier cap with a tighter seal will be in place in four to seven days . 
The new system would capture most or even all of the oil leaking from the damaged BP well . 
Ships would also be able to disconnect from the new system faster in the event of a hurricane and reconnect faster afterward . 
`` We 're on plan , '' Wells said in a conference call Saturday evening . 
The old cap was removed at 12:30 p.m. local time Saturday , uncorking the steel pipe on top of the blowout preventer on the sea floor , one mile below the surface . 
Although the amount of oil flowing into the Gulf of Mexico abruptly increased , a new ship on the scene , the Helix Producer I , is being hooked up to lines that should enable it to capture 25,000 barrels a day of oil -- more than offsetting the capacity lost by the removal of the old cap . 
The Helix owners said the ship was connected overnight Friday to a free-standing riser pipe and should be ready to start sucking up oil and gas by Sunday afternoon . 
It will separate the oil and transfer it to a tanker called the Loch Rannoch . 
With the extra collection capacity , BP would no longer need to burn oil channeled to the surface . 
BP and its contractors are racing against the next storm , which could throw plans off course . 
For the next week to 10 days , though , the weather and seas are expected to be calm and the company got the go-ahead from the national incident commander , retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , to push ahead changing the cap without waiting for the Helix Producer to be hooked up . 
The operation is not expected to affect another system that is collecting about 10,000 barrels a day . 
The suspense is heightened by BP 's poor track record ; several earlier efforts to slow or stop the leak have failed . 
The new `` total sealing cap '' -- nearly 160,000 pounds and more than 30 feet tall -- would be installed in two pieces over the next four to seven days ; on Saturday it was still on one of the boats on the surface . 
The cap has many of the same components as the blowout preventer that failed to close the well after the accident . 
Three rams would allow the company to seal the well from the top if it chose to do so . 
BP and its contractors have been working on the cap since the days after the accident and designed it to be smaller than a standard blowout preventer , keeping its weight down to better withstand the storm season . 
The new cap can also endure high pressure from the well , enabling BP to test the conditions inside the hole by pushing back against the oil and gas surging from below -- estimated at 35,000 to 60,000 barrels a day . 
The live video feeds from the mile-deep construction site showed a dance of machines that was choreographed from surface ships . 
Robot arms with different types of metal claws slowly grabbed rope leashes attached to tools and equipment in a basket on the ocean floor and carried them over to the collection of valves and equipment atop the wellhead . 
At times bright sea creatures with tentacles floated in front of the camera . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
