President Bush has presided over the weakest eight-year span for the U.S. economy in decades , according to an analysis of key data , and economists across the ideological spectrum increasingly view his two terms as a time of little progress on the nation 's thorniest fiscal challenges . 
The number of jobs in the nation increased by about 2 percent during Bush 's tenure , the most tepid growth over any eight-year span since data collection began seven decades ago . 
Gross domestic product , a broad measure of economic output , grew at the slowest pace for a period of that length since the Truman administration . 
And Americans ' incomes grew more slowly than in any presidency since the 1960s , other than that of Bush 's father . 
Bush and his aides are quick to point out that they oversaw 52 straight months of job growth in the middle of this decade , and that the economy expanded at a steady clip from 2003 to 2007 . 
But economists , including some former advisers to Bush , say it increasingly looks as if the nation 's economic expansion was driven to a large degree by the interrelated booms in the housing market , consumer spending and financial markets . 
Those booms , which the Bush administration encouraged with the idea of an `` ownership society , '' have proved unsustainable . 
`` The expansion was a continuation of the way the U.S. has grown for too long , which was a consumer-led expansion that was heavily concentrated in housing , '' said Douglas Holtz-Eakin , a onetime Bush White House staffer and one of Sen. John McCain 's top economic advisers for his presidential campaign . 
`` There was very little of the kind of saving and export-led growth that would be more sustainable . '' 
`` For a group that claims it wants to be judged by history , there is no evidence on the economic policy front that that was the view , '' Holtz-Eakin said . 
`` It was all Band-Aids . '' 
From 2002 to 2006 , the housing boom generated about 600,000 to 800,000 jobs that otherwise would not have been created -- about 10 percent of total job growth in that span , according to the consulting firm IHS Global Insight . 
Such data , expert say , suggest the economy was not as fundamentally strong as it seemed . 
`` Some of the recovery , some of the expansion , was based on very shaky foundations , '' said Nariman Behravesh , chief economist at Global Insight . 
`` It 's sad to say , but we really went nowhere for almost ten years , after you extract the boost provided by the housing and mortgage boom , '' said Mark Zandi , chief economist of Moody 's Economy.com , and an informal adviser to McCain 's campaign . 
`` It 's almost a lost economic decade . '' 
The president 's current aides say they are proud of their economic record . 
They note , for instance , that they attempted to rein in the growth of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , the housing finance companies whose vast expansion they see as a central cause of the financial crisis . 
Independent analysts generally view them only as contributors to the crisis . 
`` It does look like a great eight years , aside from the last quarter , unfortunately , '' Edward P. Lazear , chairman of Bush 's Council of Economic Advisers , said in a recent interview . 
`` In the long term , things look good . 
The reason things look good is this economy will rebound , and it will rebound strongly ... We expect things to turn around , and I would say early in President Obama 's administration . '' 
Even excluding the 2008 recession , however , Bush presided over a weak period for the U.S. economy . 
For example , for the first seven years of the Bush administration , gross domestic product grew at a paltry 2.1 percent annual rate . 
The administration also failed to gain traction on some of the fundamental economic and fiscal issues facing the nation -- including solidifying the finances of Medicare and Social Security , simplifying the tax code , or making health care more affordable . 
Resolution of those issues might have left the government more flexibility to respond to the current crisis by lowering the nation 's future budget deficits . 
