Delta Air Lines President Edward Bastian speaks during a news conference in Tokyo September 2 , 2010 . 
ATLANTA | Tue Apr 26 , 2011 4:30 pm BST ATLANTA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Soaring jet fuel costs pounded Delta Air Lines -LRB- DAL . 
N -RRB- and US Airways Group -LRB- LCC . 
N -RRB- in the first quarter , leading both to post losses , but rising fares eased the blow , and Delta said it aims to recapture the full cost of fuel on every flight . 
Results from the two carriers on Tuesday -- marking the end of quarterly reports from the largest U.S. airlines -- underscore the threat of rising energy costs . 
But Delta 's particularly aggressive stance signals new determination to keep passing that cost on to customers through fare hikes and other means . 
Delta 's stock gained 8 percent in morning trade on the New York Stock Exchange . 
`` We must fully recapture our costs on every flight every day to maintain and improve our earnings performance , '' Delta Chief Executive Richard Anderson said on an earnings conference call . 
`` Where we can not get the necessary revenue increases to offset the increased cost of operating the flights , we will remove capacity , particularly in our post Labor Day schedule , '' he said . 
Airlines have steadily boosted fares this year as more than $ 100-a-barrel oil threatens to wipe out the industry 's recovery from the economic downturn . 
Carriers are reporting higher passenger demand , but costs are also rising . 
Industry analysts were impressed by Delta 's tone , but expressed doubt about whether passengers will tolerate higher fares . 
`` You 're not seeing them in a state of panic like they were , say , in 2008 because so far demand has been so strong they 've been able to pass through most of these additional costs , '' said Ray Neidl , senior aerospace specialist with Maxim Group . 
`` But at some point , you 'll get consumer push-back for ticket price increases , '' he added . 
Morningstar equity analyst Basili Alukos said Delta 's goal of recovering the full cost of fuel on each flight may not be practical . '' 
-LRB- It 's -RRB- very aggressive , if you ask me , '' he said . 
`` The only way for that to occur is if the legacy carriers abandon the leisure passenger and focus exclusively on the premium passengers . '' 
Alukos added that if major airlines raise fares too aggressively , low-cost carriers like Southwest Airlines -LRB- LUV . 
N -RRB- will win a greater share of budget travellers and `` undercut the legacy carriers on pricing . '' 
The company projected `` double-digit growth '' in passenger revenue per available seat mile in the current quarter . 
US Airways posted a loss , excluding special items , of $ 110 million , or 68 cents per share . 
The loss was wider than a year earlier but not as bad as analysts ' average forecast of 72 cents a share . 
Revenue was $ 3 billion , up 11.7 percent . 
Operating expenses were also $ 3 billion , up 12.8 percent , due primarily to a $ 272 million jump in fuel costs . 
Shares of Delta were up 8 percent at $ 9.72 in morning trade . 
Shares of US Airways were up 5 percent at $ 8.69 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Karen Jacobs , John Crawley and Kyle Peterson ; editing by John Wallace -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
