ISTANBUL | Tue Apr 26 , 2011 1:54 pm EDT ISTANBUL -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Members of the Syrian opposition meeting in Istanbul on Tuesday pleaded for international help to persuade President Bashar al-Assad to halt a brutal crackdown on a popular revolt . 
`` Our friends in the West , in Turkey , in the Arab world , if they want to help us , then they can do that by ... putting the clearest possible pressure on the Syrian regime to stop targeting civilians , '' Anas Abdah , the British-based chairman of the Movement for Justice and Development , told Reuters . 
Abdah was speaking on the sidelines of a gathering of opposition and rights groups organised by Turkish non-government organizations to highlight the Syrian people 's plight . 
Hundreds have been killed by Syrian security forces since pro-democracy protests began six weeks ago . 
The violence intensified in recent days with an assault on Deraa , the heart of the uprising , but opposition members living in exile took heart from reports of dissent within the army . 
`` It looks like Bashar al-Assad has taken a strategic decision to crush a non-violent movement in Syria by ordering his brother Maher al-Assad ... to go and storm Deraa city , '' Abdah said . 
Maher , regarded as the second most powerful man in Syria , commands the ultra-loyal Fourth Division -- the Syrian Army 's equivalent of special forces . 
Abdah said he had reports that some army officers from another division , from captains to a lieutenant-general , were trying to stop the Fourth Division from entering the city . 
`` At this moment of time we have reports that certain elements in the Fifth Division are not responding in the way Bashar and Maher want them to , and are siding with the people , '' Abdah said . 
The Fifth Division is stationed in the south of Syria , on a plain overlooked by the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights , and its ranks are filled with Sunni Muslims . 
Syria has been dominated for nearly five decades by an Alawite minority close to Shi'a Islam , and the army 's officer corps is dominated by Alawites , though its ranks are mostly Sunni . 
`` The Syrian army is a national army . 
They will stand by the people eventually , '' said Rabhan Ramadan , an Austrian-based Syrian Kurd working with the Haitan Maleh Foundation , a rights group in Brussels . 
`` Right now we are beginning to see some members of the military refusing to shoot . 
It is just the beginning , but we expect to see more of that , '' he added . 
Abdah said he was in Istanbul as a representative of signatories of the 2005 Damascus Declaration , which has become an umbrella group for the Syrian opposition and has a program for political and economic reform . 
`` However at this moment in time all of this is irrelevant and meaningless if targeting of civilians were to continue by the Syrian regime , '' he said . 
Turkey 's President Tayyip Erdogan , who has had friendly relations with Assad , has urged Assad to refrain from using excessive force and to undertake reforms his people are seeking . 
The United States is considering targeted sanctions against Assad 's government and on Monday , President Barack Obama conferred with Erdogan about the turmoil . 
Syrian human rights organization Sawasiah has estimated at least 400 people have been killed since the uprising began . 
Walid Saffour , the London-based president of the Syrian Human Rights Committee , put the toll at more than 700 , and added that 5,000 people had been arrested . 
Syria has expelled most foreign journalists , and getting independent corroboration of casualties is impossible . 
Saffour said he had reports of at least one soldier being executed for refusing to fire on civilians in Deraa , and spoke of some officers and soldiers fleeing to Jordan to seek asylum . 
`` The situation is very , very horrific , '' Saffour said . 
