In tomorrow 's paper David Aaronovitch has written a bumper comment piece . 
The Editor thinks it might touch a few nerves - David 's stuff often does . 
So we thought we 'd serve it up a bit early on the blog , let our most devoted readers get their hands on it first . 
It 's polemic dynamite . 
The page has gone now , although we ca n't rule out some late edition changes . 
It 's been a marathon day . 
The spring sunshine has passed us by . 
Time for a pint and a good rant . 
Over to you David ... The saloon-bar right-winger with his received wisdoms is a familiar demon . 
He and his friends sit , nursing their drinks , and construct a perfect and consistent image of the modern world . 
There are too many immigrants . 
Criminality goes unpunished while law-abiding citizens are victimised . 
Hard-working people are penalized by high taxes that go to pay for no-hopers to study Mickey Mouse courses at former polytechnics . 
It s all going to the dogs . 
Meanwhile , in shuttered dining-rooms in Holland Park , Highbury and Kennington , in converted barns in Herefordshire and flagged kitchens in Brittany , in the pages of the London Review of Books and at publishing parties , the British intelligentsia collectively creates , reproduces and conforms to its own , narrow narrative of what is happening on the planet . 
As reported or argued in articles , reviews , interviews or diaries , this story includes the following necessary elements : Labor would have won in 1997 anyway without Tony Blair ; Labor are now pretty much the same as the Tories , that s why there is so much apathy ; Blair has no social vision , he just wants power for its own sake ; new Labor is in hock to America for strange psychological reasons to do with power and weaponry ; Labor wishes to privatise the public services ; Labor hasn t achieved anything of any note ; Labor represents a unique threat to our ancient liberties ; Blair is a pious , lying hypocritical warmonger ; he is trying to scare us unnecessarily ; there is no such thing as a terrorist threat or if there is such a thing , then it s no worse than when the IRA was active , or if it is worse , then it s the consequence of Western arrogance and globalisation . 
This orthodoxy , I would argue , has become in its own etiolated way as stifling as anything imposed on the faithful by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith . 
There are people who never meet people who think anything other than the things I ve listed above , yet their influence on debate in this country is out of all proportion either to their numbers or their political understanding . 
Inactive themselves , they spread hopelessness and cynicism and help pave the way for a return of the right , a return that many of them would unconsciously perhaps welcome . 
The proximate cause for my rage is an article in this edition of the London Review of Books by the novelist John Lanchester . 
Entitled What is Labor for ? 
, the piece is ostensibly a review of Stephen Pollard s biography of David Blunkett , but is in fact the magazine s election campaign curtain-raiser . 
And the temper of the argument is immediately apparent . 
The party s record in government , writes Lanchester , evokes a range of responses on the left from mild gloom to clinical depression , from irritation to rage , from apathy to horror . 
There it is , at once the annihilation of other possibilities . 
Lanchester is saying that there is no section of the left that feels -LRB- or can feel -RRB- more positively about the government than irritated or apathetic . 
That must be the best you can do , and still be on the left . 
Never mind enthusiastic ; even broadly supportive is simply not an option . 
Then comes the list . 
War , tuition fees , house arrest , wholesale subservience to American foreign policy , talk of services being swamped by refugees , the deliberately manipulative use of fear , the introduction of ID cards , the suspension of habeas corpus and these are the good guys . 
The list , of course , is hugely partial and the description of each of the items within it is carefully slanted . 
Not necessarily wrong by the way , but artfully constructed Lanchester is a writer I admire and the LRB is well-edited . 
And the piece represents probably the most coherent and literary dinner-party critique of New Labor that you are likely to find . 
But , my God , you ll find plenty . 
Let s begin with existential disgust . 
Ben Ramm , editor of the new magazine The Liberal -LRB- for which I ve written myself -RRB- expresses the mood well when , in his latest editorial , he tells his readers that , Few administrations have governed as prosaically as the incumbent Labor one , or with as little imagination , ideology and sincerity . 
Unfortunately the comparison is generalised , so we don t discover whether he prefers the lyricism of the Major government , the poetry of the poll tax , or the satisfyingly ideological drama of the miners strike . 
Another nostrum is the dimness of Blair . 
Doris Lessing said it a year ago , the philosopher Ted Honderich said it again a fortnight ago . 
He hates Blair because he is always asking to be judged by the morality of his intentions . 
He does n't understand that no one cares about his fucking morality In any case , his morality is so muddy and ill-considered . 
I 'm increasingly coming to the opinion that Blair 's main problem is that he 's not very bright . 
Honderich , we were told by his interviewer , was the son of a Mennonite German father and a Scottish Calvinist mother . 
Dim , and a philistine . 
Last week the director Richard Eyre , writing in the Guardian , described his reaction to a Labor official who described himself as being on the left . 
Quaint , is n't it , Eyre mocked , to hear a member of the present government describing themselves as being on the left ? 
More plausibly , being on the left means taking issue with the government on the Iraq war , civil liberties and tuition fees . 
It also means being indignant at the failure to demonstrate any sort of response to the arts , apart from indifference . 
It is hard to beat those three sentences for smugness . 
Could left not even possibly encompass wanting to see a fascist dictatorship toppled , greater access to higher education for more students , or protection for citizens from terrorism ? 
And how indignant , exactly , does one have to be about any sort of response to the arts -LRB- ie , inevitably , more money -RRB- before one is permitted to be on the left ? 
I wanted to know what Eyre made of a recent study showing that Britons visit more plays , concerts , libraries , museums and art galleries than their counterparts in France , Germany or Italy . 
How does it come about that , in a country run by philistine New Labor , you can just walk into the Tate , whereas the visitor to the Gare D Orsay in Paris must queue for an hour , even in the bitter cold , to pay a fortune to see the art on display ? 
In dinner-party Britain it never happened . 
One person who understands about this mental shut-out is the man I began this piece with , John Lanchester . 
In the summer of 2003 Lanchester revealed his own run-ins with the bruschetta orthodoxies . 
After the 1997 election , Lanchester wrote : I very quickly felt as if I was the only person I knew who still basically approved of Blair , apart from all the people who voted for him . 
Lanchester felt that much of the left s hatred of Blair was down to an inability to deal with power . 
So Lanchester s most recent article represents a shift , and may seem all the more convincing for that . 
But I wonder whether it isn t the society that Lanchester keeps which has eventually got to him . 
Exhausted from defending the excoriated Blair , he has decided to join in the chorus of exaggerated disgust . 
He sees , for instance , Blunkett s authoritarian tendencies , ignores any countervailing evidence -LRB- the more liberal stance on immigration , divorce , cohabitation , gay rights , cannabis etc. -RRB- , parcels together Belmarsh and Asbos , and refuses a discussion of what response would be appropriate to the possible threat from 9\/11 or Madrid-type terrorism . 
Lanchester has simply stopped saying but . 
Let s take Asbos . 
They are problematic because they re new and could be abused . 
But one quote from my local paper last week should show Lanchester why so many people support them . 
A resident of King s Cross , until recently a gigantic al fresco drugs mart , told a reporter : If you look at the difference where I live it is massive . 
Two years ago people s doorways were constantly being used by drug dealers and users , but the problem has dried up . 
The man felt , perhaps for the first time in years , that the law was on his side and protecting him . 
The same applies to the government s mission . 
Perverse headlining hid one of last week s most encouraging stories . 
Buried in the tale about the small possible fall in household incomes , was the news about reductions in relative poverty . 
The Institute for Fiscal Studies revealed that the incomes of the poorest people in Britain grew between 2003 and 2004 , partly because of new , more generous tax credits . 
The incomes of the richest fifth of households fell by about 1 per cent , but the incomes of the poorest fifth rose by about 1 per cent . 
As a result , overall , said the IFS the gap between Britain 's rich and poor shrank for the third successive year . 
Child poverty fell by 100,000 , less than the government target , but the fall may well be larger and the IFS thought that the government could still eventually meet its target . 
At the same time , pensioner poverty continues to fall dramatically , dropping by a tenth in a single year -LRB- 2002\/03 -RRB- , and by over a quarter since 1998\/99 . 
There is no NHS beds disaster , there is no teacher shortage -LRB- the Jamie Oliver phenomenon partly testifies to the lack of a crisis in other areas of school resources -RRB- , waiting lists are No , enough . 
I will not play this game . 
Because however much money goes into public services , the Dinner Party is dissatisfied . 
It is unhappy with targets which disrupt the autonomy of professionals , it is unhappy with any kind of private involvement , it is unhappy with any notion of choice . 
The writer John Harris , in his comfortable chronicle of disillusion So Now Who Do We Vote For ? 
, signs off the section on the health service with the observation of one health worker that , It s immoral that anyone should make money from illness . 
This is , I think , the stupidest thing that I have read all year , because what is really meant is It s immoral that anyone should make money out of making people well . 
Imagine endorsing a sentiment as boneheaded as that ! 
And then , on top of all these rows and arguments , there was Iraq . 
Well , perhaps it would have been better if Blair had resigned back in early 2004 when it was becoming clear that WMD in stockpiles would not be found . 
Not because he lied , but because a huge mistake was made on his watch and the shadow of it would always fall over him . 
Sometimes I ve thought he should , sometimes I ve decided that he shouldn t . 
Like everyone else I have my own criticisms of the government , some of them fairly savage . 
But the unthinking , total nature of the Dinner Party s condemnation of Blair has always trumped my feeble efforts at a critique . 
Maybe too much so . 
Besides , after Libya , Lebanon and the Iraqi and Palestinian elections themselves , isn t there at least an argument to be had about the spread of democracy ? 
Why aren t the liberal classes up in arms about Zimbabwe and Darfur ? 
Why do they squeal over the non-existent threat to Rowan Atkinson from laws to stop incitement to religious hatred , and fall totally silent about young women being executed for adultery in Iran ? 
Couldn t the task of any decent center left be to take Bush et al up on their words about liberty in the world ? 
To take Blair up on Africa and climate change ? 
Or , if you really can t get down from your high tables and your high horses , the least you could do is to stop moaning through the mouthfuls . 
This post was last changed at 06:36 PM , April 2 2005 , at a time when the top headline on Guardian Unlimited was Pope 's condition ` very serious ' , and the top headline from the BBC was Stricken Pope develops high fever , and there were posts elsewhere tagged with these same keywords : Blair politics left opposition chatteringclasses The post was written by Rafael Behr . 
You can email the author at Rafael.Behr@observer.co.uk Is this the same Aaronovitch that wrote - `` If nothing is eventually found , I - as a supporter of the war - will never believe another thing that I am told by our government , or that of the US ever again . 
And , more to the point , neither will anyone else . 
Those weapons had better be there somewhere . '' 
Bush 's re-election testified to that . 
Posted by David T on April 2 , 2005 11:01 PM . 
Was I wrong about Iraq ? 
A New Labor sell out . 
Perhaps in between gorging on port and vol au vents , Mr. Aaranovitch could go and see some normal people . 
Students will tell him they are poorer , pensioners will tell him they are poorer , muslims will tell him they feel threatened , assylum seekers and ethnic minorties will tell him they feel scapegoated , and workers will tell you their rights are being whittled away . 
Will you be at the Make Povert History demo in Scotland David ? 
RESPECT and all the socialists will be . 
Go and see the Colombian Solidarity appeal , amnesy international dealing with Dafur . 
The people there are left and dismayed at Labor . 
The Palestinians had already had elections to elect their parliament and Arafat was elected . 
And democracy becomes second to security , food and water when under a state of constant occupation-inspired poverty . 
What spread of democracy ? 
Someone got blown up and the country is split down the middle ! 
All this whole the US makes positive sounds at Saudis fake , seist elections and after his daddy reinstated family dictatorship in Kuwait . 
It is clear where the hyocracy lies . 
Posted by Hanf on April 2 , 2005 11:42 PM . 
Its more like a why-oh-why whinge about North London Liberals that could have been written for the Daily Mail ... Posted by Guido Fawkes on April 2 , 2005 11:54 PM . 
All too often , and whether they be on the left or the right , closed minds think alike . 
A few chosen examples set up generalisations that then sweep all before them , and the world - that is the lives of its 6.4 billion inhabitants - becomes to the speaker far more readily understandable . 
Religions , politicians , parties ; they are all the same . 
Blair is a ... . . 
; Bush is a ... ... ; -LRB- insert bin label of choice . -RRB- 
But both good and bad things have come out of the Blair government , the Iraq War , and any other issue one might name . 
But when slogans substitute for reason , human dialogue becomes a parliament of fowls . 
Posted by Ian MacDougall on April 3 , 2005 12:14 AM . 
Posted by Mark on April 3 , 2005 01:09 AM . 
Thank God there is still one writer standing up for real progressive values and the rights of those who never get to Islington dinner parties . 
I myself am a pensioner and am sick of the lies spread by people such as Hanf in the comments above . 
The trouble is that if you even contradict them -LRB- this is when they deign to talk to anyone weaker older or poorer than themselves -RRB- all you get a a snarling patronising put down based on the idea that they know what is best for everyone . 
When I was young it was just rich `` caddish '' types who did this , now it is people who say they are on the left and laughably call themselves names such as `` Respect . '' 
I really think they are just the same kind of people . 
Posted by Alfred on April 3 , 2005 01:12 AM . 
It 's a shame if this is what you think constitues polemic dynamite . 
As a previous poster points out , David feels duped about his immoral support for the war ; but I guess his pomposity prevents real introspection , so he fools himself that he stands as some kind of rational opponent of unthinking leftism . 
The Voice of Reason ... now where I have I heard that name before ? 
... Workers ' rights being whittled away ? 
Perhaps if Respect had any actual workers speaking for it , we might hear a little about minimum wages , union recognition , paid holiday rights , maternity rights , et al. . 
What fun Respect will have if\/when the Tories get back in . 
In short : if all these armchair critics think they have a ` better ' version of socialism that the British people will actually pick on May 5 -LRB- and yes , I 'm afraid it has to be democratic -RRB- , they 're welcome to stand as candidates and take their chances . 
This is n't an attack on liberals or the Left -LRB- I 'm both -RRB- , just on those people who call themselves liberals and Leftists and who have got so bored with moderate , progressive government that they 're ready to risk a return to right-wing Conservatism just because Labor does n't push all the right ideological buttons for them . 
Posted by Bloggers4Labour on April 3 , 2005 02:15 AM . 
Posted by lesley bennett on April 3 , 2005 10:08 AM . 
Posted by lesley bennett on April 3 , 2005 10:12 AM . 
Your comments were a real tonic Posted by Christopher Carr-Jones on April 3 , 2005 10:47 AM . 
Since ` President ' Blair asked to be judged at the polls on his Iraq adventure could anyone tell me how voting Labor can bring about anything other than another smug response from Blair that himself and `` unremitting New Labor '' have received an endorsement ? 
Has it really come to the fact that I have to vote for what I consider the least worst option on fear of letting the Tories in ? 
I 'm now hoping for a slim Labor majority that will force a change in voting to a more PR system this time and plan to vote accordingly . 
Posted by Dave Hendy on April 3 , 2005 10:55 AM . 
Posted by Tony Scott on April 3 , 2005 10:59 AM . 
We have never met but I have read many of your words in recent years and feel considerably wiser as a result . 
I now feel close to feeling I know everything about everything - surely a position one should aspire to in this confusing world in which we find ourselves . 
However I note with interest a certain tendency to express disappointment , often in quite strong terms , at the lack of dinner party invitations you receive . 
Of course I recognize it is difficult for a man who so obviously deserves to have thousands of friends asking him to dinner to express this in the explicit way in which I have - but I can read between the lines . 
So David , I would like to invite you to dinner `` chez nous '' -LRB- my wife and I -RRB- on the evening of your choice . 
-LRB- Not a Monday - we are always busy -RRB- -LRB- Oh and often there 's football on a Saturday -RRB- We would appreciate it if you could let us know of any dietry requirements you might have beforehand . 
Please feel free to bring a partner of your choice . 
Yours in friendship and brotherhood , Posted by Matthew C on April 3 , 2005 11:05 AM . 
Was I wrong about Iraq ? 
It turns out , that all along , to Aaronovitch , it did n't matter if Iraq was n't a threat , had no links to Al-Qaeda or did not posess illegal weapons . 
To say that Blair believed Iraq had these weapons is just nonsense . 
Blair had agreed to support an invasion of Iraq even before the security council . 
Blair seeked the legitimacy that Bush disregarded and failed to get it . 
Regarding compliance with UN SCR 1441 , Aaronovitch is just wrong . 
On 8th November 2002 , Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock said : `` There is no `` automaticity '' in this Resolution . 
If there is a further Iraqi breach of its disarmament obligations , the matter will return to the Council for discussion as required in Operational Paragraph 12 . '' 
It was therefore the responsibility of the security council to determine if Iraq was in breach of 1441 . 
As we now know , the faulty intelligence from Ahmed Chalabi and Allawi was kept from the real experts like Dr. Brian Jones who were excluded from the drafting of the second `` dossier '' by Alastair Campbell and the incompetent John Scarlett . 
Failures of judgement by CEOs should lead to their dismissal . 
I hope Tony Blair is duly dismissed in May . 
A hung parliament would be an ideal result , reflecting the true wishes of the electorate . 
Posted by Mark Webb on April 3 , 2005 02:13 PM . 
The Editor is right that David Aaronovitch -LRB- DA -RRB- would touch a nerve . 
The arguments are too polarised on both sides and allow for no element of truth in either side 's arguments when several exist . 
May I first ask all activists -LRB- left -RRB- to read John Lanchester . 
I 'm an activist if stuffing leaflets in envelopes , coming up with local campaigning ideas at Labor Party meetings , and driving the Chairman of the Labor party from Hastings to Eastbourne on his pre election tour is activism . 
Labor Party activism these days is almost disenfranchised , unthinking ` doing ' . 
Debate , criticism and analysis of Labor 's failures and achievements nationally is not a strong point of ward meetings . 
Could I perhaps also ask if the Editor asked Lanchester and the LRB if the Observer could reprint the Lanchester piece ? 
It would have been a useful counterpoint to D.A. 's piece . 
My immediate reaction to Lanchester was that it was spot on . 
But again it was polarised . 
These people -LRB- Lessing , Lanchester et al -RRB- are not activists says D.A. Presumably not being activists implies they never were activists , and that all they have time for now is criticising from ivory -LRB- and chrome -RRB- kitchens and eating at subsequent dinner parties . 
But the arguments marshalled by DA are thin -LRB- i.e. the riposte to Blunkett 's and therefore Blair 's authoritarianism is very weak . -RRB- 
DA is right about the left 's discomfort with ` power ' but why would n't they be , especially when it seems to be concentrated almost solely with the executive , rather than in parliament ? 
The truth is , there is the left , and the middling left , and New Labor and the right . 
It is a broad Church now . 
The old left are heretics in the eyes of the Executive , suffered and useful only at general election time . 
Heresy it is now to demand democracy at home and in Zimbabwe . 
say the leftists , if Iraq suffered in the name of Democracy then let principle demand we apply the same base rule to spread it everywhere including doing a beter job of it at home . 
But I do n't believe democracy was the reason for the Iraq War , although a semblance of democracy is still a potential outcome , but at such a cost . 
New Labor in opposition and the New Labor Government learned what Machiavelli taught his proteges , that power and the maintenance of power is the ultimate objective . 
If maintaining power requires servicing some socialist ideals it will happen and has , to some degree . 
But it also means servicing market ideologies . 
It needs broad appeal to stay in power and hold the territory formerly claimed by those in power before it . 
Yet I am troubled . 
I want New Labor to become a different Labor but shorn of Old Labor 's weaknesses and internal autocracies . 
I know that perceptions of doing something worthwhile to make a difference is often the only expedient route to maintain power in order to make small differences for the better . 
Government 's of weakened powers like Britain can only make small inroads , and Governments ca n't really do that much . 
We expect too much from them . 
And , it is not possible for them to always tell the truth , and to do so would reduce their hold on power . 
It is amazing how those in power will also subsume their internal checks of personal integrity to believign their own propaganda . 
It is what enables those with a conscience to survive . 
Posted by rosie brocklehurst on April 3 , 2005 02:42 PM . 
I rumbled Blair before he was elected : he said in an interview that he would be prepared to use nuclear weapons . 
Any politician who says this is prepared to commit the ultimate act of terror . 
That he claims to be a Christian only makes it worse . 
So I have never been surprised that Blair has proved a warmonger . 
About Iraq I knew he was lying : I had read Scott Ritter and considered the effects of sanctions on Iraq and it was clear to me -LRB- and I indicated my belief in public before the war started -RRB- that Hussein had no weapons of mass destruction . 
An ordinary member of the public like myself was right and Spooks United were wrong - which shows just how dangerous these people are particularly now that what they can say can deprive people of their liberty That Blair was not really concerned about a terrorist attack on this country was shown when he insisted on making war on Iraq . 
He had been warned that if he did so the risk of a terrorist attack would be increased . 
That should have been decisive in stopping him . 
That it was n't showed waht his real priorities were As for DAs attempt to justify a kind of `` humanitarian '' war against a tyrant because of his violation of human rights -LRB- even though he knows that such a war is still illegal under international law -RRB- he and others like him do not seem to realize that the people who are killed in such a war -LRB- or incapacitated or injured -RRB- are deprived of their human rights in consequence , so that a war to get rid Hussein because he did not value human life is showing the same lack of concern for it No wonder there is torture and imprisonment without trial in Iraq today Blair is either a fool or a knave . 
I do not believe he is a fool . 
Posted by malcolm pittock on April 3 , 2005 02:47 PM . 
This is what the IFS 's press release notes : `` As a result , income inequality -LRB- measured by the Gini coefficient -RRB- fell for the third successive year . 
But the Households Below Average Income data are drawn from a sample of only 25,000 households out of a total of around 25 million so we can only be 90 % certain that the fall in measured inequality over the latest three years is genuine rather than the result of an unrepresentative sample -LRB- 95 % certainty is usually required for the change to be regarded as statistically significant -RRB- . 
The decline in the last three years still leaves inequality higher than the level Labor inherited , but not by a statistically significant amount . '' 
So as we thought , inequality has actually increased under New Labor . 
If this is the best DA can do -- `` one of last week 's most encouraging stories '' -- then there really ca n't be much of a case . 
Posted by Penny Rendall on April 3 , 2005 02:58 PM . 
Aaronovitch and other war mongering apologists like him clearly believe that democracy and freedom imposed in Iraq by the U.S. and Britain is worth the tens of thousands of innocent deaths and the ruination of the lives of hundreds of thousands more . 
The ends justify the means . 
There is no doubt that Blair lied his socks off in his determination to win the vote in Parliament and the argument in the country and indeed the World . 
If he did not lie then he was guilty of massive incompetence and or a complete lack of judgement . 
Whichever way you cut it his only honorable course of action , when it became clear there were no WMD , was to resign in favor of Gordon Brown . 
Had Blair resigned I would now as a party member be working hard to re-elect a Labor Party led by Brown , despite his clear support for the war , on the grounds that we do need to move on and a third Labor term is by far the better outcome in the upcoming election . 
However , I just can t bring myself to countenance that someone who is regarded by many , better qualified than me , as a war criminal should still be leading my party let alone seeking to be re-elected as a Prime Minister . 
Working to re-elect Blair would make me guilty of being an accessory after the fact and that s criminal in my book . 
Aaronovitch can do what he likes but the sooner he pushes off to the Times the better . 
Atleast I wo n't then be tempted to read his pompous self satisfied drivel and feel compelled to waste my time responding . 
Posted by Phil Irving on April 3 , 2005 03:09 PM . 
Before the ilegal war on Iraq I used to respect Blair and Aaranovich . 
Now I respect neither of them . 
What Saddam did to his people -LRB- when the West supported his regime -RRB- was unforgiveable , what has been done to them since March 2003 is unspeakable . 
To swallow the Bush mantra that all this is being done in the name of democracy and freedom is fantastically naive . 
When will Blair and those who support his slavish obedience to the Bush Whitehouse finally realize that these Neocons - with their openly declared aim of ` full spectrum dominance ' - are NOT a force for good in the world ? 
They are simply the latest manifestation of the Corporate American Empire which will do anything to control the world 's recources and will not hesitate to use its military industrial complex to achieve that goal . 
I applaud much of what Labor has done domestically since 1997 . 
It is just a tragedy that so much good work has been ruined by Blair 's apparent desperation to be a world statesman which has led him to become a lackey of the White House and done untold damage to Britain 's standing in the world . 
Posted by David Rendall on April 3 , 2005 03:25 PM . 
`` Imagine endorsing a sentiment as boneheaded as that ! '' 
An extended account will be posted shortly on my site . 
Do however visit the following for a nuanced approach : Posted by Dylan Calder on April 3 , 2005 04:23 PM . 
There are two streams of leftist thought at work here : The first and most popular is a kind of default cynicism : anti-war -LRB- not just Iraq , most of the usual suspects were against Afghanistan and Kosovo as well -RRB- ; anti-new labor -LRB- ignoring all achievements , longing for 1983 style socialism , exaggerating regressive policies - `` most draconian post-war home secretary `` etc ; and keen to caricature Blair as a Tory or a Neocon . 
The consequence of this approach is that the millions of people , at home and abroad , who have benifited from Labor policies are forgotten or ignored . 
The second approach - represented by Aaronovitch - sees this government as realistically social democratic , justifiably interventionist on occasion , and about as liberal as it can get away with in the process . 
This approach is , at least , as principled as the former but based on different principles - social democracy ; humanitarian interventionism ; anti-fascism rather than pacifism , anti-imperialism or Foot\/Benn-like anti-capitalism . 
The problem is that the first group claim a monopoly on being left-wing . 
I think the war in Iraq was just for humanitarian reasons -LRB- the number of civilian deaths render this position difficult but all wars result in civilian deaths and I thought the cause of anti-fascism made this war defendable -RRB- . 
I also think the governments public spending record , back-door redistribution , and basic social liberalism are worth supporting at elections . 
I regard both of these positions as fundamentally left-wing . 
Posted by Popsensible on April 3 , 2005 04:50 PM . 
Posted by Dylan Calder on April 3 , 2005 05:21 PM . 
Posted by Mat as Pizarro on April 3 , 2005 05:25 PM . 
I hope Tony Blair is duly dismissed in May . '' 
The choice of metaphorical language says it all about the kind of people who are against Blair really does n't it ? 
Spot on David for annoying the self-satisfied middle-class wallies . 
Posted by ZigZag on April 3 , 2005 06:26 PM . 
Posted by John Spencer on April 3 , 2005 06:59 PM . 
How wonderful that David is irritated by criticisms of New Labor . 
he gives the game away in his bilious `` Comment '' - he is clearly envious of other -LRB- more influential -RRB- writers who have the temerity to pass opinions different from his own . 
Writers who have other credits to their name , and perhaps who are thus taken more seriously than he . 
I do n't actually give a toss what he thinks -LRB- Oops -RRB- his style of writing is rather tired and reactive and appears neither to be based on principle nor consistency - other than the tried and tested marketing style of the Guardian and Observer - that of winding up their regular readership . 
Do n't be fooled - they actually do n't care . 
When they are really tested as Peter Preston was with the Sarah Tisdall case , all their rhetoric goes out of the window . 
Its a nice strategy to demonise Hampstead intellectuals -LRB- whoever they are -RRB- - but it mirrors Blair and Blunketts strategy of demonising young people , single mothers , travellers , asylum seekers and anyone else who comes to mind . 
It reflects the sloganising of 1930s Germany -LRB- that the Labor Party perhaps are too lazy to notice -RRB- . 
Posted by Don Blackburn on April 3 , 2005 07:10 PM . 
Posted by Chris W on April 3 , 2005 07:23 PM . 
Posted by Paul F. on April 3 , 2005 07:46 PM . 
Aaranovitch 's position is familiar . 
The American right blames urban lefty liberals for the ills of the wolrd also , claiming to represent the common man . 
The Swedish right do much the same thing . 
His is a right-wing populist position , claiming the left is out of touch with `` the common people . '' 
I agree that the left should challenge Bush et al on their attempts to hijack democracy as a vehicle of the right . 
Democracy was first set up precisely to try to limit the types of gross misuse of power , by the powerful , which the clumsy use of force in Iraq seems to be . 
It is not enough for labor to be content to just try and drag us up to the level of the other well functioning European Social democracies . 
It also needs to work to challenge the ways in which liberalisation and unrestrained market forces are destroying substantive democracy , in terms of protection of the weak , within the deeply undemocratic global scene we inhabit . 
Supporting the US in it 's undemocratic practices was a blow against the left and against democracy . 
Yes , labor has achieved something during it 's term , but could have achieved more if it had been bolder in challenging the interests of business -LRB- which is what ` market forces ' covers up . -RRB- 
Public private partnerships are a disgrace , universities have become meat factories for the administrative age , the market runs rampant to the point of children being expected to exercise their free choice towards a `` natural equilibrium '' of healthy meals . 
This is market fundamentalism , and a disgrace to the left . 
Aaranovitch needs to get out a bit more and see what 's happening out in the wider world . 
He might risk missing a few of his beloved Spurs maches , but he might also risk learning something . 
Posted by Daniel Taghioff on April 3 , 2005 10:01 PM . 
Posted by stephen mullin on April 3 , 2005 10:02 PM . 
Posted by Peter Johnston on April 3 , 2005 10:21 PM . 
Posted by Penny Joy on April 3 , 2005 10:27 PM . 
Posted by Richard Bewley on April 3 , 2005 11:28 PM . 
There is much to agree with in David Aaronovich s tirade against the supperazzi . 
I have always reluctantly agreed with him on the war , that the war was justified by the possibility that deposing another dictator might encourager les autres and that effectively labeling Iraq as a faraway country of which we know little , as many on the left do , is as immoral now as it was in 1938 . 
I term this the Aaronovitch Defense . 
It does not require a na ve belief in the goodness of US -LRB- or UK -RRB- intentions nor a belief in WMDs . 
It would have been nice though if WMDs had been available as a further reason to oust Saddam . 
I must say therefore that when I heard the absolute milksop statements in the dossiers , even after they had been sexed up , I was dismayed . 
Is this all they have ? 
was my immediate reaction . 
I frankly I am incredulous that Blair ever believed that WMDs were a serious reason for going to war . 
To do so he would have to possess little political or even just human judgement . 
We know that not to be true . 
I would never accuse Blair of stupidity . 
Nor would I accuse most Labor MPs of stupidity so it is impossible to believe they were taken in by the dossiers either . 
It is quite clear that Blair played the WMD line because it gave a semblance of legal cover to the war which , in contrast to Bush , he felt he needed , and that the Labor party en masse perfectly understood this and went along with it . 
Those who now say they were duped are guilty of hypocritical humbug . 
Of course the war has been appallingly handled and some of this may have been due to the American government s tainted motivation as opposed to its manifest incompetence , but that is a separate matter . 
However , I do think DA , in supporting the government as decidedly better than the Thatcherite Tories -LRB- or even any Tories -RRB- by citing their undoubted plus points , is missing the main point . 
In a historical context we have been going in the wrong direction for some time . 
Hyper-capitalism spewing out of the bowels of Sloan and other US business schools is driving the Plain People relentlessly back into a state of servitude . 
Capitalists , and actually I include the businessmen who run their enterprises , have returned to the beliefs of 1830s England . 
They see it as not only their right to accumulate wealth but their duty . 
And they support this with a neat morality which places responsibility to the shareholder above all other morals . 
It s good isn t it ? 
No need for all that nonsense from Plato , Aristotle , Thomas Aquinas , Hobbes , Locke , John Stuart Mill etc. . 
It s shareholder responsibility stupid . 
Actually even this line is bogus . 
The only real morality is about milking as much as possible from the Board Compensation Committee . 
I believe that opposition to Blair because he has clearly placed himself on the side of Capital , probably not because he believes it is right but because he believes he can do little about it , is a perfectly coherent position . 
This is not to say he is completely wrong . 
It is indeed very hard to see how turbo-capitalism can be opposed . 
For at least 60 years , intermittently more if you count Lloyd George , government has seen its job at least partly as holding the ring between the barons and the People . 
But Blair is not now on our side . 
Now Robin Hood has joined the Sheriff s men and we can be downsized , outsourced , worked to death , short-changed and forsaken in retirement to Capitalism s heart s content . 
This is further advanced in America but Blair seems determined to turn us into the New Yanks . 
And I am not sure Brown is much better . 
-LRB- Remember the Tube PFI -RRB- . 
Beside this betrayal all the little good things Blair has done and all the shameful small betrayals -LRB- pummelling single mothers , victimising asylum seekers , promoting gambling as our national salvation . -RRB- 
Of course the other lot are worse . 
Posted by David Quinn on April 3 , 2005 11:50 PM . 
Hell , I even spent three weeks stalking Polly Toynbee . 
Not a sun-dried tomato in sight . 
I have n't been to a dinner party in months , nearly a year . 
Here I remain , eating supermarket mini-pizzas on my own , with only my keyboard and next-door 's cat for company . 
And yet , somehow , I still disagree with a large number of my party 's policies . 
How can this be ? 
Am I attending dinner parties without realizing it ? 
Could I be sleep-dinner partying ? 
Are a shady cabal of well-educated Guardianistas holding stealth dinner parties , just near enough to me that I somehow absorb their ill-thought out moaning ? 
your unhedging support of the Iraq ` crusade ' disqualified you rather comprehensively from continuing to present views in print as sentient anything ... Still , the cracked ideas in today 's piece from you will really take some beating . 
People who criticise Blair do n't have a single agenda , as your feeble linkage of diverse and pretty uniformly pregnant criticism reveals . 
Blair has successively shown himself hawkish , philistine , uncomprehending , ruthless ... It is hardly his critics who are obliged to wrap up all arguments against him in a single soundbite . 
Rather , what upsets you seems to be nothing less prosaic than the truth - that many people are furious with Blair , for squandering in so many ways the opportunities opened by the last two elections , not least in pursuing legally unauthorised butchery in other states -LRB- it 's a first for a Labor premier , at least -RRB- . 
Awkward for you is the fact that these critics are commonly highly capable of understanding Labor 's achievements at the same time . 
However , extraordinary deceit over the war , offensive Home Office initiatives under Blunkett , blind foreign policies ` under ' Straw -LRB- does he exist ? -RRB- 
have co-existed with -LRB- for instance -RRB- impressive economic management , -LRB- some -RRB- redistributionary initiatives and a -LRB- relatively -RRB- inclusive socio-political agenda . 
Lining up Aunt Sallies in an effort to get ` us ' all back into line offers a sort of security to the jobsworth journalist , but it has nothing to do with writing about the truth . 
The Observer wasted a page today . 
People who will happily vote for a Labor politician whose understanding of international affairs owes most to ` Condie ' and whose economic acumen is versed by his consistent inability to explain anything political in anything but touchy-feely language . 
He may be the leader the country deserves , but readers of the paper can still demand better coverage . 
Posted by Richard Canning on April 4 , 2005 12:08 AM . 
Hansard , 14 October 2004 : Column 369W Llew Smith : To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what representations he has made to the Government of Iran over the public hanging of Atefe Rajab in Neka in Nazandaran province on 15 August . 
-LRB- 190194 -RRB- Mr. Rammell : We have serious concerns about the use of the death penalty in Iran , including public executions and the execution of juvenile offenders . 
Reports suggest Ms Rajab , a 16-year-old girl , was hanged , in public , for ` acts incompatible with chastity ' . 
My noble Friend the Baroness Symons of Vernham Dean has made our strong concern clear to the Iranian authorities . 
We also continue to raise our concerns about Iran 's use of the death penalty through the EU\/Iran human rights dialogue . '' 
Do your homework David before going into print ... . 
Posted by Dr David Lowry on April 4 , 2005 12:25 AM . 
I was sitting here for the life of me trying to understand the motive for Aaranovitch 's stereotyping of the labour-supporting-but-with-some-doubts left with so much of his bitterness . 
I thought it must stem from his increasingly marginalised and forlorn position as invasion supporter . 
It 's simply borne of anti-fascist zeal ! 
Thanks for clearing that up , Ben ! 
Posted by nicky tee on April 4 , 2005 01:36 AM . 
Posted by stuart williams on April 4 , 2005 11:02 AM . 
Posted by Dave on April 4 , 2005 01:09 PM . 
Posted by Zaphod on April 4 , 2005 06:36 PM . 
I wholly support David Aaronovitch 's argument . 
Please keep it up , Mr A. ! 
You are almost the only columnist worth reading in either The Guardian or The Observer . 
How typical of The Guardian that you are pushed into the margins of G2 while the Blair-hating goes on interminably day after day in the main paper -LRB- Freedland , Ashley , Younge , Toynbee , Hattersley , etc. - leavened with some right wingers like Wheatcroft and Hastings -RRB- . 
How revealing that both left and right hate Blair with such ferocity . 
How revealing too that The Guardian gives more space to the right than to supporters of Blair . 
Both the liberal and traditional left are behaving disgracefully . 
Neither can bear the reality of a center left government because it involves compromises . 
They far prefer the security and purity of oppositional politics . 
Yes , for the left , like the right , the worst possible situation is not to have a Conservative government . 
The left , now utterly devoid of realistic politics or economics , is reduced to nothing but cliches about Blair 's ` Thatcherism ' plus the economic illiteracy of ` anti-globalisation ' plus , the most important element of all , hatred of the US and its allies -LRB- especially the ` poodle ' Blair -RRB- . 
It ignores or justifies any monstrosities , so long as they are cloaked in ` anti-imperialist ' -LRB- i.e. , anti-US -RRB- clothing -LRB- terrorism in Iraq , Saddam 's crimes , Mugabe 's reign of fear , Islamic terrorism -RRB- . 
The left is devoid of serious political ideas now that their fantasy politics of go left and win elections has been resoundingly tested to destruction in four successive UK elections between 1979 and 1992 . 
The left might hate the fact that middle class votes are essential for winning elections but it s a fact of life . 
Their idealised working class have never supported favorite leftwing policies , for instance , wholesale nationalisation . 
Nor has the working class ever been attracted to the left s near pacifism or , even worse , their universal assumption that all UK defense policy is imperialist . 
Similarly , the economics of the left is bankrupt : planned economies are no longer an option and , in any case , were authoritarian and inefficient . 
Public servants , although often admirable , can be knaves as well as knights -LRB- Julian Le Grand -RRB- . 
Public bureaucracies are funded by working people and exist to serve them , not the workers who staff them . 
Blair and -LRB- yes ! -RRB- 
Brown -LRB- for all his opportunistic posturing -RRB- believe that the future for the left is dynamic market economies married with strong welfare states . 
In the left s fury at their own historical failure , they castigate Blair for his Thatcherism this about a man whose government has generously funded welfare services and public services and raised taxes both to fund these and support generous tax credits for the poorest . 
The liberal left , at least , should know better because they , at least , in principle , support the Blairite marriage of dynamic market economies and social justice through strong public services . 
But , even for them Blair 's alleged ghastly failings are infinitely more significant than -LRB- a -RRB- the many positive achievements of his government and -LRB- b -RRB- all the atrocities carried out by self-styled ` radicals ' in the developing world . 
Posted by DL , London on April 5 , 2005 12:20 AM . 
Posted by mike turner on April 5 , 2005 10:25 AM . 
I did n't like the Iraq war business any more than anyone else did , but it is , as Aaronovitch says , used by people as a blunderbuss against Labor . 
If Labor does not win the next election the Tories will not the Lib Dems , not Respect . 
The Government from my point of view has a patchy record , but it is in the nature of democracy that very few people will like everything a government does we have different values and interests . 
I am quite certain that if it wins a third term the effect on the population as a whole , and particularly on the most disadvantaged , will be good rather than bad , undoubtedly much better than that of the Conservatives would be . 
And yes , I know people -LRB- not quite so high-powered and rich -RRB- like those described by Aaronovitch . 
This is a typical case , a woman I encountered at a Christmas party . 
How she longed for a really radical Labor government the thought brought tears to her eyes . 
However , in the meantime , and because public services are so bad under Labor , she is forced to use private health services and education , and of course she pays cleaners and tradesman cash in hand , because we all dislike paying tax , do n't we ? 
There really are quite a lot of these people , and one characteristic they share is profound and what must be wilful ignorance of what Labor has actually done ; the Children Leaving Care Act , the repeal of s28 of the Local Government Act , Sure Start and the effect on low incomes of working people of the tax credits , for example ; I know scarcely anyone outside public services who is at all aware of such measures . 
I think they do n't want to know these things , partly because they are well-heeld themselves but also because expressing really radical views while declaring it to be impossible to vote Labor combines nicely a preferred self-image and covert pursuit of self-interest under the Conservatives . 
Getting to grips with what has actually been done in this country and deciding between the rather better and the much worse requires recognition that politics is about the negotiation of conflicting interests , not a theater where all the right-thinking automatically see their visions realized . 
In Iraq , their hope seems to be that things will get worse and worse , which would justify their opposition . 
I opposed it , but I mind about the Iraqi people as well as the British people , and I want things to improve in both countries . 
I will just add that in my experience citizens who work hard to improve and change policies , through the tedium and labor of campaigning , drawing up objections for public inquiries , etc , are far more likely to recognize the complexity of the political system and the impossibility of gaining everything we want . 
Sometimes we win something , because out representation of our views is more persuasive than that of those who differ from us ; we never win everything . 
One thing is certain , though : talking down a Labor government never did the majority fo the population any good , Posted by Liz Mandeville on April 5 , 2005 11:48 AM . 
Thank you for writing an article that expresses the same sentiment that i felt when reading Richard Eyre 's piece last week - except you expressed yourself much more articulately than I would have done . 
Richard Eyre 's smug , self satisfied drivel , based on little factual evidence , made me very angry . 
Once again you have hit the nail on the head . 
David Aaronovitch attacks the ` cynicism ' of ` dinner-party Britain ' for criticising Tony Blair over subservience to neo-conservative US foreign policy , infringements of domestic civil liberties and the manipulative use of the politics of fear . 
The intelligentsia , he suggests , is out of touch with the working class , who have benefited under Labor from a reduction in relative poverty and an alleged increase in the quality of life through the judicious use of ASBOs . 
Does Aaronovitch assume that the working class is motivated purely by self-interest and is unable to vote according to matters of principle ? 
I live in a working class area of Manchester and everyone I know would agree with the ` bruschetta orthodoxy ' that ` Blair is a pious , lying , hypocritical warmonger . ' 
In the words of a friend of mine , Aaronvitch 's assertion that ` if you 're clever and you are n't going to vote Labor because of the war you must be a quiche-eating , moaning Hampstead ponce who 's got it easy , is entirely scurrilous . ' 
Posted by DJ Welch on April 5 , 2005 05:40 PM . 
It is rare -LRB- and perhaps slightly worrying -RRB- to agree 100 % with an article in any newspaper but Aaronovitch s piece struck a chord with me . 
The smart set -LRB- Lessing , Lanchester , Honderich and Eyre -RRB- who decry Blair and his government do so out of snobbery and fashion . 
Their photographs in the article show them to be well into their wrinkly years and yet their memories are depressingly short . 
They sit comfortably in their academic eyries mumbling into their soup and complaining - about what ? 
That Blair is a pragmatist ? 
That he compromises his positions ? 
That he wants the benefits of as mixed economy without doctrinaire prejudice ? 
Isn t that what being a politician is all about ? 
The intellectual snobs who castigate the Prime Minister -LRB- like these four -RRB- have absolutely no alternatives to present . 
They know what they don t want but they haven t a clue about what they do want expect in the fluffiest of terms . 
Get real my friends fluffy intellectuals don t get elected . 
Clever Blair does -LRB- yes Blair is much cleverer than the Dinner Party would like to think -RRB- . 
I hope that he -LRB- Blair -RRB- wins the next election and I actually think that he deserves to . 
Posted by Paddy Briggs on April 5 , 2005 07:06 PM . 
Thank you David Aaronovitch for expressing so eloquently the malaise amongst so many on the left who seem to prefer the prospect of Michael Howard as Prime Minister to another Labor term . 
Tony Blair and his government are trying hard to rebuild public services and improve the prospects of the less advantaged in society . 
Of course they have made mistakes but exercising power is difficult . 
They have delivered economic stability and high levels of employment - we should be giving them credit not trying to punish them . 
And those people who claim to be voting for a hung parliament or a reduced labor majority should recall what happened to Jospin in France . 
I supported the Iraq war with anxiety and misgivings but believe that we are seeing the beginnings of real democracy in Iraq . 
Every time I wavered I only had to remind myself of the pre-war cringe-making , sycophantic interview a star-struck Tony Benn conducted with Saddam Hussein to know that I definitely was not on the side of the stop the war coalition . 
Posted by AJ , London on April 5 , 2005 10:54 PM . 
Thank you David for your timely well-targetted piece . 
I have yet to hear any of the Dinner Party follow the logic of their convictions and argue that Saddam Hussein should be considered the legitimate ruler of Iraq and call for his restoration . 
What about this for a scenario had Saddam not been ejected ? 
Following the failure of the UN weapons inspectors to find WMD during 2003\/4 -LRB- despite unanimity at the time among the international community concerning their likely existence -RRB- Saddam 's apologists in the West were successful in their campaign to have UN sanctions lifted . 
Saddam then puts into effect his plans to acquire WMD . 
Any attempt then to dislodge Saddam -LRB- or , worse , his psychpathic son Uday , who oversaw the poisonings at Halabja -RRB- would have been far more dangerous , both for those that had the courage to confront him and for countries neighbouring Iraq . 
Unlike members of the Dinner Party , those with responsibility of high office have difficult choices to make that can not be escaped . 
I believe that Tony Blair acted honourably in seeking to discharge his responsibilities . 
I can accept that many disagreed with the war , and do so vehemently , but I find the willingness of some endlessly to repeat the lie that Tony Blair lied intentionally and cynically in making the case for war , and their evident wish for this to be true , does their case no credit . 
Posted by Neil , North Wales on April 6 , 2005 09:46 AM . 
Thank you , David for your well-handled rage and dissection of the chattering classes . 
How much more you could have helped those of us on the defensive on the dinner party circuit had you bothered to refute these empty accusations . 
`` As reported or argued in articles , reviews , interviews or diaries , this story includes the following necessary elements : Labor would have won in 1997 anyway without Tony Blair ; Labor are now pretty much the same as the Tories , that s why there is so much apathy ; Blair has no social vision , he just wants power for its own sake ; new Labor is in hock to America for strange psychological reasons to do with power and weaponry ; Labor wishes to privatise the public services ; Labor hasn t achieved anything of any note ; Labor represents a unique threat to our ancient liberties ; Blair is a pious , lying hypocritical warmonger ; he is trying to scare us unnecessarily ; there is no such thing as a terrorist threat or if there is such a thing , then it s no worse than when the IRA was active , or if it is worse , then it s the consequence of Western arrogance and globalisation . '' 
So-called Black Wednesday in September 1992 , when the pound was humiliatingly forced out of the ERM , might have started the process by which the British economy was revived , but being an unplanned accident , it destroyed the Tories ' reputation for sound financial management . '' 
Yet try to convince these `` bruschetarati '' that Labor would not have won even if it had Peter Mandleson as leader and changed it 's name to the `` Me '' party ? 
David , as we dig into the vol-au-vents , we cry to you , `` Tell us , tell us how Labor is different from the Tories ? 
Show us Blair 's social vision . 
They keep saying he pinched it from Jamie Oliver . '' 
We hear such nasty things about the sainted Tony ; how he halved PMQs ; how he 's never in the House ; how he 's replaced cabinet resonsibility with presidential edicts . 
We want a sign that shows he really really cares as much as he says he does . 
Show us Blair has stood up to President Bush in the way that John Major stood up to his father . 
We , your fans , David , know that cutting trial by jury , double jeopardy , the abolition of habeus corpus , the introduction of ID cards , Asbos restricting one 's right to wear what one likes on one 's own property , set back individual rights not a bit , but our guests bray so ! 
I know and you know David , that there is a terrible terrorist threat . 
The IRA were unsublte and planted bombs and killed people . 
The new terrorist are far more cunning and dangerous . 
They do n't do anything ! 
We must stop them before they do n't do it again . 
I 'm fed up with these smug middle-class people with facts . 
Old Marxists like you and I would not trouble ourselves with anything so vulgar . 
Posted by Dave Weeden on April 6 , 2005 02:03 PM . 
Posted by Patrick on April 6 , 2005 05:06 PM . 
Brian V Peck : author of Walking on the Moon ... Pub by www.athenapress.com Posted by Brian V Peck on April 7 , 2005 06:17 PM . 
Posted by irritant on April 16 , 2005 03:12 PM . 
Posted by Eric Blair on May 9 , 2005 02:04 AM . 
the party party - George Bush sampled in funky mp3 mash-up jam . 
Sublime subversion ... openDemocracy - Independent , free , free-thinking . 
Gotta be a good thing ... Guardian Unlimited - Suspicious behavior on the tube - In which an innocent man is arrested for wearing a coat . 
If it had been denim he might be dead ... Tim Worstall : Britblog Roundup # 31 - It 's a roundup of Brit blogs . 
The 31st , to be precise ... TV Cream Themes - Mp3 TV nostalgia binge -LRB- as inspired by Troubled Diva 's indirect Jonny Ball connection -RRB- ... Up The Down Escalator - A husband cares for his very sick wife . 
An excellent blog -LRB- via <ahref="http://timworstall.typepad.com/timworstall/"> Tim Worstall </a> -RRB- ... Grammar Puss - A friend of the zeugma is a friend of ours ... Ourmedia - Free bandwidth for digital creativity . 
