Tuesday , August 24 , 2010 ; 10:14 PM Two weeks after BP 's Macondo well blew out in the Gulf of Mexico , the federal government 's Minerals Management Service finalized a regulation intended to control the undersea pressures that threaten deepwater drilling operations . 
MMS did not write the rule . 
As it had dozens of times before , the agency adopted language provided by the oil industry 's trade group , the American Petroleum Institute , and incorporated it into the Federal Register . 
MMS received two favorable public comments about the regulation : one from the Offshore Operators Committee , an industry group , and the other from BP . 
The regulation stated : `` BP , a large oil and gas company , expressed the importance of this rule and how they have been involved with MMS and industry to develop the industry standard . '' 
The fact that BP - which has come under withering criticism for how it managed mounting pressure in the Macondo well - took partial credit for crafting the rule is not surprising . 
MMS has adopted at least 78 industry-generated standards as federal regulations , American Petroleum Institute records show . 
MMS 's acquiescence stemmed from the unusual relationship it had cultivated with industry . 
Directed by law to `` meet the nation 's energy needs , '' the agency pursued that mission by declaring itself publicly and formally as industry 's partner . 
Top officials and front-line workers routinely referred to the companies under their watch as `` clients , '' `` customers '' and especially `` partners . '' 
As the relationship became more intertwined , regulatory intensity subsided . 
MMS officials waived hundreds of environmental reviews and did not aggressively pursue companies for equipment failures . 
They also participated in studies financed and dominated by industry , more as collaborator than regulator . 
In the face of industry opposition , MMS abandoned proposals that would have increased costs but might have improved safety . 
The story of how a little-known federal agency became an extension of the industry it oversaw spans three decades and four presidents . 
It began in 1982 with a major change in the way the nation managed its natural resources , picked up pace with initiatives to streamline bureaucracy in the Clinton and George W. Bush administrations , and ended after the April 20 BP blowout with the Obama administration 's abrupt decision to undo the partnership . 
Few in positions of power in Washington paid close attention to MMS and the hard-to-understand world it was charged with regulating . 
When they did , it was often to pressure the agency to increase the money it earned from leases it sold and the production that followed . 
Over its 28-year history , MMS grew to become one the government 's largest revenue collectors , after the Internal Revenue Service . 
As oil and gas companies took their drilling operations into deeper and riskier waters , MMS had to rely on its corporate partners ' expertise . 
Along the way were warning signs of the partnership 's imbalance , but the industry 's track record of no major accidents provided a comfort level that proved deceptive . 
Industry innovation , as it often does , had outrun and overpowered the government 's regulatory prowess , with disastrous results . 
They were partners , but they were not equals . 
James G. Watt , the man who created MMS , came to Washington in 1982 with a mission : to alter the way the government managed its natural resources . 
Coming off the hostage crisis in oil-rich Iran and gas shortages on the home front , he vowed to `` mine more '' and `` drill more . '' 
Nearly three decades later , the lawyer known for his sharp mind and oversized glasses says in an interview from his home in Jackson Hole , Wyo. , that he `` would n't change one decision . '' 
