Tuesday , August 24 , 2010 ; 9:13 PM The Gulf of Mexico ecosystem was ready and waiting for something like the Deepwater Horizon blowout and seems to have made the most of it , a new scientific study suggests . 
Petroleum-eating bacteria - which had dined for eons on oil seeping naturally through the seafloor - proliferated in the cloud of oil that drifted underwater for months after the April 20 accident . 
They not only outcompeted fellow microbes , they each ramped up their own internal metabolic machinery to digest the oil as efficiently as possible . 
The result was a nature-made cleanup crew capable of reducing that reduced the amount of oil amounts in the undersea `` plume '' by half about every three days , according to research published online Tuesday by the journal Science . 
The findings , by a team of scientists led by Terry C. Hazen of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California , help explain one of the biggest mysteries a mystery of the disaster : Where has all the oil gone ? 
`` What we know about the degradation rates fits with what we are seeing in the last three weeks , '' Hazen said . 
`` We 've gone out to the sites , and we do n't find any oil , but we do find the bacteria . '' 
The species dominating the digestion of the oil is a newly discovered one , Hazen said . 
The findings point to a different conclusion from that drawn by readers of a study published last week , also in the journal Science . 
That research by scientists at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute found no reduction in the oxygen content of the gigantic oil plume , suggesting that microbes were consuming the oil very slowly . 
The Berkeley team study published Tuesday also indicates indirectly that dispersants used to break the wellhead stream of oil into a mass of submicroscopic particles might have speeded the cleanup . 
By increasing the surface area between oil and water , the dispersants seem to have provided the deep-sea microbes greater access to this unusual food source . 
Alan Mearns , a senior staff scientist in the emergency response of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , called the Berkeley team study `` critical to the understanding of the fate of what remains in the Gulf . 
This study shows that microbes are quickly degrading some components of subsurface oil found in the deep ocean without creating hazardous dead zones . '' 
Some of the spill 's 206 million gallons of oil has come ashore , some has sunk into bottom sediments , and a little is still a floating froth . 
But the mile-wide , 650-foot-high oil cloud of oil that for months drifted 4,000 feet underwater seems to have disappeared in the six weeks since the well was plugged . 
The plume 's whereabouts has been a contentious matter . 
In tThe Woods Hole study , scientists described finding an undersea oil cloud June 23 to 27 similar to the one Hazen and his colleagues found between May 25 and June 2 - which was similar to one found soon after by people from the Monterey cents Bay Aquarium Research Institute . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
