Credit : Reuters\/Syrian TV via Reuters TV AMMAN | Thu Apr 21 , 2011 8:02 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Syrian army deployed overnight in the flashpoint city of Homs , witnesses said , ahead of Friday prayers that have been marked by intensifying protests in the last five weeks against authoritarian rule . 
The prayers will test whether President Bashar al-Assad 's decision Thursday to lift emergency law , imposed by his Baath Party when it took power in a coup 48 years ago , will defuse mass discontent with repression and corruption . 
Aided by his family and a pervasive security apparatus , Assad , 45 , has absolute power in Syria . 
More than 220 protesters have been killed since pro- democracy protests erupted on March 18 in the southern city of Deraa , including 21 protesters killed this week in Homs , rights campaigners say . 
A decree Assad signed Thursday that lifted emergency law is seen by the opposition as little more than symbolic , since other laws still give entrenched security forces wide powers . 
Human Right Watch said Assad `` has the opportunity to prove his intentions by allowing -LRB- Friday 's -RRB- protests to proceed without violent repression . 
`` The reforms will only be meaningful if Syria 's security services stop shooting , detaining , and torturing protesters , '' said Joe Stork , the group 's deputy Middle East director . 
A rights activist said trucks carrying soldiers and vehicles equipped with machine guns were seen on the main highway from Damascus to Homs , a central city that has emerged as the new focal point of protests . 
Residents organized neighborhood patrols after 21 protesters were shot dead Monday and Tuesday by security police and gunmen known as ` al-shabbiha ' . 
Soldiers in groups of five patrolled the streets of Homs overnight on foot . 
Plain-clothed security police and security police wearing camouflage uniforms were also present , two witnesses said . 
`` We are determined on totally peaceful protests ... we rejoice at the downfall of the state of emergency . 
It was not lifted , it was toppled ... With the help of God , we will embark on freedom , '' a comment on a Facebook page run by activists said . 
Emergency rule has been used since Assad 's Baath Party seized power to justify arbitrary arrests and detention and a ban on all opposition . 
Assad 's conciliatory move to lift the state of emergency followed a familiar pattern since the unrest began a month ago : pledges of reform are made before Friday when demonstrations are the strongest , and are usually followed by an intense crackdown . 
The authorities have blamed armed groups , infiltrators and Sunni Muslim militant organizations for provoking violence at demonstrations by firing on civilians and security forces . 
Western and other Arab countries have mostly muted their criticism of the killings in Syria for fear of destabilizing the country , which plays a strategic role in many of the conflicts in the Middle East . 
Syria is technically at war with Israel but has kept its Golan Heights front with the Jewish state quiet since a 1974 ceasefire . 
It has long borders with Iraq , and supports the Palestinian Islamist group Hamas and the Shi'ite Hezbollah movement in neighboring Lebanon , also backed by Iran . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
On the other hand Cuba have seen democracy in the horizon for more than 40 years and figure out that it is just something in the horizon anyhow . 
The smorgasbord is to small even if you would taste the communism . 
The problem in Syria is not really the Emergency Law or other similar repressive laws on the books . 
Over the past 50 years of the Assad family dictatorship the pervasive state security apparatus has grown so entrenched and autonomous that it heeds no laws . 
The feared mukhabarat , as the shadowy state security services are known in Syria , never think of law and order when they kidnap , torture , or disappear freedom activists . 
The only way for the Assad regime is to disband the 15 + state security agencies it created over the decades and hand the power back to a new reformed judicial system , the first step in a transition of power to a democratically elected civilian government . 
This would certainly mean the end of the Assad family rule of Syria and end to the monopoly on power by the small Allawite minority . 
It would be very courageous of Bashar Al Assad to take such action and would save him and his children , but many of his relatives and close associates will be brought to justice over their past human rights abuses , especially the genocide in the city of Hama in 1982 . 
Without this Syria is heading toward a vicious civil war in which the biggest losers will be the Alawites themselves . 
It is in this minority 's best interest to negotiate a peaceful and orderly exit from power with the least bloodshed . 
The Alawites need to be told by the international community that it is now 25 years after the fall of the Soviet Union , their protector , and that there are officials and ex-officials amongst them that are unsavable under international law for their bloody pasts . 
The minority and its future should not be sacrificed for them . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
