A monster of our own making These British bombers are a consequence of a misguided and catastrophic pursuit of multiculturalism There is damaging confusion over the real nature of the terrorist threat and where it is located . 
Is it global or local ? 
It undoubtedly is both , but the former is a distraction from the most serious problem , which lies in Europe . 
In 2001 , following the 9\/11 attacks , the American government called terrorism centrally directed and international , motivated by hatred of the West . 
It was waging a ` war ' against the West , so the West must go to war against it . 
Many or most in Britain and Europe accepted this . 
Al-Qaeda , identified by Washington as international terrorism 's central authority , was said by the US and British governments to be linked to Saddam Hussein 's Iraq and certain other Middle Eastern governments . 
The evidence linking the London , Sharm el-Sheik -LRB- so far as we know -RRB- and Madrid bombings to the surviving al-Qaeda leadership remains tenuous at best . 
It is unclear whether al-Qaeda remains a group with a disciplined structure and the organisational capacity for international action . 
Thanks to the internet , it communicates , but what is behind the communication ? 
The most significant thing about Islamic terrorism today is that it is a politicosocial phenomenon among apparently self-motivated individuals and small groups . 
They are volunteers in a loose international movement of religious revival and radicalisation that offers alienated young Muslims an explanation for the unsettling forces at work in their lives and a mission . 
The argument that terrorism is an organised global menace continues to be put forward in Washington , although with fading conviction . 
It is necessary as the justification for the Bush administration 's war in Iraq . 
It is essential for Bush and Blair to be able to say that staying the course in Iraq can disable or end the terrorism practiced by young Muslims in Europe and elsewhere . 
The argument ignores or implicitly denies the cultural and social sources of Islamic extremism in the West . 
Few today would seriously deny that the war in Iraq generates terrorist sympathies among members of Western Europe 's Muslim communities , as the Palestinian intifadas did . 
The war clearly provides a continuing obstacle to the integration of these communities into the larger society , in Britain as elsewhere . 
Ending the war would remove the obstacle , but today would , quite rightly , be interpreted as defeat for the coalition . 
Despite the fact that the Iraqi resistance seems predominantly nationalist in motivation , the radical Islamists would claim credit for forcing the coalition 's withdrawal . 
Military withdrawal none the less is perfectly possible , since the evidence is overwhelming that foreign military occupation and the resistance are in symbiotic and symmetrical relationship , each reinforcing the other . 
In any case , American public opinion has taken a sharp turn against the war , and finding a plausible exit is now the Bush administration 's priority . 
Without one , the government will eventually confront the dire choice between conscription , politically ruinous to the Republicans , and a smokescreen-covered defeat , as in Vietnam . 
This ` defeat ' , however , would transfer the problem of Islamic fundamentalism back to where it belongs , inside Islamic society itself . 
There , the myth of a return to a glorious past will eventually be discredited . 
The primary aim of the Islamic extremists is to radicalise Islamic society in order to purify it . 
Their main concern with the West is to expel it and its influences from the Islamic world . 
The radical leaders have no imaginable reason to want to conquer and try to rule the infidel West , even if they could . 
The notion of al-Qaeda as a global force is mainly the result of America 's obsession with it . 
The 11 September attacks gave a conservative American government just the challenge it wanted , having already a malevolent eye on the defiant Saddam Hussein and an ambition to establish new Middle Eastern strategic bases . 
The attacks were immediately called a new Pearl Harbor , the start of a war more dangerous than the Cold War , waged by militants acting out of ` hatred for freedom ' - creating an emergency that required mobilisation of all the democracies under American leadership . 
You are with us or against us . 
The US reorganised its government to defend the ` homeland ' , drastically revised its security and immigration legislation , set up military courts of exception , denounced the Geneva Convention on the treatment of prisoners and the use of torture as ` no longer relevant ' , and suspended habeas corpus in certain security cases . 
It attacked Afghanistan and Iraq . 
Blair 's Britain followed , contributing to the forces that eventually produced the London bombings . 
British police investigation presumes the London bombings on 7 July were carried out by young , British-born citizens , using materials easily obtained in supermarkets , hardware shops and beauty parlors . 
The second round of attempted explosions still seems the work of young amateurs and their friends and family , intended ` to scare people ' . 
Police asked of the first group : ` Who supported them ? 
Who encouraged them ? ' 
On the evidence of previous bombings in Europe , it is reasonable to think that they supported , encouraged and financed one another , took their training from the internet , or from radicalised friends , and were inspired , one might say , by the zeitgeist . 
Ayman al-Zawahiri , who says he is second in command of al-Qaeda , appeared on television to claim credit for it all and warn that worse is on the way . 
But that is his practice . 
Ayman al-Zawahiri , Tony Blair and George W Bush also exist in a symbiotic relationship . 
All have a vested interest in terrorism as a centrally directed international threat -LRB- an Islamic Comintern -RRB- , at war everywhere with the West . 
However , many have already seen in it an international network of people with a common ideology and access to the internet ; some with , but most without , experience of Afghanistan under the Russians or Iraq under the coalition ; and some committing copycat crimes motivated by unarticulated motives of political-religious protest and moral dislocation . 
A half-century of a well-intentioned but catastrophically mistaken policy of multiculturalism , indifferent or even hostile to social and cultural integration , has produced in Britain and much of Europe a technologically educated but culturally and morally unassimilated immigrant demi-intelligentsia . 
Like the anarchists of the 19th and early 20th centuries , these people have no realisable goals and make no meaningful political demands , only Utopian ones . 
Thus , like the anarchists , they must be called nihilists . 
For that reason , they present a profound problem to governments accustomed to dealing with rationally manageable threats , enemies and demands . 
Reason has no answer to nihilism . 
William Pfaff 's most recent book is The Bullet 's Song : Romantic Violence and Utopia , published by Simon & Schuster . 
