News Corp Chief Executive and Chairman , Rupert Murdoch appears before a parliamentary committee on phone hacking at Portcullis House in London July 19 , 2011 . 
Credit : Reuters\/Parbul TV via Reuters Tv NEW YORK | Wed Jul 20 , 2011 12:19 am BST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - As Rupert Murdoch sat through the first hour of questioning by British lawmakers probing News Corp 's phone-hacking scandal , it looked like days of work by his team of crisis management advisers would go up in smoke . 
They crafted an opening statement for the media mogul that included a killer sound bite -- `` This is the most humble day of my life '' -- only to have the parliamentary committee deny him the chance to deliver it . 
That appeared to shake the 80-year-old Murdoch , who sounded exasperated and looked uncomfortable in the early going on Tuesday , dodging questions and banging his hands on the table he shared with his son James . 
`` That first hour was a real bummer , '' said one source close to News Corp. `` He looked overprepared by the lawyers . 
In time , he stepped up into being himself . 
He pushed back a bit , talked about his ethics . '' 
Murdoch 's performance , far from perfect , still probably came as a relief to his public relations advisers , who were charged with finding a strategy to contain a telephone-hacking scandal that has turned into full-blown crisis for News Corp. . 
The team , which assembled in London late last week , included outside advisers Alex Bigg and James Lundie from Edelman , the world 's biggest PR firm , and Steven Rubenstein from Rubenstein Public Relations , a fixture in New York communications with a long history with the Murdochs . 
The in-house team was led by Joel Klein , who once headed the U.S. Justice Department 's antitrust unit -LRB- ID : nN1E76E1OR -RRB- , and Matthew Anderson , who runs News Corp 's strategic affairs . 
From that group of advisers came the suggestion late last week that Murdoch sit down with and apologise to the parents of murdered schoolgirl Milly Dowler , whose phone was hacked by his now-shuttered Sunday tabloid , News of the World . 
Murdoch also prepared a broader apology to readers that ran in all national British newspapers over the weekend , and then moved to quiet critics by accepting the resignation of trusted employees News International Chief Executive Rebekah Brooks and Dow Jones & Co CEO Les Hinton . 
Even within the circle of close advisers , however , few believe Murdoch has found the silver bullet to end the crisis . 
`` This is burning white hot , '' said the source . 
`` You 've got to let it burn for a while . '' 
In a sign that News Corp is concerned the crisis could spread to the United States , it hired Sard Verbinnen , based in New York , and The Glover Park Group , based in Washington D.C. , to assist in public and government relations . 
Rubenstein will also play a key role in the United States . 
The son of legendary communications veteran Howard Rubenstein has represented Murdoch 's New York Post as well as entertainment figures such as David Letterman , who hired him to deal with a scandal over a series of affairs with work colleagues . 
`` Recovery from a crisis of this magnitude is slow , '' said Chris Tennyson , co-leader of crisis communications practice at Fleishman-Hillard , which is not involved in the matter . 
`` Anyone who had bone to pick with Rupert Murdoch is now in the water . 
It will open a period of intensity -- it will be fierce and furious . '' 
Still , experts say Murdoch appears on better footing after misjudging the depth of public anger over allegations that News of the World journalists hacked into the voicemails of thousands of people , from crime victims to families of soldiers killed in combat . 
Among the team of PR aces , a lot of credit is being given to Klein , a former New York City schools chancellor who has been tapped to lead a new management and standards committee at News Corp. . 
Anderson , too , is getting high marks . 
A former junior tennis champion , he has been close friends with James Murdoch since they both worked in Asia -- Anderson for the PR firm Ogilvy and Murdoch for BSkyB . 
Murdoch later hired Anderson , a native of San Francisco , to run communications for BSkyB before bringing him onboard News Corp. . 
James Murdoch is viewed as having carried himself well during the proceeding , outperforming his father and relieving some of the pressure over his future . 
The senior Murdoch gained momentum in the second hour of the hearing -- he did manage to slip in the `` humble '' quote early on -- offering more forceful answers on his responsibility and the role of his papers in British society . 
An unexpected attack by a protester wielding a plate of white foam , who was fought off by Murdoch 's wife , Wendi , only served to help his case , PR experts said . 
It became the leading headline and humanized the billionaire media baron . 
`` The combination of Rupert Murdoch 's age and the custard pie attack will have elicited a tremendous amount of sympathy , '' said Andrew Hawkins , chairman of Comres , a polling company . 
`` You could n't make this stuff up . 
It could have turned the whole situation around for them . '' 
News Corp declined to comment on their communications strategy . 
-LRB- Reporting by Paul Thomasch ; Editing Tiffany Wu and Steve Orlofsky -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
