By-standers watch as a booby-trapped car burns after an explosion in the southern Yemeni port city of Aden July 20 , 2011 . 
ADEN\/SANAA | Wed Jul 20 , 2011 7:17 pm BST ADEN\/SANAA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A blast in a booby-trapped car killed a Briton living in Yemen 's southern port city of Aden on Wednesday , officials said , and the British government urged its citizens to leave the country . 
Opposition officials said one of their political leaders survived an assassination attempt in the capital Sanaa and warned of further unrest . 
A security source told Reuters he believed militants were behind the blast that killed the long-time British resident of Aden , who was in his 60s , as he started his car . 
The victim was an independent surveyor working for marine and insurance companies in Yemen . 
A Western shipping source based in Aden said the Briton had just returned from surveying a tanker attacked in July by pirates off Yemen 's coast . 
`` We tend to think that it was some kind of terrorist attack because he was well known , '' the security source said . 
Attacks on foreigners are rare in the port city , which lies east of a strategic shipping lane through which some 3 million barrels of oil pass daily . 
The impoverished Arabian Peninsula state , neighbor to Saudi Arabia , is grappling with growing turmoil as mass protests calling for an end to President Ali Abdullah Saleh 's rule drag into a sixth month . 
Washington and Riyadh fear the unrest gives al Qaeda 's Yemen-based wing more room to operate . 
Witnesses in Aden said the British victim 's car blew up as soon as he turned on the engine , shattering windows in nearby buildings on Aden 's Mualla Plaza . 
`` He started the car and it immediately exploded and he was engulfed in flames , '' a witness said by telephone . 
One passer-by was critically wounded in the blast which also damaged nearby buildings , a municipal official said . 
She said there was no indication who was behind the explosion . 
`` It 's clear that there was some kind of explosive device placed in his car , '' she said . 
A British Foreign Office spokeswoman confirmed the Briton 's death and said the government was advising all British nationals against traveling to the whole of Yemen , a position which `` could n't be any firmer . '' 
Aden had been relatively quiet in recent months , even as protests in other parts of the country erupted into sporadic violence . 
The neighbouring Abyan province has witnessed daily bloodshed since Islamist militants seized the city of Jaar in March and the provincial capital of Zinjibar in May . 
The army , which says the militants are part of al Qaeda 's Yemen-based wing , launched an offensive to retake Zinjibar five days ago but has yet to regain the city . 
The army impose a security belt around Aden several weeks ago to try to prevent more militants from slipping into the strategic port city . 
It had previously reported that several al Qaeda linked operatives had snuck into Aden , where some 54,000 Abyan residents have sought refuge . 
Further north in the capital Sanaa , opposition officials said the head of the leading Islamist party Islah survived an attack by gunmen . 
Sanaa has been the scene of rising violence in recent days following weeks of relative calm after Saleh traveled to Saudi Arabia for treatment on wounds he suffered in a bomb blast at his compound . 
Yemen 's opposition coalition said the gunmen fired on Islah leader Mohammed al-Yadumi 's car but he escaped the attack . 
The group blamed Saleh 's family and forces loyal to him , and warned the move could spark worse violence in the fragmented nation . 
`` Targeting the head of Islah is an attempt to plunge the country into civil war . 
Saleh 's family is deluded in thinking it can remain in power , '' the coalition said in a statement . 
-LRB- Reporting by Mohammed Mukhashaf in Aden , Mohammed Ghobari in Sanaa , Humeyra Pamuk in Dubai and Stephen Mangan in London ; Writing by Erika Solomon ; Editing by Alistair Lyon -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
