Monday , September 27 , 2010 ; 7:13 PM The two chairmen of the president 's Oil Spill Commission , which is conducting an inquiry into the April 20 Deepwater Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , expressed skepticism Monday about claims from BP and government officials that initial underestimation of the flow rate of the Macondo well had no impact on the response to the spill . 
`` It 's a little bit like Custer . 
He underestimated the number of Indians that were on the other side of the hill and he paid the ultimate price for that , '' said former senator Bob Graham , speaking at a news conference with his co-chairman , William Reilly . 
The flow rate of the blown-out well sparked great controversy at the height of the crisis . 
The Coast Guard initially pegged the leak at 1,000 barrels a day , then upped that to 5,000 barrels , using both government and BP estimates . 
But the actual rate initially was 62,000 barrels a day , according to scientists in the government-backed Flow Rate Technical Group . 
A persistent question is whether BP and the Coast Guard calibrated their initial response plans , at the surface and at the sea floor , to handle the smaller amount of gushing oil . 
Representatives of both , appearing Monday at a commission hearing at the Marriott Wardman Park Hotel , denied that they made such a mistake , saying they went all-out with every available resource . 
`` We literally threw everything at it , '' said Doug Suttles , BP chief operating officer for exploration and production . 
Coast Guard Capt. Edwin Stanton echoed those remarks . 
But Graham said at the news conference that the commission has information suggesting that some of the deep-sea technology used to fight the leak , such as the `` top hat '' containment cap , was premised on a smaller flow . 
There was also new information on how the erroneous flow estimate came to be early in the crisis . 
Ian MacDonald , a Florida State University physical oceanographer , testified Monday that BP 's Regional Oil Spill Response Plan , a 567-page document dated 2008 that covers the Gulf of Mexico and is famous for its provision for saving walruses that do not live in the gulf , contains an incorrect statistical formula for estimating the size of a spill . 
The formula in the BP plan underestimates the thickness of black oil on the surface of the sea by a hundredfold , MacDonald said . 
As a result , BP 's `` best guess '' for the leak as of April 27 was 5,768 barrels , close to the 5,000-barrel estimate initially produced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 
MacDonald made headlines early in the crisis when he said that his own scrutiny of satellite images of the slick produced a leak estimate of 26,000 barrels a day minimum . 
He told reporters Monday that he did not take evaporation into account , and thus the real flow had to be higher yet . 
MacDonald said that most of the oil remains in the gulf . 
This oil `` is a highly durable material that resists further dissipation , '' MacDonald concluded . 
Referring to the spill as a kind of uncontrolled experiment , he wrote in his prepared testimony that there could be long-term damage to productivity and biodiversity in the gulf : '' -LRB- W -RRB- e must remember that this experiment was performed on an ecosystem that was already badly damaged '' by overfishing , coastal runoff and low oxygen levels . 
Doug Inkley , senior scientist with the National Wildlife Federation , said in a written statement citing MacDonald 's findings , `` From Day One , BP and the government have lowballed the volume of the oil in the water and minimized the current and future impacts of this disaster . '' 
Earlier , Graham pressed Suttles about why the company overestimated its ability to handle a massive spill when it applied for a permit in 2009 to drill the ill-fated Macondo well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Suttles said he was not involved in the creation of the company 's Oil Spill Response Plan . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
