I vote to banish Larry Summers . 
Not from the planet . 
That would n't be nice . 
Just from public life . 
The criticisms of President Obama 's chief economic adviser are well known . 
He 's too close to Wall Street . 
And he 's a frightful bully , of both people and countries . 
Still , we 're told we should n't care about such minor infractions . 
Because Summers is brilliant , and the world needs his big brain . 
And this brings us to a central and often overlooked cause of the global financial crisis : Brain Bubbles . 
This is the process wherein the intelligence of an inarguably intelligent person is inflated and valued beyond all reason , creating a dangerous accumulation of unhedged risk . 
Larry Summers is the biggest Brain Bubble we 've got . 
Brain Bubbles start with an innocuous `` whiz kid '' moniker in undergrad , which later escalates to `` wunderkind . '' 
Next comes the requisite foray as an economic adviser to a small crisis-wracked country , where the kid is declared a `` savior . '' 
By 30 , our Bubble Boy is tenured and officially a `` genius . '' 
By 40 , he 's a `` guru , '' by 50 an `` oracle . '' 
After a few drinks : `` messiah . '' 
The superhuman powers bestowed upon these men -- and yes , they are all men -- shield them from the scrutiny that might have prevented the current crisis . 
Alan Greenspan 's Brain Bubble allowed him to put the economy at great risk : When he made no sense , people assumed that it was their own fault . 
Brain Bubbles also formed the key argument Greenspan and Summers used to explain why lawmakers could n't regulate the derivatives market : The wizards on Wall Street were too brilliant , their models too complex , for mere mortals to understand . 
Back in 1991 , Summers argued that the subject of economics was no longer up for debate : The answers had all been found by men like him . 
`` The laws of economics are like the laws of engineering , '' he said . 
`` One set of laws works everywhere . '' 
Summers subsequently laid out those laws as the three '' - ations '' : privatization , stabilization and liberalization . 
Some `` kinds of ideas , '' he explained a few years later in a PBS interview , have already become too `` pass '' for discussion . 
Like `` the idea that a huge spending program is the way to stimulate the economy . '' 
And that 's the problem with Larry . 
For all his appeals to absolute truths , he has been spectacularly wrong again and again . 
He was wrong about not regulating derivatives . 
Wrong when he helped kill Depression-era banking laws , turning banks into too-big-to-fail welfare monsters . 
And as he helps devise ever more complex tricks and spends ever more taxpayer dollars to keep the financial casino running , he remains wrong today . 
Word is that Summers 's current post may be a pit stop on the way to the big prize , Federal Reserve chairman . 
That means he could actually make `` maestro . '' 
Mr. President , please : Pop this bubble before it 's too late . 
