From Frederik Pleitgen and Jonathan Wald , CNN Buildings are riddled with bullet holes ; wreckage litters the streets Moammar Gadhafi 's forces laid siege to the western city A CNN team gets a firsthand look Misrata , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Five weeks of battle and Misrata looks grim . 
Bullets have made Swiss cheese of buildings . 
Wreckage litters streets that are empty save opposition fighters desperately defending their city against Moammar Gadhafi 's heavy armor . 
The Libyan leader laid siege to the nation 's third largest and most prosperous city after opposition fighters took control here . 
Just two hours east of Tripoli , it was the final rebel stronghold in the West . 
Now it is a city of fear , uncertainty and human suffering . 
International reporters had not been able to access central Misrata and many of CNN 's reports were cobbled together from interviews with witnesses and doctors . 
That was until Wednesday , when CNN journalists were able to reach the city by boat . 
The fishing trawler was commissioned by two wealthy Libyan businessmen to carry 150 tons of food , medicine and other basic supplies . 
A heart surgeon on board said he wants to do everything he can to help : Libya is in `` mortal danger '' and he could not stand by without doing his share . 
Rare view inside Misrata 's war zone CIA working the ground in Libya ? 
One Misrata resident says Gadhafi 's men are going door-to-door evicting and terrorizing people . 
It 's `` utter madness , '' he said Thursday , fearing a massacre . 
Bullets zing through the air . 
Tension hangs thick and heavy . 
An opposition fighter celebrates atop the carcass of a tank . 
Another shows the consequences of Gadhafi 's heavy hand -- destroyed schools , restaurants , gas stations , fire stations . 
Gadhafi 's foes say they are outgunned and fight back with the few weapons they possess , including rifles and rocket-propelled grenades . 
They provided CNN with a video of a man disabling a tank with a rocket-propelled grenade launcher . 
Despite the weapons disparity , the opposition has held onto an enclave in the city for several weeks . 
It 's difficult , day to day , to know where the battlefront will be . 
The evidence of war mounts everywhere . 
At a relocated orphanage , children , traumatized by bombs and bullets , rock back and forth chanting `` Allahu Akbar . '' 
-LRB- God is great . -RRB- 
At a school , entire families displaced from their homes find comfort in one another . 
They have nothing else left of their lives , says Masoud el-Masoudi , who came to the shelter a week ago with his wife and three children after their house on Benghazi Street was shelled . 
At a makeshift refugee camp next to the port , Libya 's largest , foreign workers trapped in the nation 's war simply try to survive each day . 
They are from places like Niger , Ivory Coast , Ghana and Egypt . 
They have nothing but the bread people bring them to feed their aching bellies , says Masahudu Idris , 29 , of Ghana . 
The shops are empty and there is no food they can buy , he says . 
At the central hospital -- where men , women and children lie in crowded rooms , forever scarred -- doctors work around the clock without proper equipment , medicine or even anesthesia . 
`` We do n't go from here , '' says Dr. Ali el-Misrati . 
`` We sleep here . 
We live here now . '' 
The chief of the hospital , Dr. Mohammed Fortia , says 398 people have been killed in Misrata since the Libyan conflict began last month . 
Five were killed Wednesday , he says . 
He fears more have died . 
The hospital just does n't know about them . 
Mohammed , 12 , and his older brother were wounded when mortars hit their home . 
Mohammed lost several fingers on his left hand . 
His right hand is gone . 
His father vows revenge . 
`` Gadhafi should be killed , '' he says . 
A man who can do this to his people , Mohammed 's father says , must not be human . 
CNN 's Moni Basu contributed to this report . 
