By the CNN Wire Staff Libyan rebels attempting to organize A government spokesman says the rebels are not serious about the cease-fire The ultimate goal is still regime change , the opposition says Sources tell CNN Gadhafi could relinquish power to someone in his inner circle Report : A senior adviser to one of Gadhafi 's sons is in London for talks Are you in Libya ? 
Send your pictures , video to iReport . 
Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Battles raged in Libya on Friday as mixed messages of peace put forth from several corners brought no guarantees of an end to the bloody conflict . 
In the rebel stronghold of Benghazi , Libyan opposition leader Mustafa Abdul Jalil laid out conditions for a cease-fire with Moammar Gadhafi 's forces . 
Among them were the removal of snipers , mercenaries and militias from western cities , an end to the sieges laid on cities such as Misrata and freedom of expression for the Libyan people . 
But ultimately , he said , the opposition 's goal remains regime change in Libya . 
Jalil spoke at a podium with the United Nations special envoy to Libya , Abdelilah al-Khatib , who had carried the opposition 's message to Tripoli the day before . 
Rebels discuss cease-fire with Gadhafi Al-Khatib reiterated that the U.N. objective is to achieve a cease-fire and end the loss of civilian lives but he did not mention regime change , highlighting the discrepancy between the stated objectives of the Libyan opposition and the international community . 
Meanwhile in Tripoli , Libyan government spokesman Musa Ibrahim told reporters that the rebels are not `` really serious '' about the offer of a cease-fire , which he said was tied to `` silly conditions . '' 
`` They are asking us to withdraw from our own cities and open our cities to people , who are holding up arms , who are tribal , violent , no unified leadership , al Qaeda links , and no one knows who they are . 
If this is not mad , then I do n't know what it is , '' he said . 
`` We will not leave our cities . 
We will not stop protecting our civilians . '' 
Ibrahim added that the Libyan government is ready for peace . 
Sources close to Gadhafi told CNN that political solutions are still possible but that the Libyan leader would relinquish power only to others within his inner circle . 
They said there is still time for dialogue but expressed doubts about who would represent the opposition . 
Any transition , they said , would involve Gadhafi 's second son , Saif al-Islam Gadhafi , and for such a transition to take place there would first have to be an end to the fighting . 
The sources added that there is an emerging consensus within the regime that the old guard must prepare to give way to a younger generation of leaders . 
Citing unnamed British government sources , the Guardian newspaper reported Friday that a senior adviser to Saif Gadhafi was in London for secret talks with British officials . 
That adviser , Mohammed Ismael , told CNN earlier this week that he would be traveling to London for family reasons . 
Calls placed to his mobile phone by CNN on Friday were not answered . 
Asked about the Guardian report , a British Foreign Office spokesman neither confirmed nor denied it . 
`` We are not going to provide running commentary on our contacts with Libyan officials , '' the spokesman said . 
`` In any contact that we do have , we make it clear that Gadhafi has to go . '' 
Ibrahim , the Libyan government spokesman , said he did not know where Ismael was and declined to comment on what he might be doing . 
The Libyan sources told CNN that for now , Gadhafi remains confident the regime can withstand any challenge from the rebels . 
Bad weather for the last two days forced a hiatus in international airstrikes , and in that time , rebel forces retreated from areas they had gained . 
But in a fresh offensive Friday , Libyan opposition forces led by army units that have defected from Gadhafi 's forces were able to pushed back Gadhafi 's troops , rebel spokesman Shamsiddin Abdulmolah said . 
Rebels were fighting with newly refurbished rocket launchers and artillery delivered to the frontlines Thursday night by the army units that switched sides , Abdulmolah said . 
Fighting raged at the western gates of the oil town of al-Brega , which has changed hands six times in as many weeks under the dramatically shifting circumstances of Libya 's civil war . 
In the west , witnesses reported more explosions and fierce urban warfare in the besieged city of Misrata , once the final rebel stronghold in the western part of the country . 
Gadhafi 's heavily armed forces continued their pounding Friday amid a series of political setbacks . 
Observers said the surge in firepower reaffirmed the regime 's message : Gadhafi is determined to prevail , and the defections of some of his high-profile allies are making him nervous . 
`` You 're certainly getting evidence that there are a lot of tensions , '' said Anne-Marie Slaughter , a professor of international affairs at Princeton University . 
`` Each person that leaves , that makes it a little scarier for the people that are still remaining , '' she said . 
`` And you may , at some point , get a tipping effect . '' 
On Thursday , word emerged that Gadhafi 's pick for U.N. ambassador , former Foreign Minister Ali Abdussalam Treki , had defected to Egypt . 
The day before , the latest foreign minister , Moussa Koussa , fled to London and told the government there that he had resigned . 
U.S. officials claim Gadhafi 's military capabilities have been steadily eroded since the onset of U.N.-sanctioned airstrikes . 
But the dictator 's forces still outnumber rebels by about 10-to-1 in terms of armor and other ground forces , Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Navy Adm. Mike Mullen told the House Armed Services Committee on Thursday . 
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates , also speaking before the House committee , warned that the Libyan rebels still need significant training and assistance . 
`` It 's pretty much a pickup ballgame '' right now , he said . 
U.S. and British officials say no decision has been made about whether to arm the opposition . 
CNN 's Frederik Pleitgen , Ben Wedeman , Nic Robertson , and Reza Sayah contributed to this report . 
