By Gloria Borger , CNN Senior Political Analyst Gloria Borger : Barack Obama argued for acting as part of a coalition She says that kind of leadership raises question of who 's driving the operation Republican critics are able to attack style of leadership shown by Obama , she says Borger : GOP presidential contenders do n't have to take stand for or against intervention Editor 's note : Gloria Borger is a senior political analyst for CNN , appearing regularly on CNN 's `` The Situation Room , '' `` AC360 , '' `` John King , USA '' and `` State of the Union . '' 
Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- To recap : The United States and its allies are scrambling to defeat Moammar Gadhafi 's forces in Libya . 
There 's a no-fly zone , a freezing of assets , threats about prosecution in international courts and an arms embargo . 
We 're trying to get Gadhafi to surrender -- and , hopefully , leave . 
And , by the way , the president has secretly ordered the CIA to try to figure out just who the rebels are -- and whether they 're a dependable enough crew , worthy of our money or our arms . 
`` We have n't ruled out arming the rebels , '' a senior administration official tells me . 
`` But there are a lot of questions that need to be answered first -- including whether they are even trained to use what we might give them . '' 
If the policy sounds , er , improvisational , that 's because it is . 
Naturally , any form of ad-hoc-ism is not exactly comforting , especially when it comes to foreign military intervention . 
Most often , intervention works this way : When we are attacked , we respond . 
When people plan to attack us , we try to prevent it . 
Presidents are asked to consult with Congress , provide a mission , goals , timetables and endgames . 
We like to know how we 're getting out before we get in . 
We are understandably war-weary . 
Yet when the president proposes an alternative to the now unpopular all-or-nothing-go-it-alone military interventions of Iraq and Afghanistan , it 's still somehow unsettling . 
We do n't want to go it alone . 
Yet we 're not sure we trust others to take the lead . 
View from Libya 's ` shaky ' frontline Gates : Obama followed War Powers Act Kucinich : Only Congress can declare war When the president says , as he did in his speech Monday , `` We should not be afraid to act -- but the burden of action should not be America 's alone , '' we get it . 
But we also start wondering : What happens if we 're not driving the car ? 
We always drive the car . 
Truth is , we like to drive . 
And when we 're not driving , we think it 's easy -- even likely -- for the coalition to veer off course . 
So here 's the conundrum : We do n't want to go it alone . 
Yet we 're not sure we trust others to take the lead . 
And that 's where the Republican political play is right now . 
And it 's easy : Sidestep the entire question of intervention , while either -LRB- a -RRB- saying Obama took too long to do it or -LRB- b -RRB- he did it in a wimpy -LRB- and possibly self-defeating -RRB- way -LRB- spelled `` coalition '' -RRB- . 
In other words , do n't lead . 
Just say Obama ca n't lead . 
Consider Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour , who recently complained to a local radio station that `` The Obama administration 's position has been to say , ` You know , we 're just one of the boys . 
We 're not going to try to be the leader . ' 
And we see that when you do n't have strong leadership from the strongest country in the world , then everybody else scatters out and breaks up . '' 
So , um , what 's the right thing to do ? 
`` I 'm not saying ` Do this , do that , ' '' he told WFMN radio in Jackson , Mississippi , going on to say we need to make sure we have the resources we need to accomplish the mission . 
Now is that clear ? 
Mitt Romney says he supports military action , but says Obama is taking orders -- from the Arab League and the UN -- rather than giving them . 
And then there 's Newt Gingrich , who was for an intervention before he was against it -- at least the way Obama did it . 
Republicans can get away with the Obama-doesn ` t-believe-in-American-exceptionalism stuff for awhile because the public itself is ambivalent . 
In fact , a Pew poll taken on the eve of the president 's speech showed that only 47 % of Americans believed that the airstrikes in Libya were warranted . 
And when asked about whether there is a clear goal , the public also seemed largely unconvinced . 
Most notably , independent voters said there 's no clear goal , by a 57 % to 35 % margin . 
The president deserves props for the immense coalition he put together , not to mention a successful vote in the UN Security Council against Libya . 
Yet Obama has succeeded in making no one completely happy : Those who wanted unilateral intervention quickly say Obama has dithered , caring more about building a coalition than saving the Libyan people . 
On the other end of the spectrum , those worried about intervention without a clear exit strategy consider Obama to be too hasty . 
So he ca n't win . 
If Gadhafi goes , Obama 's a hero . 
And all of that improvisation will suddenly look like a well-constructed sonata . 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Gloria Borger . 
