RAMALLAH\/GAZA | Mon May 2 , 2011 1:23 pm BST RAMALLAH\/GAZA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The killing of Osama bin Laden by U.S. forces was welcomed on Monday by the Western-backed Palestinian Authority while its prospective power-sharing partner , Islamist Hamas , deplored his death . 
`` Getting rid of bin Laden is good for the cause of peace worldwide but what counts is to overcome the discourse and the methods -- the violent methods -- that were created and encouraged by bin Laden and others in the world , '' Palestinian Authority -LRB- PA -RRB- spokesman Ghassan Khatib said . 
Ismail Haniyeh , head of the Hamas administration in the Gaza Strip , called bin Laden a martyr . 
`` We condemn the assassination and the killing of an Arab holy warrior , '' Haniyeh told reporters . 
`` We regard this as a continuation of the American policy based on oppression and the shedding of Muslim and Arab blood . '' 
Hamas , classified by the United States and the European Union as a terrorist group over its violence against Israel , is due to sign a unity deal this week in Cairo with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas 's more secular Fatah movement . 
Israel has condemned the agreement , saying it could sabotage any efforts to revive peace talks with the Palestinians . 
The deal envisages an interim unity government comprised of independents and Palestinian elections later in the year . 
The Fatah-led PA supports a negotiated peace with Israel to obtain a state in territories the Jewish state captured in a 1967 war . 
Hamas is officially sworn to Israel 's destruction . 
Abbas has defended reconciliation with Hamas , saying it reflected a deep-seated Palestinian desire to close a rift with the group that seized Gaza from Fatah forces in 2007 . 
The United States has responded coolly to the unity pact . 
In the West Bank city of Ramallah , the PA 's view on the death of the mastermind of the September 11 , 2001 attacks was shared by Ahmed Saleh , a 58-year-old retiree . 
`` The world is better without bin Laden . 
This has removed a pillar of evil from the world , '' he said . 
`` His heinous actions were exploited to allow hostile policies towards the Arabs and Muslims . '' 
But Umm Mohammed , a veiled woman , said she hoped news of bin Laden 's death was a lie . 
`` God willing , he will continue to conquer the West , '' she said . 
Palestinians hit the headlines after the 2001 attacks on New York and Washington , carried out by al Qaeda , when a small group were filmed celebrating in East Jerusalem . 
At the time , there were bigger demonstrations in the Gaza Strip in support of the attacks . 
Palestinians partly blame their national plight on generations of U.S. support for Israel . 
But late Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat banned such public displays and voiced sympathy for the dead in the United States . 
In Gaza , Hamas now faces a challenge from al Qaeda-inspired groups that consider it to be too moderate . 
One such group was behind last month 's killing of a pro-Palestinian Italian activist in the territory . 
Abdel-Qader Abu Shaaban , a 53-year-old Palestinian from Gaza , described bin Laden 's killing as `` a very criminal act . '' 
`` This is not a victory . 
If they assassinated bin Laden , there will be others stronger than him : politicians and military people , '' he said . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
