Libyan rebels fire a wire-guided missile at a position belonging to forces loyal to Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , at the frontline near the town of Zlitan , west of the rebel-controlled city of Misrata August 6 , 2011 . 
BENGHAZI , Libya | Sat Aug 6 , 2011 2:44 pm EDT BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan rebels Saturday said they had launched a push to capture the coastal oil town of Brega , but were advancing slowly because Muammar Gaddafi 's forces had sown minefields across its approaches . 
`` There 's a big movement on all fronts around Brega . 
We are attacking from three sides , '' said spokesman Mohammad Zawawi . 
Fighting on the eastern front of the civil war , which has moved backwards and forwards for the past months , has been bogged down for weeks on the fringes of Brega , about 750 kilometers -LRB- 465 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli . 
Zawawi said rebel forces were in sight of a residential area of Brega and believed they could take the town , which is south of the rebel capital Benghazi on the eastern side of the Gulf of Sirte . 
`` It could be very soon , but we do n't want to lose anybody so we 're moving slowly but surely , '' he said . 
In Misrata , a Qatari plane made a quick stop to offload ammunition destined for rebel fighters , sources with knowledge of the flight said . 
Airport officials acknowledged a Qatari plane had landed but declined to reveal details of its contents . 
`` The plane offloaded six pickup trucks which were packed with ammunition , and minutes later it flew off again , '' said one source , speaking on condition of anonymity . 
Rebels have complained about a lack of weapons and ammunition to effectively push forward to the capital . 
France has also supplied ammunition and weapons in air-drops . 
Qatar has been one of staunchest supporters of Libyans seeking to topple Muammar Gaddafi from power . 
Friday was another day of claim and counter-claim in the six-month-old war now being waged on three fronts -- in the Western Mountains southwest of Tripoli , near Misrata to the east of the capital , and around Brega between Misrata and Benghazi . 
Gaddafi 's government Friday denied a rebel report a NATO air strike on Zlitan , a town west of Misrata , had killed the Libyan leader 's son Khamis who commands of one of the government 's most loyal and best-equipped units . 
Government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim said word of Khamis Gaddafi 's death was a ploy to cover up the killing of three civilians in Zlitan , a battlefront city where Gaddafi forces are trying to halt the rebel advance on Tripoli . 
`` It 's false news . 
This is a dirty trick to cover up their crime in Zlitan , '' he told Reuters . 
A rebel spokesman said the NATO air strike had killed 32 Gaddafi loyalists in Zlitan , where Khamis Gaddafi 's elite 32nd Brigade is believed to have been leading the defense of the approaches to Tripoli , 160 kilometers away . 
NATO said it had targeted a command-and-control target in the Zlitan area but `` can not confirm anything right now because we do n't have people on the ground . '' 
Rebels who cleared Gaddafi 's forces from Libya 's third-largest city Misrata after weeks of intense fighting have been trying to push westwards and take Zlitan , which would open the coastal road toward his Tripoli stronghold . 
There have been two reports of Khamis 's death in the past six months : Arab media reported in March he had died in a kamikaze crash by a disaffected Libyan air force pilot . 
Libyan state television countered with pictures of a man resembling Khamis , which it said disproved the report of his death . 
The government said earlier this year a NATO strike in Tripoli had killed Gaddafi 's son Saif al-Arab , who unlike Khamis did not have a high public profile or a major leadership role . 
Gaddafi has kept control of the capital despite severe fuel shortages and rebel advances backed since March by Western air strikes , assault helicopter attacks and naval bombardments . 
The rebels face numerous problems , from stalling battlefield momentum to internal splits , exposed starkly last week when military chief Abdel Fattah Younes was assassinated behind his own lines in circumstances yet to be explained . 
Near the capital , rebels also control the Western Mountains southwest of Tripoli . 
A rebel official there , Colonel Juma Ibrahim , told Reuters his forces had set an ultimatum to the surrounded town of Tiji to surrender or face attack Saturday . 
Rebels were using loud-hailers to appeal to a tribal chief close to Gaddafi to evacuate civilians from Tiji and broker the withdrawal of pro-Gaddafi forces . 
`` If he does not comply , we will attack , '' said Ibrahim . 
