BENGHAZI , Libya | Tue Apr 5 , 2011 8:50 pm BST BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Western powers have destroyed nearly a third of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's military since launching air strikes last month but NATO said it was forced to change bombing tactics because of human shields . 
The besieged city of Misrata , the only big population center in western Libya where a revolt against Gaddafi has not been crushed and which faces army tanks and snipers , is now the priority for NATO air strikes . 
But Libyan rebels on the battlefield complained about what they see as a dropping off in air support and a spokesman in the rebel stronghold of Benghazi said NATO `` disappointed us '' with its slow response that allowed Gaddafi forces to kill people . 
`` Either NATO does its work properly or we will ask the Security Council to suspend its work , '' said Abdel Fattah Younes , head of the rebel forces . 
`` NATO is moving very slowly , allowing Gaddafi forces to advance , '' he told reporters . 
`` NATO has become our problem , '' he said , adding that NATO inaction was allowing the army to advance and letting them kill the people of Misrata `` every day . '' 
As the row erupted over the military campaign , the International Criminal Court said on Tuesday it had evidence Gaddafi 's government had developed plans to crush protests by killing civilians even before the uprising in Libya broke out . 
`` We have evidence that after the Tunisia and Egypt conflicts in January , people in the regime were planning how to control demonstrations inside Libya , '' court prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo told Reuters in The Hague . 
`` The planning at the beginning was to use tear gas and -LRB- if that failed to work -RRB- ... , shooting , '' said Moreno-Ocampo who is investigating Gaddafi , his sons and close aides and who will be requesting arrest warrants in the coming weeks . 
Protests against the government that began on February 15 swiftly descended into civil war after Gaddafi forces opened fire on demonstrators . 
He then crushed uprisings in Libya 's west , leaving the east and Misrata in rebel hands . 
NATO-led air power is now holding the balance in Libya , preventing Gaddafi forces from overrunning the revolt in the North African desert state but unable for now to hand the rebels outright victory with a stalemate on the desert battlefield . 
NATO took command of operations in Libya from a coalition led by the United States , Britain and France on March 31 and is enforcing a no-fly zone ordered by the United Nations and launching air strikes on Gaddafi forces to protect civilians . 
`` The assessment is that we have taken out 30 percent of the military capacity of Gaddafi , '' Brigadier General Mark van Uhm , a senior NATO staff officer , said in Brussels . 
Over the last day , air strikes around Misrata hit Gaddafi 's tanks , air defense systems and other armored vehicles . 
Near Brega in the east , where intense fighting raged for a sixth day on Tuesday , NATO aircraft struck a rocket launcher . 
Answering earlier criticism by insurgents that air power became less effective with the alliance in control , NATO officials said the presence in Libyan skies was undiminished . 
But Van Uhm said Gaddafi was using civilians as human shields and hiding his armor in populated areas , curbing NATO 's ability to hit targets . 
`` The operational tempo remains , but we have seen a change of tactics -LRB- from Gaddafi -RRB- , '' he said . 
`` When human beings are used as shields we do n't engage . '' 
There were other tactical changes . 
`` They are using more and more trucks and light vehicles ... and they are keeping more heavy equipment like armored vehicles -LRB- hidden -RRB- , '' said Van Uhm , who added that the end result was that Gaddafi was prevented from using heavy armor . 
Diplomatic efforts to end the conflict in the oil producing nation have failed to make progress with the government side offering concessions , but insisting Gaddafi stay in power , and rebels adamant that Libya 's leader for the past 41 years leave . 
After a series of rapid rebel advances followed by headlong retreats , the insurgents held their ground for six days in Brega , putting their best trained forces in to battle for the oil town and keeping the disorganised volunteers away . 
A sustained government bombardment of rockets and mortar bombs , however , pushed the insurgent pick-up truck cavalcade back towards the rebel stronghold of Benghazi , their biggest retreat in several days of inconclusive battles . 
`` Since the day NATO took over the air strikes , we have been falling back , '' said Ziad el Khafiefy , 20 , a rebel fighter . 
`` Gaddafi 's troops are hitting us with Grad missiles , '' said Mabrouk el Majbary , 35 . 
`` Something is wrong ... When the U.S. gave leadership to NATO , the bombings stopped . '' 
The rebels had shown better organization than in past weeks , keeping territory for longer but government troops mounted a sustained assault on Tuesday . 
The rebels are set for a boost with the arrival of a tanker in one of their ports which can carry one million barrels of crude , worth more than $ 100 million , which would be their first shipment since the fighting broke out . 
A Turkish ship arrived at the port of Cesme in western Turkey on Tuesday afternoon carrying 321 injured Libyans after visiting Benghazi and Misrata . 
Sirens wailed as ambulances rushed the injured to nearby hospitals . 
In the capital Tripoli , angered by fuel shortages and long queues for basic goods caused by sanctions and air strikes , some residents began openly predicting Gaddafi 's imminent downfall . 
Stepping up efforts to eradicate symbols of resistance against Gaddafi in western Libya , the army razed a mosque once used by rebels as a command center in Zawiyah . 
The government took reporters to the city to show it was under control . 
`` People are upset , '' said Mohammad , a shopowner . 
`` How can you remove a mosque in a central square just like that ? 
It 's a Muslim country . '' 
`` Do n't you see how tightly controlled we are now . 
Government spies have us surrounded in this city and we are scared to talk , '' said another resident . 
`` Those were revolutionaries and civilians that they killed , they were not gangs or al Qaeda . '' 
Stalemate on the frontline of fighting in eastern Libya , defections from Gaddafi 's circle and the plight of civilians caught in fighting or facing food and fuel shortages prompted a flurry of diplomacy to find a solution to the civil war . 
The government has offered concessions . 
Spokesman Mussa Ibrahim said Libya was ready for a `` political solution '' with world powers and offered a `` constitution , election , anything . 
But the leader has to lead this forward . '' 
Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Abdelati Obeidi ended a diplomatic shuttle to Greece , Turkey and Malta to set out the government position . 
Libya 's Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa , once a close ally of Gaddafi , has defected to Britain . 
Turkey is expecting an envoy to visit from the opposition in the coming days and is listening to both sides . 
`` Both sides have a rigid stance , '' a Turkish Foreign Ministry official said after Obeidi 's visit . 
`` One side , the opposition , is insisting that Gaddafi should go . 
The other side is saying Gaddafi should stay . 
So there is no breakthrough yet . '' 
There has been talk of Gaddafi staying on as an historic figurehead with one of his sons overseeing a change in Libya towards democracy . 
But many Western leaders see no role for Gaddafi in Libya 's future . 
`` But let 's be clear , when Gaddafi leaves , that is when the real difficulties start and we need to prepare for that , that is bringing the country together again , '' said Sweden 's Foreign Minister Carl Bildt , who was involved in the Balkans conflict . 
