NEW YORK | Fri May 14 , 2010 5:42 pm EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP 's oil spill could make for one of the highest-stakes U.S. Gulf hurricane seasons on record . 
Storms may scuttle clean-up efforts , force containment vessels to retreat , or propel spilled crude and tar balls over vast expanses of sea and beach , scientists said . 
Meteorologists say that climate conditions are ripe for an unusually destructive hurricane season , the storm-prone period that runs from June 1 to the end of November in the Gulf . 
Oceanographers say that could hurt the clean-up . 
`` If a storm comes into this situation it could vastly complicate everything , '' said Florida State University oceanography professor Ian MacDonald . 
`` All efforts on the shoreline and at sea , the booms and structures and rigs involved in clean-up and containment , could stop working . '' 
As thousands of spill responders gird for a clean-up that could last for months or years after the leaking well is capped , weather and ocean currents are emerging as major unknowns , raising anxiety levels , economic and environmental stakes in the Gulf as storm season nears . 
Compounding the uncertainty is how little research has been done on how storms affect oil spills . 
Some believe storm surges may help disperse the oil off shore or break down the slick . 
Other research suggests the oil slick itself could keep storms from gathering strength . 
Recent Atlantic Basin readings showed water temperatures up to 0.8 degrees Celsius above normal , and near a record high for the season . 
El Nino , which creates wind shear that can prevent Gulf hurricanes from forming , has recently subsided . 
The factors could spur major storms in the Gulf this year . 
`` It only takes one storm to wreak havoc , '' said Chris Shabbot , a meteorologist at Sempra in Connecticut . 
`` The consensus forecast is for above average storm activity as the El Nino -LRB- event -RRB- decays and the Atlantic is as warm or warmer than 2005 . '' 
Colorado State University 's renowned team of forecasters is calling for an above-average hurricane season that may bring 15 named storms this year , eight of hurricane strength . 
Accuweather 's Joe Bastardi also fears a destructive season . 
`` I hate to say it since the oil spill is already affecting people , but I think this hurricane season is going to be big , '' he said in an interview . 
The next official hurricane season outlook from the government 's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is due on May 20 . 
Miles and miles of booms have been placed offshore along the Gulf Coast to help stop the slick from making landfall . 
Amid the menacing forecasts , oceanographers and spill-responders are considering how storms and deep ocean currents would affect the movement of spilled oil , which authorities say could soon hit land in Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama or Florida . 
The U.S. coast of the Gulf of Mexico spans some 1,680 miles . 
The spill , gushing an estimated 5,000 barrels a day from a subsea oil well 50 miles south of Louisiana , has formed a thin oil slick that covered more than 1,200 square miles in late April , according to Louisiana State University researchers . 
The slick has been harder to define this month , and may be shrinking , LSU professor Nan Walker said . 
Lurking under the sea surface , viscous tar balls are forming , facilitated by wave activity , as the heavier hydrocarbon molecules gradually sink toward the sea-floor , a process that can take months , scientists said . 
Experts are having trouble modeling how the oil will react in water since BP has n't disclosed exactly what kind of crude is spilling . 
Lighter oil evaporates quicker and is more easily dispersed by chemicals . 
Heavier crude can be more damaging to marine or bird life , but it could sink faster or be easier to contain . 
As many as 520 vessels are already responding to the spill throughout the Gulf , according to U.S. authorities . 
Efforts to stop the spill involve drilling relief wells from a seaborne rig , which BP says could take three months . 
The company is also trying to cap the leak with a metal funnel on the sea-floor , to gather oil into a giant hose connected to a storage ship above . 
Both of those efforts could be disrupted by tropical storms , which can force evacuation of oil and gas rigs throughout the Gulf . 
Peter Niiler , an oceanographer at the Scripps Institution in San Diego , has researched how even winds caused by a low pressure cycle can displace floating scientific buoys from waters near Florida to Texas in less than a week . 
`` Anything on the ocean surface , including oil , can move very fast and just about anywhere that wind or currents push it , '' Niiler said . 
The oil slick might even reach waters and shores abroad , scientists and foreign authorities warned this week . 
Mexican officials say if the spill persists into the fall it could reach Mexican beaches along the country 's Gulf Coast , the site of famed tourist destinations like Cancun . 
Some of the spilled crude should make its way into the LOOP current , a deep ocean stream that transfers heat from the tropics to higher latitudes and becomes the Gulf Stream . 
`` If you look at it , the LOOP current could lead that oil right to Havana , Cuba , '' said Florida State 's MacDonald . 
After sweeping near Havana , the LOOP current continues toward the Florida Keys and the Gulf Stream heads up the U.S. Eastern Seaboard . 
Some researchers said a wider dispersion of the spill may be good , and storms could help that process along . 
Researchers at NOAA , in a report last week , said the oil slick may also help to impede storm formation by preventing heat transfer from sea to air . 
`` There are two important issues here : the effect of hurricanes on the spill , and the effect of the spill on hurricanes , '' said Doron Nof , professor of oceanography at Florida State University . 
`` I think what a hurricane would do is break up the oil spill , making it even harder to clean up , '' he said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
This simple technique using locally available hay and straw will at least bind up the floating oil and keep it from fouling shorelines . 
See the video -- it 's amazing . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
