HOUSTON\/PORT FOURCHON , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- BP on Thursday geared up for its latest attempt to control a gushing undersea well as environmentalists complained they were being kept in the dark about the oil spill 's potential ecological impact . 
BP Plc , the British energy giant , said it would deploy a small containment dome , known as a `` top hat , '' soon to trap the oil at the site of the leak a mile beneath the Gulf of Mexico . 
HOUSTON , May 8 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- A natural gas cloud enveloped a Gulf of Mexico offshore oil rig leased by BP Plc <BP.L> and exploded just as visiting BP officials were celebrating seven accident-free years in the rig 's crew quarters , according to accounts by survivors of the accident . 
Robert Bea , a University of California Berkeley engineering professor , said on Saturday he obtained transcripts of interviews from three rig workers familiar with the explosion , including two who were in the rig 's crew quarters at the time . 
HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- For Louisiana 's young Republican governor , a massive oil spill lurking off his state 's fragile coast is another chance to show his skills as a detail-oriented manager and position himself for the national political stage . 
State political experts say Bobby Jindal , the 38-year-old son of Indian immigrants , is maneuvering for a possible run against Democratic Senator Mary Landrieu in 2014 . 
Jindal has dismissed such speculation and insists he is focused on getting re-elected in 2011 . 
HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- The outer edge of a massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico washed up to wildlife refuges and seafood grounds on the Louisiana coast on Friday , as efforts redoubled to avert what could become one of the worst U.S. ecological disasters . 
The last flight by a Coast Guard plane on Thursday had situated the thin surface `` rainbow sheen '' of the slick just 10 metres -LRB- 33 feet -RRB- from the Pass-a-Loutre wildlife reserve in Louisiana . 
It seemed inevitable that some of the oil would reach shore , although the Coast Guard was awaiting information from its first Friday morning flight , a spokesman said . 
HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- The U.S. government intensified its response to a spreading oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , mobilizing the military to try to avert an environmental disaster along the fragile coastline of Louisiana and three other Gulf states . 
President Barack Obama pledged on Thursday to `` use every single available resource '' and the U.S. military ratcheted up preparations to help contain the oil slick . 
HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- The U.S. government ratcheted up efforts to avert an environmental disaster as a massive oil slick leaking from a ruptured well moved closer to the mouth of the Mississippi River on Thursday , menacing the delicate coastline of Louisiana and three other Gulf states . 
President Barack Obama pledged to `` use every single available resource '' and the U.S. military was mobilizing to help contain the spreading spill from the deepwater leak in the Gulf of Mexico . 
HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- A massive oil slick from a blown-out well in the Gulf of Mexico is expected to reach a wildlife reserve at the mouth of the Mississippi River on Thursday as it threatens the environmentally delicate coastline of Louisiana and three other Southern U.S. states . 
President Barack Obama pledged to `` use every single available resource '' -- including the U.S. military -- to help the London-based energy giant BP Plc fight the crude oil spill , which was about 3 miles from the marshes of the Mississippi Delta and spreading faster than expected toward the shoreline , according to the Coast Guard . 
HOUSTON , April 29 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- A massive oil spill expected to hit the southern U.S. coast on Friday could affect petroleum shipments and delay plans to open up coastal waters to more drilling , government officials said on Thursday . 
The spill -- from a BP Plc <BP.L> rig that exploded in the Gulf of Mexico last week -- is spewing five times more oil than previously estimated and raising fears of severe damage to fisheries , wildlife refuges and beaches in Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
`` This is a spill of national significance , '' Janet Napolitano , the secretary of Homeland Security , told a news conference at the White House . 
`` We will continue to push BP to engage in the strongest response possible . '' 
The governor of Louisiana , which is still recovering from the ravages of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , declared a state of emergency and the U.S. military said it was reviewing how it might help the efforts to contain the growing slick . 
Shares in London-based BP and Swiss-based rig company Transocean Ltd <RIGN.S> <RIG.N> fell by more than 6 percent on Thursday as investors feared a significantly higher cleanup cost . 
BP is down more than 10 percent and Transocean is down nearly 14 percent since the rig explosion on April 20 . 
Shares of oilfield services companies Cameron International Corp <CAM.N> and Halliburton Co <HAL.N> tumbled on fears about their ties to the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
Cameron , which supplied the blowout preventer for the rig , said on Thursday it was insured for $ 500 million of liability , if needed . 
Halliburton said it did a variety of work on the rig and was assisting with the investigation . 
The slick will hit the coast in the Mississippi Delta `` sometime later tomorrow , '' Sally Brice OHare , rear admiral of the Coast Guard , said at the news conference with Napolitano . 
President Barack Obama said BP was ultimately responsible for the cost of the cleanup and that his government would use every resource to address the spill . 
The White House said Obama has been briefed on how the slick may interfere with shipping channels , which could affect tankers delivering petroleum to the U.S. market . 
It may also have ramifications for proposals in Congress and by Obama to issue new offshore drilling permits . 
Initial indications were that the spill would be worse than one in the Pacific Ocean off Santa Barbara in 1969 which prompted a moratorium on oil and gas drilling off the Pacific and Atlantic coasts , a ban Obama has said he wants to modify . 
The Obama administration did not rule out imposing a pause in new deepwater drilling until oil companies can show they can control any spills that may happen . 
`` Everything is on the table , '' Deputy Interior Secretary David Hayes told reporters , adding it could take 90 days to install a relief valve to stop the leak . 
Eleven workers are missing and presumed dead after the rig disaster , the worst in the United States in almost a decade . 
Transocean 's Deepwater Horizon rig sank on April 22 , two days after it exploded and caught fire while the company was finishing a well for BP about 40 miles -LRB- 64 km -RRB- southeast of the mouth of the Mississippi River . 
The daily leak from the well blowout is now estimated at 5,000 barrels or about 210,000 gallons -LRB- 795,000 litres -RRB- . 
The Navy said it was supplying the Coast Guard with inflatable booms and seven skimming systems . 
BP and the Coast Guard have mounted what the company calls the largest oil spill containment operation in history , involving dozens of ships and aircraft . 
But they are struggling to control the slick from the leaking well 5,000 feet -LRB- 1,525 metres -RRB- under the sea off Louisiana 's coast . 
After underwater robots failed to activate a cutoff valve to stop the leak , BP and the Coast Guard set a `` controlled burn '' on Wednesday to try to prevent the slick from growing . 
`` We will not rest until we have done everything to bring this under control , '' said Andrew Gowers , head of group media for BP , likening the spill 's consistency to `` iced tea '' with the thickness of a human hair . 
`` Chris has been a journalist for Reuters since 2001 , when he joined the Washington DC bureau as a summer intern . 
As a correspondent in Washington , Chris covered energy policy , reported on Congress , the Supreme Court and federal agencies like the Environmental Protection Agency . 
As Houston Bureau Chief , Chris oversees a team of five reporters and covers general news topics like the BP oil spill , hurricanes , NASA , and national politics . 
In addition , Chris oversees a team of Power and Gas reporters in New York and Houston . '' 
