- Kees Willemse is professor of offshore engineering at Delft University . 
The opinions expressed are his own . 
- Last month s explosion at the Deepwater Horizon rig continues to result in the leakage of an estimated 200,000 gallons -LRB- 910,000 litres -RRB- of oil into the Gulf of Mexico each day . 
According to U.S. President Barack Obama , we are dealing with a massive and potentially unprecedented environmental disaster . 
While the leak is extremely serious , and Obama s words may ultimately ring true , the leak is -LRB- as yet -RRB- not one of the top 50 biggest oil spillages from either oil rigs or tankers in historical perspective : cents Some 7-10 ,000 tonnes of oil are so far estimated to have leaked into the Gulf of Mexico from Deepwater Horizon . 
cents The Exxon Valdez leaked some 36,000 tonnes of crude oil on the shores of Alaska . 
cents The largest ever off-shore leakage of oil occurred in 1979 in the Ixtoc-1 spillage when an estimated 476,000 tonnes of oil polluted the Gulf of Mexico -LRB- Bay of Campeche -RRB- . 
cents The biggest ever on-shore spillage occurred in the aftermath of the 1991 Iraq War when an estimated 1.4 to 1.5 million tonnes was released in Kuwait by Iraqi military forces . 
Most at risk from the Deepwater Horizon spill are the coastlines of Texas , Florida , Mississippi , Alabama , and Louisiana , including the wetlands near New Orleans where millions of migratory birds are currently nesting , and fish spawning . 
The oil spill could also be catastrophic for the Gulf Coast s substantial seafood industry , including oysters and shrimp . 
To mitigate the environmental impact , measures will continue to be taken to prevent as much of the oil as possible reaching the shoreline , including setting fires to burn-off the oil ; soaking up the oil ; and placing protective barriers around shorelines . 
The precise scale of the unfolding disaster remains uncertain owing to the lack of clarity over how long the leak will last . 
In the worst-case scenario , as U.S. Interior Secretary Ken Salazar has suggested , the leak could continue for several more months . 
Uncertainty is also increased by the fact that BP executives are reported to have admitted to members of the U.S. Congress that the amount of oil spilling could intensify -- perhaps by several multiples of the current leakage per day -- if they can not cap the flow . 
Hopes for a relatively early end to the leakage are resting largely upon the success of the operation to install a five-storey , 100 tonne containment dome . 
The device was to be lowered by cranes around 1500 metres to the sea floor and , if possible , positioned over the two areas of leaking pipe . 
If successful , the dome would serve as a giant funnel , collecting and piping it for collection on the sea surface . 
However , this operation has only been applied at a much smaller water depth and the first attempt to employ the device here has not been successful . 
Even if successful , the dome will not stem all of the leakage -LRB- perhaps 80-90 percent of it -RRB- and there remains a risk of explosion when the oil reaches the surface because of the volatile mix of oil , gas and water . 
Thus , the operation can only be a holding one to buy time until the spillage can be shut off at the two remaining sources of the leak . 
While shutting off the leakage at source will be an immensely difficult task , hopes will have been raised last week by the fact that BP successfully shut off the smallest of the three original leakages . 
This was done by placing a valve over the ruptured pipe and shutting it off using a remotely controlled submarine . 
The best hope of shutting off the two remaining sources of leakage is getting the blow-out preventor working again . 
This is the system , which should act as an emergency cut-off to stop oil continually spilling out if a pipe is damaged , and which failed catastrophically last month . 
However , the blow-out preventor is proving immensely hard to fix , in large part because of the exceptional depth of the water . 
Hopes rest largely upon robot submarines re-starting the system . 
In the event that the blow-out preventor can not be fixed , relief wells have begun to be drilled that could be used to siphon off the oil leaking from the holed pipeline . 
This operation will take an estimated two to three months as the drilling is taking place at 1500 metres water depth and a further 5 kilometres into the hard rock . 
The relief well can also be drilled such that the shaft of the new well enters into the shaft of the existing , problematic well . 
A cement prop can then be inserted to stop the flow in the first well . 
This requires extremely accurate drilling , but that technique has been proven before . 
Inevitably , all of this environmental mitigation and emergency replacement activity is proving extremely expensive . 
The cost of operations to BP alone is an estimated 6 million dollars a day , and independent estimates have put the final bill at between 3 billion and 12 billion dollars . 
However , the effects of this accident can not be expressed in money terms alone , because of the growing scale of the environmental disaster if the oil spill can not be contained soon . 
Once the crisis is over , industry and government will need to make an urgent in-depth analysis of the cause of the accident to ensure that similar incidents can never happen again . 
The Canadian oil sands can finally officially pass the crown Dirty oil off to their rightful owners the offshore producers and shippers . 
Oil sands can provide clean and environmentally friendly oil to the world for over a hundred years . 
This without bringing the hurt and pain to environmentally sensitive regions that do not deserve this again . 
It s unfortunate that this needed to happen for the world to wake up that an endless supply is located onshore . 
I submitted an idea to BP a few days ago which I believe will work , to stop the leak . 
They already have a 78 ton metal box which they can put on top of the leak on the ocean floor . 
I suggest they start vacuuming mud off the sea bed and dumping the mud on top of the box . 
Eventually , the mud will build up a large roughly conical mound on top of , and around , the box and leak . 
The weight of the mud bearing down on the box will seal it effectively against the sea bed . 
The sheer mass of mud will counteract the overpressure of the oil from the well . 
The relief well currently being drilled will eventually remove the oil overpressure , so the mud can then be removed by pumps and the leak sealed in a more permanent fashion . 
Everyone is worried about the oil coming up uncontrolled from the sea bed . 
The biggest worrier I have seen so far is BP . 
Sure they are losing millions because of this oil floating up and kill fish and wildlife daily . 
They are also spending millions , without comment about how much money they are spending or for that matter losing on this one site . 
I 'll bet you that 99.9 % of the population worried about this pollution are still buying fuel for their cars . 
Of those I 'd guess that about 50 % of these go to any other company that is not BP . 
Yes I can see everyone being mad and worried about this problem happening , I would just see that the support of BP while it is happening a good idea . 
Sure if you wish , go to another oil company when the problem is fixed . 
Unfortunately , I am the occupant of an electric wheel chair 24 hours a day , 7 days a week . 
If I was still able to drive a vechile on the roads , until this problem is solved , I would gladly by my fuel from BP to make a donation so they can clean up ASAP . 
If its not a blow by or fear for a blow by , its rather simple to replace the so called failing BOP . 
20 years ago I presented my company a concept of an equipment to replace a failing BOP . 
Any way , 27 years ago I presented the oil majors Shell , Exxon and BP a concept for oil drilling ; cheaper , faster and safer . 
Most major advances in oil drilling of the last 25 years were included in that concept ; coiled , monodiameter , underbalanced , snake . 
So to my opinion the oil spill is a result of rather clumsy operations . 
best regards , www222Lu , JvdVeen Kees Willemse is professor of offshore engineering at Delft University . 
