Credit : Reuters\/Jonathen E. Davis\/U . 
S. Navy photo\/Handout By Caren Bohan and Steve Gorman WASHINGTON\/PORT FOURCHON , Louisiana | Fri May 14 , 2010 5:45 pm EDT WASHINGTON\/PORT FOURCHON , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - U.S. President Barack Obama on Friday slammed the companies involved in a massive Gulf of Mexico oil spill as BP Plc readied a siphoning system to contain a growing environmental disaster . 
Obama applied further pressure on the companies involved in the unfolding drama , criticizing them for a `` ridiculous spectacle '' of publicly trading blame over the accident in his sternest comments yet on the situation . 
With oil gushing unchecked from a blown-out well a mile under the Gulf of Mexico , London-based BP began work on its latest short-term fix -- a tube that undersea robots will try to insert into a pipe to funnel oil to the surface . 
The device could begin siphoning oil late Friday , BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said . 
The energy giant 's prior attempt to contain the oil -- a giant containment dome -- failed last week after the appearance of frozen hydrocarbons rendered it useless . 
The so-called riser insertion tool is `` the best option , the most likely option to combat '' the frozen hydrocarbons , Suttles said . 
If short-term efforts fail , it will take BP about 90 days to permanently cap the leak with a relief well . 
Shares of companies involved in the disaster , including BP , have taken a big hit in recent days , but now other firms that make a living in the Gulf of Mexico 's oil-rich waters are starting to feel financial pain . 
The U.S. Department of the Interior issued a moratorium on new drilling permits at least until May 28 when a safety review is due to be completed . 
But now , analysts and investors are beginning to fret future implications of the ban . 
In comments after a meeting with his Cabinet to discuss efforts to stop the spill and minimize its impact on U.S. Gulf Coast communities , Obama said he was angry and frustrated about the spill , which threatens an ecological and economic disaster in the Gulf region . 
`` I have to say , though , I did not appreciate what I considered to be a ridiculous spectacle during the congressional hearings into this matter . 
You had executives of BP and Transocean and Halliburton falling over each other to point the finger of blame at somebody else , '' Obama said . 
Obama was referring to testimony this week in Congress by leaders of the three companies involved in the disaster -- BP , Halliburton and Transocean Ltd. . 
None of the three took responsibility for the spill , and instead blamed one another . 
Fisheries and tourism , two of the Gulf Coast 's economic mainstays , along with birds , sea turtles and other wildlife , are threatened by the spreading slick . 
The accident also could cripple attempts in Washington to overhaul U.S. energy policy . 
Obama repeated a demand that BP must pay for the spill 's cleanup and other economic impact on the Gulf region but said the U.S. government would use `` every available resource '' to stop oil from coming ashore . 
He said he would not `` rest or be satisfied '' until the leak was stopped at its source . 
`` We absolutely understand and share President Obama 's sense of urgency over the length of time this complex task is taking , '' BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward said in a statement . 
The spill began after an April 20 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig , which killed 11 workers . 
It threatens to eclipse the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill off Alaska to become the worst ecological disaster in U.S. history . 
The tone of Obama 's Rose Garden comments were his sternest yet on the catastrophe . 
In the aftermath of the spill , the Obama administration was faulted by some for the speed of its response , with some drawing comparisons to Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . 
The White House rejects the criticism , and Obama 's visit to Louisiana on May 2 to meet with local officials and residents helped to dampen it . 
But as the leak begins to move ashore , the administration wants to head off any potential political fallout , especially with congressional elections looming in November . 
Obama also said he directed U.S. Interior Secretary Ken Salazar to undertake a `` top-to-bottom '' review of the Minerals Management Service , the federal agency that oversees offshore drilling . 
On Tuesday , Salazar announced that the agency will be split in order to separate the collection of oil royalties from safety inspection duties . 
`` For too long , for a decade or more , there 's been a cozy relationship between the oil companies and the federal agency that permits them to drill , '' Obama said . 
A six-month halt in new drilling would defer as much as 80,000 barrels -LRB- 3.4 million gallons\/15 .9 million liters -RRB- of oil equivalent per day , or 4 percent of projected production in the Gulf of Mexico in 2011 , according to energy consultancy Wood Mackenzie . 
`` Longer term , after the moratorium is eventually lifted the cost implications of this accident on future drilling could prove significantly detrimental for the industry , '' research firm Raymond James said in a note to clients on Friday . 
A U.S. lawmaker on Friday urged BP to provide more information about how much oil is gushing from its ruptured well , noting that estimates range from 5,000 barrels per day -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- to 100,000 barrels -LRB- 4.2 million gallons\/15 .9 million liters -RRB- per day . 
Democratic Representative Edward Markey said the public deserves to know exactly how much oil will end up in the ocean and ultimately on U.S. coastlines . 
BP , whose shares have tumbled and wiped out $ 30 billion of market value since the April 20 rig fire , has said the oil spill had cost it $ 450 million so far . 
BP shares dropped more than 3 percent in London on Friday . 
BP defended its lower spill estimate of 5,000 bpd . 
`` I think that 's a good range , '' Suttles said on CNN . 
`` I do n't know the precise number , but I think it 's somewhere around that number . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
obama has taken so much money from BP ... just talks the game ... a campaigner and not a leader This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
