EPSOM , England | Sat Jun 4 , 2011 9:27 pm BST EPSOM , England -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Teenage jockey Mickael Barzalona earned a one-day ban to go with a winning ride in his first Epsom Derby on Saturday after standing up to celebrate a dramatic victory even before passing the post . 
The 19-year-old Barzalona lifted himself out of his stirrups and punched the air with his whip in delight before landing the spoils for France and trainer Andre Fabre with victory on 4-1 chance Pour Moi . 
The youngster received a one-day ban and a warning because of his `` premature celebration . '' 
They also ruled that Barzalona had used his whip too much in the closing stages . 
But nothing could spoil the day for the Frenchman , grandson of a racehorse trainer in Corsica . 
He told reporters : `` I did n't really plan the celebrations at the finish -- it just happened . '' 
Barzalona had bided his time at the rear but made dramatic late ground to win England 's premier classic by a head from 25-1 Irish-trained outsider Treasure Beach and 5-2 favorite Carlton House , owned by Britain 's Queen Elizabeth . 
`` I was not worried about being last for much of the race as I had all the other good horses just in front of me , '' the winning jockey said . 
`` I hoped they would take me along and that is what happened . 
`` Pour Moi gave me an immediate response and horse after horse came to me when I asked him to go . 
I thought I would finish fourth or fifth but he just went on and on . '' 
Barzalona , nephew of ex-rider Armand Barzalona , spent four years at a French jockeys ' school before joining Fabre in 2009 . 
He has ridden for the Godolphin operation of Sheikh Mohammed of Dubai and other big wins include this year 's United Arab Emirates Derby . 
Fabre , 65 , and winning his first English Derby at his 10th attempt , said : `` It 's so pleasing that Mickael is a home-grown jockey -- and I know his family . 
`` It 's such a pleasure to win this race and under these conditions , with a young jockey and this big crowd . 
I could n't be more happy . '' 
As for the one-day ban for Barzalona over his joyous celebrations , Fabre observed wryly : `` He is only 19 . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
