Swine flu outbreak at Birmingham school infects 44 Welford school , hit by biggest outbreak in UK , will undergo ` deep clean ' during half-term holiday Welford primary school in Handsworth , Birmingham . 
Photograph : PA An outbreak of swine flu at a Birmingham primary school led to 44 new cases of the virus being confirmed yesterday , the largest number in a single day since the spread began . 
Pupils at Welford primary in Handsworth , Birmingham , began feeling ill last week when three cases were initially diagnosed . 
Yesterday , lab results confirmed a further 44 infections at the school . 
They included 41 children and three adults . 
Three more people from the east of England and London were also diagnosed , taking the total in the UK so far to 184 , the Department of Health said . 
The Health Protection Agency -LRB- HPA -RRB- insisted that high rates of infection were to be expected in school environments where children come into close contact with one another . 
The school is closed this week for half term and expected to open for all pupils who are feeling well next week . 
Before the holidays began , the headteacher informed the HPA there had been an unusually high number of absences owing to illness . 
At least 100 children had been off sick , according to local reports . 
As a result of the first confirmed case , all parents and staff were told either to attend the school over the weekend to collect antiviral medication or to receive medical attention at home . 
A joint statement issued by the school and the HPA , posted on the school 's website , says that it is undergoing a `` deep clean '' of the premises during the holiday before it reopens . 
The headteacher , Chris Smith , was unavailable for comment yesterday . 
The HPA said that all confirmed cases are being treated at home with antivirals and are responding well to treatment . 
HPA officers contacted every parent of children in the school as well as teachers to find out if they have symptoms . 
A spokeswoman for the HPA said that they had not yet identified the source of the outbreak . 
`` The initial case is still under investigation . 
The vast majority of cases have been in people recently returning from an infected country or who have been in close contact with someone who has just returned . 
This is one of a very small number of cases where there is n't that history , '' she said . 
The school recently featured in a BBC2 documentary called The Primary , about building a multicultural school community with children of 17 different nationalities . 
The school has 420 pupils and 60 in its nursery unit . 
Almost 50 countries have now confirmed cases of swine flu and about 13,000 people around the world have been diagnosed with the virus . 
The death toll from the virus in Mexico stands at 83 , while 12 people have died in the United States and two have died in Canada . 
Of four cases confirmed on Monday in the UK , one was yesterday revealed to be a two-year-old boy from Oxford . 
A DoH spokesman said : `` The localized cases of swine flu found in the UK have so far been mild , and we have not seen evidence of widespread community transmission . 
Our strategy of containing the spread with anti-virals appears to have been effective in reducing symptoms and preventing further spread of infection . 
`` But we must not be complacent it is right to prepare for the possibility of a global pandemic . 
The UK 's arrangements are continuing , to ensure that we are well-placed to deal with this new infection . '' 
