UPDATE 1-Risk Libyan oil down for months - BoA Merrill Lynch \* BoA ML says unrest could hit Libyan output for months \* Market 's ability to cope with more Mideast unrest limited LONDON , Feb 28 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Unrest in Libya could make oil supplies from the North African producer unavailable to the market for months , Bank of America Merrill Lynch said . 
The U.S. bank said initial reports suggested companies had already shut onshore production , and it estimated as much as 1.2 million barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- of crude oil may have been shut down in the country . 
`` With Libya apparently at risk of a civil war , there are reasons to believe that oil supplies in that country could be off for months , '' it said in a note to clients , received by Reuters on Monday . 
It said Libya 's oil infrastructure was on the eastern side of the country and could be prone to attacks by either supporters of Muammar Gaddafi or opposition forces , `` creating the risk of a prolonged output loss '' . 
The bank said it saw substantial upside risks to Brent crude oil LCOc1 prices over the next few months and that its forecasts for oil prices were `` skewed to the upside '' . 
`` The combination of a substantial run-up in demand coupled with a very severe supply shock makes a spike and crash scenario increasingly likely for global oil prices and the world economy , '' it said . 
`` In our opinion , if Brent crude oil prices hold at around $ 110 - $ 115 per barrel in 2011 , energy as a percentage of GDP would remain close to record levels , suggesting that the point of demand destruction is in short sight . '' 
The bank estimated that a 10 percent increase in oil prices pushes down global oil demand by about 0.5 percent . 
It said the oil market 's ability to deal with further unrest in the Middle East remained very limited . 
-LRB- Reporting by Christopher Johnson ; editing by Jane Baird An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
