Libyan oil output cut by at least half , Saudi steps in PARIS\/RIYADH | Mon Feb 28 , 2011 1:40 pm EST PARIS\/RIYADH -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The uprising in Libya has cut its oil output by half , the International Energy Agency said on Monday , but Saudi Arabia 's pledge to pump more helped to prevent a further surge in the price of oil . 
The head of Italian oil company ENI , the biggest foreign operator in Libya , said he thought two-thirds of Libyan oil and gas output had been halted and warned oil extraction could halt if shipments did not resume . 
Foreign firms have been pulling staff out of Libya due to the uprising against Muammar Gaddafi 's rule . 
China 's three major state-owned oil and gas companies have evacuated all their Chinese employees . 
U.S. oil firm Marathon Oil Corp also said it had evacuated all expatriate employees and their dependents from Libya , while ConocoPhillips said it had closed its operations there and evacuated some employees due to the unrest . 
About half of Libya 's 1.6 million barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- of production had been cut , IEA Chief Economist Fatih Birol told Reuters Insider TV , citing industry reports . 
That is higher than the IEA estimated initially . 
Oil prices jumped toward $ 120 a barrel last week for the first time since 2008 because of the disruption in Libya , the world 's 12th largest oil exporter . 
Prices have since eased to $ 112 , partly because Saudi Arabia has promised to meet any shortages . 
`` This is not good news for suppliers in the market but at the same time it is very comforting that Saudi Arabia showed their readiness to make up , '' Birol told Reuters in the interview . 
All demands for extra oil have been met , the head of Saudi state oil company Saudi Aramco said on Monday . 
The kingdom has boosted its output to around 9 million bpd , a senior Saudi source told Reuters , to meet demand . 
`` All incremental needs requested by our customers have been met , '' Saudi Aramco CEO Khalid al-Falih said . 
As well as the scale of the loss of Libya 's oil , the duration of the shutdown is also a concern to oil markets . 
Some analysts expect it may be out for a while . 
`` With Libya apparently at risk of a civil war , there are reasons to believe that oil supplies in that country could be off for months , '' Bank of America Merrill Lynch said in a note . 
Libya 's oil exports and oil tanker loadings remained at a virtual standstill . 
The country exports about 1.3 million bpd of high-quality crude , mostly to Europe . 
The size of the cut in Libya 's oil output remains unclear partly because of disrupted communications with the country . 
Eni 's chief executive , Paolo Scaroni , said on Monday he thought two-thirds of Libyan oil and gas output had been halted . 
He had put the disruption at 1.2 million bpd , or 75 percent , last week . 
Most of Libya 's oilfields are no longer under Gaddafi 's control , the European Union 's energy commissioner said on Monday . 
A unit of Libya 's state-owned National Oil Corp has decided to operate separately from its parent until Gaddafi is overthrown and Tripoli is free of his rule , an official said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Ludovic Vickers , Jim Bai , Selam Gebrekidan , Tom Miles , Martina Fuchs , Reem Shamseddine , Barbara Lewis and Giancarlo Navach ; editing by James Jukwey -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
