BENGHAZI , Libya | Tue May 31 , 2011 2:56 pm BST BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Jamal al-Farisi 's brother was killed by a fighter loyal to Muammar Gaddafi , but he shows no hatred or desire for retribution , an attitude that contradicts the bitterness that defines many civil wars . 
In Libya 's rebel-held east , there is a conspicuous lack of the deep and fractious animosities that fuelled internal conflicts in Iraq , Northern Ireland , Rwanda , Libya 's neighbor Algeria and elsewhere . 
Almost all invective is aimed at just one man : Gaddafi . 
`` Who do I hate ? 
I do n't want Libyan soldiers prosecuted . 
You 're a soldier and you have to follow orders , '' said Farisi , whose brother Fathi was killed in February at the beginning of the uprising against Gaddafi 's absolute rule . 
In east Libya at least , evidence of the brutality that has marked most recent civil conflicts -- in particular dumped bodies bearing signs of torture and mutilation -- is hard to find . 
One reason cited by people in Benghazi , the rebel capital , is Libya 's homogeneity . 
Virtually all Libyans are Arab Sunni Muslims , unlike Iraq , for example , where in the years following the 2003 U.S. invasion , extreme violence fed on divisions between Sunnis , Shi'ites , Kurds and Christians . 
The main fault lines seen in Libyan society are tribal . 
Gaddafi has manipulated the country 's tribal structures through patronage of some tribes and intimidation of others , to consolidate power . 
Some analysts see tribal strife further destabilising Libya should Gaddafi fall . 
The Libyan leader still controls much of the country 's west and the capital Tripoli , despite increasing pressure from NATO airstrikes . 
The rebels however have been keen to disavow tribalism , and Farisi did not want tribal violence in his brother 's name . 
`` If we tried all Gaddafi 's soldiers , there would be real civil war . 
Each man has a tribe behind him ... There has to be reconciliation , '' he said . 
It is difficult to tell how widespread Farisi 's views are , but his conciliatory tone is echoed by many others in the east including the rebel leadership , whose National Transitional Council on Saturday offered an amnesty to Gaddafi supporters who defect . 
In Benghazi , the bodies of dead Gaddafi soldiers and those of rebels that fought against them are buried in the same cemetery . 
They are washed according to Islamic ritual and prayers are said for all , cemetery and morgue workers said . 
`` We do n't have the custom of ` These are Gaddafi 's people , throw them over there ' . 
They 're all martyrs , and they 're buried together with our martyrs , '' said grave digger Ghaith Hussein . 
`` These people were just following orders ... Our problem is with the one who gave the orders , '' he added . 
Hussein and others said those who fought the rebels may have been forced to do so , or could have been fooled by Gaddafi 's propaganda . 
The Libyan leader 's autocratic rule has been brutal , and deserters risk the death penalty . 
On state TV , he has labeled the rebels rats and drug-addled followers of al Qaeda . 
At Benghazi 's courthouse , lawyer Breika Bitamar says she will volunteer to defend captured Gaddafi loyalists for free . 
`` Some of them may genuinely believe the rebels are al Qaeda , or that they are fighting a crusader from abroad in the form of NATO , '' she said . 
`` Some of these men think they are fighting for Libya , and anyone who dies fighting for Libya is a martyr , '' she added . 
However , the magnanimity towards Libyan Gaddafi loyalists felt by some in the rebel-held east rarely extends to African mercenaries , who the rebels say Gaddafi has hired to quell the revolt against his four-decade rule . 
After battles , rebels often display identity cards taken from the bodies of people from Chad , Niger , Mali , Mauritania and other African states . 
Rebels who blame the actions of Gaddafi 's Libyan troops on a misunderstanding are less indulgent with the mercenaries . 
But morgue worker Haroun Salem , who has handled the bodies of men accused of being mercenaries , bears them no ill will , and has washed their bodies and prayed for them at the cemetery . 
`` Sometimes we find counterfeit or out of date money in their pockets , '' he said . 
`` Gaddafi has tricked them , just like he tricked us for 41 years . 
God have mercy upon them . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
