Monday , November 22 , 2010 ; 7:16 PM Kenneth R. Feinberg is in charge of handing out $ 20 billion of BP 's money , but he 's finding that it is n't easy . 
But not everyone is buying into his plan . 
Last Friday , a senior Justice Department official sent a letter to Feinberg warning of `` concerns '' over the pace of the claims process , the `` overbroad '' release forms for settlements , and the need for `` additional transparency . '' 
The letter said `` the success of the GCCF must be judged by whether the people of the Gulf feel fairly treated . '' 
Earlier this month , Alabama Gov. Bob Riley -LRB- R -RRB- called Feinberg 's claims process `` extortion , '' and outgoing Alabama Attorney General Troy King issued a `` consumer alert '' warning people that Feinberg `` works for BP . '' 
Feinberg was named by President Obama , though BP is paying him and four other lawyers at his firm $ 850,000 a month to run the fund . 
Plaintiffs attorneys are also wary . 
`` It seems silly at this point , when we do n't know what the long-term environmental effects are going to be , '' said one lawyer who said he did n't want to comment publicly until he has seen details of Feinberg 's offers . 
`` Why are they essentially ... coming just before Christmas and flashing some money in front of people 's eyes and trying to get them to waive their rights ? 
That 's not the optimal situation . '' 
As of Nov. 18 , the BP claims fund made $ 1.88 billion of emergency payments to 86,728 individuals and 31,271 businesses . 
Feinberg and his team have rejected 56,197 claims . 
Feinberg received a total of 400,516 of damage claims , but only 8,055 of them were for final settlements . 
As a result , Feinberg has agreed to make `` interim '' payments , which will be reviewed every three months instead of every six months . 
Now gulf coast residents and businesses face this dilemma : If they want to hang on to their rights to sue BP and other companies , they can keep getting payments from Feinberg 's fund that will be reviewed , and possibly terminated . 
If they are ready to take lump sums for all present and future damages , they have to sign away their right to sue the London-based oil giant later . 
`` If I were a private lawyer , I would recommend that my clients take the money now , '' Feinberg said recently . 
He said `` finality is a virtue . '' 
Moreover , with fisheries and coastlines reopening for business , in a year or two damages might appear smaller than they do today . 
If the emergency payment program is any indication , coming up with final settlements wo n't be easy . 
Feinberg has made a career out of running big funds , such as the one for victims of the Sept. 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks . 
He has relied on legal techniques to calculate payments designed to shortcut lengthy litigation . 
The Exxon Valdez case is the poster child of what can happen otherwise : it dragged on for 20 years , a big settlement was slashed on appeal , final payments were modest and many plaintiffs died before receiving anything . 
Although $ 20 billion might seem like enough to go around , Feinberg wants proof of damages , and that proof is n't clear-cut . 
A chiropractor says business is slow because there are n't as many people fishing . 
The Plaquemines Parish government is providing forms on which people write their names and a dollar figure with no backup documents ; they declare that they deserve money `` due to the hardship caused by the oil spill . '' 
Claims have also come from beer distributors and dentists . 
Florida restaurant and lodging businesses say they suffered because tourists were frightened off by predictions - incorrect as it turned out - that oil would reach their shores . 
Feinberg has been battling plaintiffs ' lawyers over the question of `` proximity , '' meaning how close to soiled coastlines is close enough for payments . 
Feinberg and his team - he has 3,000 people reviewing claims - have also unearthed 1,200 cases of alleged fraud . 
For a fee , a ring of more than a dozen boat owners and a tax preparer allegedly drew up and distributed fake documents to people who falsely claimed to be deckhands . 
One woman allegedly stole the identity of her dead sister so she could file a claim . 
Several individuals fabricated documents showing they owned gift shops that did n't exist . 
A person who was already in prison during the oil spill filed a claim for lost earnings . 
Lawyer Mike Papantino , in a September interview , said that the escrow fund should have been bigger . 
But when asked whether he 'd rather take $ 20 billion now versus litigating for a decade for $ 60 billion , he said he would rather take the money now . 
`` I want things to recover here . 
I 'd love to see it work for $ 20 billion , '' he said . '' 
