BP said Transocean 's allegations are misguided and misleading Energy giant BP has been accused of hiding key data needed to investigate the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster . 
Transocean , the company that owned the oil rig , alleged that BP is refusing to hand over information it needs about the explosion . 
The claim is made in a letter from one of Transocean 's lawyers sent to members of President Barack Obama 's cabinet . 
BP rejected the allegation , saying the letter contained `` misguided and misleading assertions '' . 
Nevertheless , the claim risks piling further pressure on BP , which has borne the brunt of political and public criticism for the disaster on 20 April which killed 11 workers and caused the worst oil spill in US history . 
In the letter , Steven L Roberts , lawyer for Transocean , writes : `` BP has continued to demonstrate its unwillingness , if not outright refusal , to deliver even the most basic information to Transocean . 
`` This is troubling , both in light of BP 's frequently stated public commitment to openness and a fair investigation and because it appears that BP is withholding evidence in an attempt to prevent any other entity other than BP from investigating , '' he wrote . 
According to a report by the AFP news agency , the letter was sent to members of Mr Obama 's team and leading Members of Congress . 
Transocean is facing 249 lawsuits for damages over the disaster . 
The company has asked a court to limit its liabilities to $ 27m -LRB- # 17.3 m -RRB- , saying it was not responsible . 
Understanding how this plume is dispersing and breaking down will determine how quickly deepwater fishing can resume in the Gulf '' End Quote Dr Simon Boxall National Oceanography Centre , University of Southampton In a statement , BP said it was `` unequivocal and steadfast '' in its commitment to discover why the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded . 
`` We are disappointed that Transocean has opted to write a letter with so many misguided and misleading assertions , including the assertion that BP is ` withholding evidence ' '' on the explosion and spill . 
`` We have been at the forefront of co-operating with various investigations commissioned by the US government and others into the causes of the Deepwater Horizon tragedy , '' BP said . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
