Gulf oil spill : Kevin Costner signs contract with BP for oil slick clean-up Movie star has developed a ` dream machine ' that will separate oil from water to combat Deepwater Horizon spill Hollywood star Kevin Costner yesterday unveiled the `` dream machine '' that he says will separate oil from water and save the Gulf of Mexico from the environmental catastrophe caused by the destruction of the oil rig . 
Costner 's company , Ocean Therapy Solutions , signed a contract with BP last week to provide 32 units . 
These are expected to be working in the Gulf within the next 60 days , said BP 's chief operating officer , Doug Suttles . 
Financial details of the deal between Costner and BP have not been disclosed . 
`` At its core , my dream , this machine , was designed to give us a fighting chance to fight back the oil that has got us by the throat , '' Costner told reporters at a press conference in Port Fourchon , an oil industry supply port in southern Louisiana . 
Costner , who is best known for films such as Dances with Wolves and Waterworld , said his machine would not provide the US with an overnight solution to the oil spill , but claimed it could make a major difference to levels of pollution . 
`` When you are in a fight , anybody knows you go to confront it right where it is . 
You do n't wait for it to come to your door . '' 
The actor who says he has invested more than $ 20m in the centrifuge 's development testified in Congress last week that he had been trying to employ the technology designed by his company for the past 17 years , but said he had been blocked by red tape . 
BP has now bought the centrifuges and is testing the devices to see whether they could handle the oil that has been pouring into the Gulf and triggered the worst environmental catastrophe in American history . 
Each machine , called a V20 , is said to be capable of separating 210,000 gallons of oily water a day . 
Oil experts say crude oil has been leaking from the undersea well for the past two months at an estimated rate of about 60,000 barrels -LRB- about 2.5 m gallons -RRB- a day . 
