BP chief 's weekend sailing trip stokes anger at oil company Pictures of Tony Hayward yachting at the Isle of Wight billed as a PR nightmare and insulting to those affected by oil slick Sunday 20 June 2010 11.27 BST Crew aboard the yacht belonging to BP chief executive Tony Hayward at the Isle of Wight . 
Photograph : Chris Ison\/PA Images of the beleaguered BP chief executive , Tony Hayward , attending a yacht race on the Isle of Wight , just 48 hours after a hostile interrogation by a US congressional committee on the Gulf Coast oil spill , have provoked sharp criticism on both sides of the Atlantic . 
President Barack Obama 's chief of staff , Rahm Emanuel , condemned Hayward 's attendance at the event as `` part of a long line of PR gaffes and mistakes '' on ABC television , adding : `` I think that we can all conclude that Tony Hayward is not going to have a second career in PR consulting '' . 
A YouGov poll on the special relationship between Britain and the US , carried out in both countries , showed most believe criticism by Obama , including his careful dubbing of the company British Petroleum rather than BP , is doing damage . 
In Britain , 64 % of respondents , and 47 % in the US , believed the president 's handling of the crisis was harming relations and 22 % in both Britain and the US thought Obama was anti-British . 
In Britain , only 54 % said they now viewed the US favourably , compared with 68 % before the spill dramatically fewer than the 77 % of Americans who felt favourably towards Britain . 
On both sides of the Atlantic , almost identical numbers blamed BP for the spill , 59 % in Britain and 58 % in the US , but in the US , 57 % believed BP had cut corners to save costs , compared with 26 % in Britain . 
The images of Hayward at the Isle of Wight race yesterday , 4,500 miles away from the oil still spewing into the waters of the Gulf of Mexico , show a man looking anything but happy and relaxed , collar up against a cold breeze , his face almost hidden by a baseball cap pulled down over dark glasses . 
He was snapped at the JP Morgan Asset Management Round the Island race , where the 52ft yacht Bob , which he co-owns , finished fourth in its class . 
Emanuel said the images were clearly another in a long line of public embarrassments he mocked Haywood 's most infamous comment , saying `` he 's got his life back , as he would say '' but added there was more of substance to worry about . 
`` Beyond that photo , there 's really a substance here that matters . 
That 's clearly a PR mistake , but he 's made a number of those mistakes . 
What 's important is : are we capping the well ? 
Are we capturing the oil ? 
Are we containing the clean-up ? 
Are we filing the claims ? 
Are we also cleaning up the mess ? 
That 's what 's important . '' 
On the Isle of Wight , the local Friends of the Earth co-ordinator said Hayward deserved all the criticism . 
`` I 'm sure that this will be seen as yet another public relations disaster for him from people who have got exceedingly upset about this whole thing . 
`` Personally I do n't think that the bloke is particularly competent from the results that he has delivered . 
He obviously does n't have the technical know-how but he should at least be managing the image of the company better . '' 
Charlie Kronick , of Greenpeace , said Hayward was `` rubbing salt into the wounds '' of people affected by the crisis . 
`` The whole process has been a disaster but what is far worse is that BP 's recklessness caused the accident in the first place . 
What has happened in the Gulf of Mexico is as a result of Hayward 's own agenda to go for the marginal , unconventional barrels of oil . 
`` Clearly it is incredibly insulting for him to be sailing in the Isle of Wight but the fact is that him being there has n't stopped the leak . '' 
A spokeswoman for BP said Hayward was spending some time with his teenage son , but was still `` very much in charge '' , despite earlier reports that he had been dropped from overall control of handling the crisis . 
She added : `` We would n't dream of commenting on what the chief executive does in his rare moments of private time . '' 
