Syria conflict : Aleppo districts ` under fresh assault ' Both sides claimed to be in control of the Salah al-Din district of Aleppo The Syrian city of Aleppo has come under fresh bombardment , activists say , as the government attempts to retake districts seized by rebel fighters . 
Several areas of the city were reported to have come under attack , including strafing from helicopter gunships . 
The rebels say they have completely withdrawn from the embattled Salah al-Din district `` in a tactical move '' . 
The fighting comes as Iran prepares to host its own international meeting on the Syrian crisis . 
Iran , Syria 's only regional ally , says it will be attended by countries with a `` realistic '' position on the crisis . 
But it is unclear exactly which countries will be attending the summit , held in Tehran . 
Western governments have expressed scepticism that Tehran can mediate , because of its close relationship with the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad . 
A new prime minister , Wael al-Halqi - the former health minister - has been appointed , state television has announced . 
He replaces Riad Hijab , whose defection to the opposition was announced on Monday and who was said to have crossed into Jordan on Wednesday . 
The Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- has confirmed it has retreated from the strategic Salah al-Din district , a densely packed area of narrow streets . 
The Free Syrian Army overran several districts of Aleppo three weeks ago `` We have staged a tactical withdrawal from Salah al-Din , '' rebel commander Hossam Abu Mohammed of the Dara al-Shahbaa Brigade in the northern city told the AFP news agency by phone . 
`` The district is completely empty of rebel fighters . 
Regime forces are now advancing into Salah al-Din . '' 
State media had earlier said the army was now in full control of the district , reporting that hundreds of `` terrorist mercenaries '' had been arrested or killed . 
On Wednesday , Syria 's state military launched a large operation to retake Aleppo from the rebel fighters , who overran some districts three weeks ago . 
Aleppo is Syria 's largest city , and Salah al-Din is considered a vital supply route for government troops coming from the south . 
There were reports of further clashes overnight in the districts of Hanano , Saif al-Dawla , Shaar and Shakur , said the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights , quoted by AFP . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees network of activists also reported shelling and gunfire in several districts . 
The Syrian Observatory said at least 26 people were killed in Aleppo on Wednesday - it said they were among 130 people killed across the country . 
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has said the foreign ministers ' summit in Tehran will be a gathering of countries with `` a correct and realistic position '' on the Syrian conflict . 
He said it would be an opportunity `` to replace military clashes with political , indigenous approaches to settle the disputes '' . 
Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi was quoted by state media as saying `` 12 to 13 countries from Asia , Africa and Latin America '' would be taking part , but did not name them . 
Kuwait 's foreign ministry told al-Seyassah newspaper it would not be sending a representative . 
Lebanon has also said it will not attend while Russia is sending its ambassador and not Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir in Beirut says this is a meeting of people who are already close to Tehran and to the Syrian regime . 
There is deep scepticism in the West about Iran assuming a peacemaker role , given its recent strong commitments to the survival of the Assad government , our correspondent adds . 
Earlier this week , Iran 's security chief Saeed Jalili visited President Assad in Damascus , to pledge Tehran 's support . 
Mr Jalili said Syria was one part of a vital regional alliance which he described as the `` axis of resistance '' , which Tehran would not allow to be broken . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
