Michel Samaha 's arrest is seen as highly unusual , given Lebanon 's current government which is sympathetic to Syria 's President Assad The detention of a well-known Lebanese political figure , Michel Samaha , has underlined the explosive potential of the Syrian crisis and how it stretches into the heart of Lebanese politics . 
Mr Samaha , a former information minister and member of parliament , was escorted from his home in the hills near Beirut by security forces early on Thursday morning . 
He is known for his strong ties with the Syrian regime and with President Bashar al-Assad personally . 
He is reported to have been detained by personnel from the Information -LRB- intelligence -RRB- Branch of General Security on instructions from the acting public prosecutor . 
That security branch has the reputation of being loyal to the staunchly anti-Syrian `` March 14th '' faction , headed by Saad al-Hariri , former prime minister and son of the assassinated Sunni leader Rafiq al-Hariri , also a former prime minister . 
That such a detention should take place under the current Lebanese government was seen as highly unusual . 
The government excludes the March 14th coalition , is backed by Hezbollah , and includes Syria 's allies in Lebanon . 
Reaction to Mr Samaha 's detention has been muted Current Prime Minister Najib Miqati was quoted as saying that the detention was security-related but had nothing to do either with the locally-controversial international tribunal on the Hariri assassination , or the possibility of his being an Israeli agent . 
It is believed that Mr Samaha is being questioned in connection with efforts to destabilise the country through bomb explosions and assassination attempts . 
The anti-Syrian Christian leader Samir Geagea , whose now-dissolved Lebanese Forces used to be one of the main fighting factions in civil war days , was the target of an apparent would-be assassination in April which failed . 
Several other anti-Syrian figures have said they have information that they are under threat of assassination on Syria 's behalf . 
Michel Samaha used to belong to the largely Maronite Christian Phalangist Party , of which Mr Geagea 's Lebanese Forces were an offshoot . 
But both the Phalangist Party and the Lebanese Forces are now firmly in the anti-Syrian camp , while Mr Samaha has retained his friendship and ties with the Syrian regime . 
That means he has no immediate personal political power base , which is one reason why reaction to his detention has been relatively muted . 
The implication of the reaction that there has been , is that there must be some kind of evidence that merits investigation . 
Prime Minister Miqati , a Sunni regarded as generally sympathetic to Syria without being in thrall to it , was quoted as saying that he knew beforehand about the impending detention , and that the outcome of the investigation should be awaited . 
The reaction of Hezbollah itself , a close ally of Damascus , was also low-key . 
Given Mr Samaha 's prominent profile , some observers believed it likely that the President , Michel Suleiman , who is also a Maronite Christian and is seen as a fairly neutral figure , would also have known about the impending move . 
But there was considerable shock about the manner in which his detention was conducted , with security forces raiding his house at 07:30 local time -LRB- 04:30 GMT -RRB- and dragging him from his bed . 
He was taken away swiftly , but agents then spent several hours combing through his house . 
His family , and pro-Syrian political allies , have charged that the step is blatantly political . 
Much will clearly depend on what results the investigation by the public prosecutor 's office produces . 
Despite the fault-line running through Lebanese politics from across the Syrian border , and the obvious potential for serious trouble , the situation has so far remained relatively contained . 
Above all , Hezbollah , by far the most powerful faction in the country , has shown no sign of spoiling for a fight in the domestic arena , as it watches its allies in the Syrian regime struggling for survival . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
