World News for Schools :12 January Hi there , I 'm Leah from the BBC World News for Schools . 
It 's Wednesday January the 12th . 
One year on from the Haiti earthquake -- but a million people are still living in tents . 
And Michael Jackson 's doctor is officially accused over his death . 
But first -- there 's no let up in Australia as flood waters pour into one of its biggest cities , Brisbane . 
People are fleeing to evacuation centres and tens of thousands of houses are expected to be under water when flood levels peak this evening . 
BBC reporter Nick Bryant is there : CLIP : `` The situation is going to get worse . 
People are trying to sandbag their homes in the hope that they can try and block the waters . 
But that 's a pretty forlorn hope . 
I 've just been speaking to the local mayor here , he says that twenty thousand homes are either going to be totally or partially flooded . '' 
There 's also been severe flooding in Sri Lanka . 
Weeks of heavy rain have led to two-hundred thousand people losing their homes -- and the rain shows no sign of stopping . 
Transporting water in Port-au-Prince , the capital of Haiti Next - it 's a year since the devastating earthquake in Haiti which killed around two hundred and fifty thousand people . 
Twelve months on a million people are still homeless and living in makeshift camps . 
So far hardly any of the rubble from collapsed buildings has been cleared and poor hygiene in camps has led to diseases like cholera spreading , killing many more . 
Haiti still faces many problems - with much of the money promised by foreign countries not yet received on the ground . 
Our World News for Schools reporter spoke to Hannah Reichardt who works for the charity Save the Children and is in the capital city Port au Prince : CLIP : `` Save the Children is very concerned that all the money promised has n't yet made it to the people who need it on the ground in Haiti . 
What we know is that something like half to sixty per cent of the money promised by the governments has n't yet made it here . '' 
Before the earthquake hit , many people lived in very poor conditions - with only half of children going to school . 
Hannah says the kids are a priority : CLIP : `` Children in Haiti have undergone more suffering in the last year than most children in other countries will ever know in their lifetime . 
They 've lost close friends and family , they 've seen children like them suffer from cholera and very threatening illnesses . 
They 've had to undergo so much it will have a profound impact on their lives for ever . 
But we also know that children if they 're given the right support can be highly resilient and they can bounce back . 
But they need to be able to return to a normal childhood as quickly as possible . '' 
Next -- there 's to be a trial over the death of pop singer Michael Jackson eighteen months ago . 
A judge in Los Angeles has ordered his personal doctor to face charges of being accidentally involved in his death -- and not giving the singer proper care . 
Dr Conrad Murray says -- he 's not guilty . 
Finally an Italian man has astonished doctors by sneezing a bullet out through his nose after being shot in the head . 
Darco Sangermano was in hospital waiting for treatment when the bullet popped out of his right nostril . 
He 's expected to make a full recovery . 
And for today 's question : how fast does the average sneeze travel ? 
Yesterday we asked what two awards were joined to make the new FIFA world player award ? 
And the answer is : French Football magazine 's and the old FIFA player of the year awards . 
OK , that 's all from the World News for Schools team . 
We 're back tomorrow ! 
