Obama Blueprint Deepens Federal Role in Markets President Obama is expected to unveil the plan to overhaul the financial regulatory system today . 
-LRB- By Brendan Smialowski -- Bloomberg News -RRB- The Obama administration last night detailed a series of proposals to involve the government more deeply in private markets , from helping to steer borrowers into affordable mortgage loans to imposing new limits on the largest financial companies , in a sweeping effort to curb the kinds of reckless risk-taking that sparked the economic crisis . 
The plan seeks to overhaul the nation 's outdated system of financial regulations . 
Senior officials debated using a bulldozer to clear the way for fundamental reforms but decided instead to build within the shell of the existing system , offering what amounts to an architect 's blueprint for modernizing a creaky old building . 
The White House makes its case for this approach in an 85-page white paper that describes the roots of the crisis . 
Gaps in regulation allowed companies to make loans many borrowers could not afford . 
Funding came from new kinds of investments that were poorly understood by regulators . 
Big firms paid employees massive bonuses , while setting aside little money to absorb potential losses . 
`` While this crisis had many causes , it is clear now that the government could have done more to prevent many of these problems from growing out of control and threatening the stability of our financial system , '' the white paper says . 
The plan is built around five key points , according to a briefing last night by senior administration officials and a copy of the white paper obtained by The Washington Post . 
The proposals would greatly increase the power of the Federal Reserve , creating stronger and more consistent oversight of the largest financial firms . 
It also asks Congress to authorize the government for the first time to dismantle large firms that fall into trouble , avoiding a chaotic collapse that could disrupt the economy . 
Federal oversight would be extended to dark corners of the financial markets , imposing new rules on trading in complex derivatives and securities built from mortgage loans . 
The government would create a new agency to protect consumers of mortgages , credit cards and other financial products . 
And the administration would increase its coordination with other nations to prevent businesses from migrating to less regulated venues . 
President Obama is scheduled to announce the full plan today , ending months of political calibration and internal discussion and dropping the details into an already-heated debate on Capitol Hill . 
Congress is scheduled to hold its first hearings on the proposals tomorrow , and interest groups already are ramping up their campaigns . 
Congressional leaders say they hope to pass some version of the plan by year 's end . 
`` Speed is important , '' Obama said yesterday in an interview aired by CNBC . 
`` We want to do it right . 
We want to do it carefully . 
But we do n't want to tilt at windmills . 
We want to make sure that we 're getting the best possible regulatory framework in place so that we 're not repeating the mistakes of the past . '' 
