With BlackRock 's Reach Set to Expand , CEO Defends Money Manager 's Stability Laurence Fink , CEO of BlackRock , left , and Robert Diamond , president of Barclays , held a joint interview in New York . 
BlackRock will be the world 's largest money manager after its planned acquisition of Barclays 's investment arm . 
-LRB- By Andrew Harrer -- Bloomberg News -RRB- NEW YORK , June 16 -- The acquisition of Barclays Global Investors by BlackRock , which has emerged from the financial crisis as a powerhouse and adviser to the U.S. government , creates a giant overseeing $ 2.7 trillion in assets , making it by far the largest money manager in the world . 
To grasp the size of that purchasing power , consider : The Federal Reserve , in its unprecedented effort to rehabilitate the economy , has expanded its balance sheet by $ 1.2 trillion . 
The federal government 's 2010 budget is $ 3.6 trillion . 
The gross domestic product for the United States , the world 's largest economy , was $ 11.7 trillion last year . 
At a time when `` too-big-to-fail '' institutions such as AIG and Citigroup have been injected with billions in taxpayer funds , some analysts are raising questions about the scale of the BlackRock enterprise and its ties to the federal government . 
President Obama is set to propose Wednesday a plan to tighten financial regulation , but largely absent from the debate about regulatory reform has been the role of asset managers , which oversee about $ 21 trillion of assets globally for institutional investors such as pension funds , hedge funds and university endowments . 
In an interview Tuesday , BlackRock 's chairman and chief executive Larry Fink , who started the firm 21 years ago in a modest New York office , said `` $ 2.7 trillion may sound like a lot of money , but the reality is , most of the added money from BGI is in stock and bond index funds . '' 
He disputed the notion that BlackRock could pose a risk to the financial system and the larger economy . 
For one , he said , `` 100 percent '' of BlackRock 's business is managing assets for clients as a fiduciary responsibility , not trading for its bottom line . 
BlackRock also uses minimal leverage -- $ 20 billion , or less than 1 percent , of its $ 2.7 trillion in assets is bought with money lent to clients , Fink said . 
The use of leverage , or debt , in the pursuit of higher profits amplified losses for financial institutions , including firms that no longer exist such as Bear Stearns . 
`` There 's more systemic risk in a hedge fund that has $ 10 billion in assets that 's leveraged 40 to 1 than a BlackRock , '' he said , adding that every entity with more than $ 1 billion in assets should be regulated regardless of whether it is public or private . 
`` For every dollar of equity BlackRock has , we have a dollar of assets . 
That is why it 's not a too-big-to-fail issue , '' Fink said . 
`` What has happened over the past five years , in terms of the tremendous leveraging of certain financial institutions , does not apply to BlackRock . 
You ca n't compare the two . '' 
Responding to concerns that have been raised by some members of Congress about BlackRock 's role in helping the federal government evaluate and manage the rescues of troubled financial institutions , Fink said there was a fire wall between investment management and the part of his firm that performs risk analysis , called BlackRock Solutions . 
`` It so happened that because of the financial crisis , many institutions , public and private , are utilizing that service , '' Fink said . 
That business now analyzes risk for $ 7 trillion of assets and clients include sovereign wealth funds and other governments , he said . 
Indeed , BlackRock and other asset managers are `` not as risky '' as a dealer who writes billions of dollars worth of credit-default swaps and whose collapse could spark a chain reaction of failures , said John Coffee , a law professor at Columbia University . 
But , he added , `` If you were giving common advice to $ 3 trillion worth of funds , you are going to be having an impact that could increase systemic risk . 
There can be systemic risk if one person or entity is able to make a bet-the-farm-investment decision based on poor investment analysis for an extraordinary large amount of capital . '' 
