The new flat-rate State Pension - how will you be affected ? 
Paul Lewis takes your calls . 
Claudia Hammond and guests discuss ways of dealing with self harm . 
The program visits a clinic in Sheffield which has a zero-tolerance approach to self harm . 
The UK has the highest self-harm rates in Europe , and the numbers are rising . 
The program visits a Sheffield clinic which has significantly reduced incidents of adolescents cutting and harming themselves with a new ` zero tolerance ' rule . 
However , this is controversial because many believe that accepting and working with self-harming behavior is the best long-term approach . 
Dr Tony Livesey , the psychiatrist behind the Sheffield experiment , tells Claudia Hammond why he thinks the new policy has worked so well for the young people in his care and Marjorie Wallace from SANE argues that prohibition risks denying individuals a coping strategy and would force self-harmers to be even more secretive in their behavior . 
The numbers of people in the UK that have confirmed swine flu is heading towards the 3,000 mark . 
Governments the world over have been putting their H1N1 virus pandemic plans in place , and communicating with the public is a crucial part of these preparations . 
They have to get a serious message across without causing a panic , and it is here that psychology plays a part . 
Dr Peter Sandman is a consultant in emergency risk communication . 
He has advised on the SARS epidemic as well as bird flu and he says it is the authorities who can get it wrong . 
PROFESSOR GAIL HORNSTEIN - Agnes s Jacket Unlike most scholars who study mental illness , Gail Hornstein , Professor of Psychology at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley , Massachusetts , has always been as interested in patients ' experiences as in doctors ' theories . 
She has compiled a bibliography of first-person narratives of madness which now lists more than 700 titles , and her current research focuses on the contributions that patients past and present have made to our understanding of psychology . 
Her new book , Agnes 's Jacket : A Psychologist 's Search for the Meanings of Madness , uses the century-old jacket of a German asylum patient , seamstress Agnes Richter , who painstakingly stitched autobiographical text into her institutional jacket , as a starting point for her journey into the personal stories of those who experience mental distress . 
`` Photograph by Gail Hornstein ; Image courtesy of Sammlung Prinzhorn , Heidelberg '' Demystifying the health issues of the day that confuse us . 
Inside Health , with Dr Mark Porter , will ... 
