MIAMI -- Using a law originally enacted to combat the Mafia , attorneys are filing lawsuits accusing BP PLC and Transocean Ltd. of committing a longterm series of crimes by concealing flaws in deepwater drilling plans and lacking safeguards to contain a catastrophic Gulf of Mexico spill . 
BP has been named in at least three lawsuits brought under the federal law known as RICO , which stands for Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations . 
Transocean , which leased the ill-fated Deepwater Horizon drilling rig to BP , has been named in two lawsuits filed in Louisiana and Florida . 
The lawsuits accuse both companies of committing wire and mail fraud over a number of years by filing false documents with the U.S. government , and by misleading investors through other documents and falsehoods . 
They also claim both companies are guilty of bribery because they are part of an overall oil and gas industry effort to `` infiltrate '' federal regulators by providing favors such as alcohol and drugs , sex , golf and ski trips , concert and sports tickets , and more . 
`` The pattern of racketeering activity engaged in by defendants involves a scheme to fraudulently create a pretense of safety to the public while , at every turn , seeking to avoid the costs associated with actually conducting their operations in a safe manner , '' claims a lawsuit filed by Louisiana attorney Daniel Becnel and others on behalf of a restaurant seeking to represent a huge class of businesses suffering economic loss from the oil spill . 
RICO , passed by Congress in 1970 , contains both a civil and criminal component , but both of them rely on proof of longterm violations of at least two specific crimes from a lengthy list . 
The attraction of the civil portion , which are being used in the current lawsuits , is that any damages would be tripled . 
In the past , civil RICO cases have often been followed by criminal prosecutions . 
The Justice Department has not ruled out using RICO in its ongoing criminal investigation of the Deepwater Horizon explosion , which killed 11 rig workers and triggered a massive oil spill that has affected five Gulf Coast states . 
Criminal convictions can lead to prison sentences of 20 years on each racketeering count , plus hefty fines and forfeiture of ill-gotten gains . 
`` We are investigating any possible violations of the law , '' said Justice Department spokeswoman Hannah August . 
BP declined comment on the RICO allegations . 
Transocean did not respond to a request for comment . 
Florida attorney Peter Prieto , a former federal prosecutor , said it might be a stretch for the Justice Department to bring a criminal RICO case when there might be easier-to-prove offenses . 
`` If it 's a simpler crime , that 's what they are going to do . 
Prosecutors are going to use RICO when it is truly applicable or when it involves organized crime , '' said Prieto , who is not involved in the oil spill cases . 
`` It is kind of a hammer , but if the facts fit RICO , you can use RICO . '' 
Even as use of RICO in criminal cases has waned somewhat , it 's become increasingly popular on the civil side . 
This year alone , RICO lawsuits have been filed against the Roman Catholic Church over priest abuses ; Toyota over its sudden acceleration problems ; a group of title insurers over alleged overcharges ; and online cigarette vendors over lost tax revenue . 
In March , pharmaceutical giant Pfizer was ordered by a Boston jury to pay $ 142 million in damages for wrongly marketing the epilepsy drug Neurontin as treatment for migraines and bipolar disorder . 
The difficulty in the BP and Transocean cases , some experts say , is finding evidence tying the companies ' actions to damages caused by the spill . 
On the criminal side , a prosecutor would have to have ironclad proof of criminal intent , not just negligence or stupidity . 
`` The problem is just connecting the dots , '' said Thomas Walker , an Idaho attorney who has tried about 20 civil RICO cases and maintains a blog on RICO . 
`` The fraudulent communications , if they were fraudulent , went from BP to the government . 
The damage was not caused by the letter , it was caused by the oil spill . '' 
The RICO lawsuits are among more than 200 filed against BP , Transocean and other companies seeking damages for economic losses , environmental damage and shareholder losses . 
A federal judicial panel will meet July 29 in Boise , Idaho , to consider whether to consolidate some or all of them for pretrial purposes . 
Potential damages from those lawsuits would come on top of the $ 20 billion BP has pledged to set aside to pay claims and other spill cleanup costs . 
Most of the criminal allegations in the RICO lawsuits are taken from testimony and documents produced by congressional investigations of the spill , documents filed with financial regulators and investors , and even investigative news articles by The Associated Press and other news outlets . 
For example , the Louisiana complaint charges that : -- According to an AP story , an independent firm hired by BP in 2009 found the company was violating its own policies by failing to have key engineering documents aboard the deepwater drilling rig Alantis . 
The study was never disclosed to regulators . 
-- BP filed documents showing it had a solid response plan for a catastrophic oil spill , when in fact it `` lacked any meaningful ability '' to resond . 
-- BP repeatedly failed to disclose to the U.S. Interior Department a range of safety concerns about the Deepwater Horizon , including use of a risky well cementing technique and problems with pockets of flammable natural gas . 
-- Transocean assured investors and regulators that it had an excellent safety record , when in fact it was responsible for an increasing number of accidents on deepwater drilling rigs . 
-- Both companies are part of an oil industry effort to prevent the Minerals Management Service -- now renamed the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management -- from imposing tough rules , in part through industry events where government officials were given cocaine , marijuana and alcohol , had sex with company executives and received gifts ranging from exotic travel to concert tickets . 
