Before the spill , the Obama administration lifted the moratorium on drilling in U.S. coastal waters as a way to address the country 's energy needs . 
But most Americans now want fewer offshore wells -LRB- 31 percent -RRB- or the amount kept at current levels -LRB- 41 percent -RRB- . 
Perhaps as a consequence of the spill , public support for oil and gas drilling in general is also significantly lower than it was a year ago . 
And as Americans have become increasingly skeptical about such exploration , some elected representatives are now questioning what the government is doing to ensure that offshore exploration can take place safely . 
On Wednesday during a Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee hearing , the panel 's chairman , Jeff Bingaman -LRB- D-N.M. -RRB- , said the gulf oil spill underscores a failure of both BP and the federal government . 
`` It 's clear that prior to the explosion at the Deepwater Horizon rig neither the companies involved nor the government adequately appreciated or prepared for the risks involved in a deep-water drilling operation of this type , '' Bingaman said . 
The new Post-ABC poll reveals a widespread perception that poor federal regulation was at fault in the gulf spill . 
About 63 percent point a finger at inadequate enforcement of regulations , and 55 percent see an overall weak regulatory structure . 
Even more , 73 percent , blame BP and its drilling partners for the accident . 
And the same number are calling the spill a major environmental disaster . 
In an interview Wednesday , House Natural Resources Committee Chairman Nick J. Rahall -LRB- D-W . 
Va. -RRB- said it sometimes `` takes a tragedy of these proportions '' to provide the political will to impose stricter federal rules on energy exploration . 
The broad concern about government inaction directly relates to public support for new drilling : Those who see a weak regulatory structure as a reason for the spill are about twice as likely to want to curb offshore drilling than are those who do n't see the need for stricter federal controls . 
About half of the poll respondents , 49 percent , now see the gulf spill as part of a broader problem with such drilling . 
Support for drilling in general has slipped from 64 percent last August to 52 percent now . 
The Post-ABC poll was conducted June 3 to 6 , among a random national sample of 1,004 adults . 
The results from the full poll have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points . '' 
