BEIRUT | Wed Jun 1 , 2011 1:21 pm EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Months of political paralysis and a crisis in neighboring Syria have harmed Lebanon 's security , a senior U.N. official said on Wednesday , days after a bomb attack wounded six U.N. peacekeepers . 
Special Coordinator for Lebanon Michael Williams said the attack , which followed the kidnapping of seven Estonians and a deadly incident last month on the Israeli border , was part of an `` eroding and deteriorating '' security situation . 
Lebanon has been without a proper functioning government since January when the Syrian - and Iranian-backed Hezbollah and its political allies brought down the government of Prime Minister Saad al-Hariri , who has Western and Saudi support . 
Efforts to form a government have made little progress and the 10-week unrest in Syria has escalated tensions . 
Damascus ended a prolonged military presence in 2005 , but remains a powerful player in a country still defined by the political and religious faultlines which fueled its 1975-1990 civil war . 
`` We see signs of the security situation deteriorating in general , and disturbingly that the institutions of the state are not responding in the way that they should , '' Williams told Reuters at his U.N. office in the hills above Beirut . 
He said the main concern was a political vacuum caused by the lack of government . 
Although Lebanese are accustomed to protracted wrangling over new cabinets , the current impasse was unusually fraught and likely to drag on for months , he said . 
`` The risk is greater now . 
One , because of the absence of a government . 
Two , because of the crisis in Syria . 
And three , because there is some fragility now along the Blue Line -LRB- U.N.-mapped frontier with Israel -RRB- . '' 
The Israeli army fired on a demonstration at the Lebanese border village of Maroun al-Ras two weeks ago , killing 11 Palestinians marking the `` catastrophe '' 63 years ago of the founding of Israel , security sources said . 
Similar protests may take place on Sunday 's anniversary of the 1967 war when Israel seized the Golan Heights and West Bank . 
Seven Estonians are still missing after being seized in Lebanon 's Bekaa Valley after crossing the border from Syria in March , in a kidnapping which Williams and EU envoy Angelina Eichorst described as a dark reminder of Lebanon 's civil war . 
In another sign of fraying authority , rival security forces came close to confrontation last week in a standoff at a state-owned telecoms firm when caretaker Telecommunications Minister Charbel Nahhas was denied access to the building . 
`` It is another indication of the deterioration in the security situation and the inability of state institutions to manage , '' Williams said . 
The political standoff and security fears also threaten Lebanon 's economy , with growth projections trimmed , tourism revenues expected to fall , and no progress on Lebanon 's plans to explore for oil and gas in the Mediterranean . 
`` I frankly find it distressing and troubling that the country is losing opportunities now . 
It 's obvious that the economic situation is deteriorating , '' Williams said . 
Friday 's bombing of the Italian peacekeepers , one of whom remains `` in a very grave condition , '' was the first such attack in three years on UNIFIL . 
`` We do n't see the attack in isolation , '' Williams said . 
`` Although it is the first on UNIFIL in a very long time we see the attack in the present security context . '' 
Expressing concern and surprise at Saturday 's announcement that Italy -- which has the largest UNIFIL troop contingent -- will cut its peacekeeping force to 1,100 from 1,780 , Williams said he would travel to Rome next week for talks . 
UNIFIL was expanded to about 12,000 troops and naval personnel under a U.N. Security Council resolution which halted the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah war in south Lebanon . 
It operates alongside 15,000 Lebanese army troops who are deployed to keep the peace and prevent weapons transfers in an area which is a stronghold of Hezbollah guerrillas . 
Despite a deadly border clash last August , Williams said the cessation of hostilities since 2006 had held `` remarkably well . '' 
`` What 's been achieved is stability on the Blue Line and in southern Lebanon for the first time in decades . 
In a way that is why I am most worried now . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
