BP wrestles with oil spill hitch in Gulf of Mexico A relief well being drilled to stop the spill will not be finished for weeks Engineers from the British oil firm BP are scrambling to find a way to contain oil leaking from a blown-out well on the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico . 
A containment device lowered over the well to funnel oil to the surface had to be moved on Saturday after ice-like crystals began accumulating inside it . 
Some 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons -RRB- of oil a day has been flowing into the sea since an explosion on a rig last month . 
Balls of tar have meanwhile begun washing up on an island off Alabama . 
Bundles of absorbent material have been laid along the shore of Dauphin Island in an attempt to protect the resort area . 
Samples of the tar will be analyzed to ascertain whether they come from the massive oil spill off the coast of neighbouring Louisiana . 
A massive effort to contain what threatens to become an environmental catastrophe has been under way since 20 April , when an explosion killed 11 workers and led to the eventual sinking of the Deepwater Horizon rig , 50 miles -LRB- 80km -RRB- off Louisiana . 
I would n't say it 's failed yet . 
What I would say is what we attempted to do last night did n't work A sheen of oil began washing ashore on the Chandeleur Islands chain last week , and crews have been laying inflatable booms , spraying chemical dispersants and setting fire to the slick to try to protect local wildlife . 
Although the Deepwater Horizon was operated by Transocean , it was leased by BP , which is responsible for cleaning the 3.5 million gallons that have so far leaked out of the well below , creating a slick covering about 2,000 sq miles -LRB- 5,200 sq km -RRB- . 
The 98-tonne concrete-and-steel funnel lowered 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- to the seabed had been BP 's best hope to contain the main leak while it attempted to stop it altogether by drilling relief wells nearby . 
But a build-up of gas hydrates - crystalline water-based solids resembling ice - inside the device blocked the exit at the top , and it had to be put aside until engineers could decide what to do . 
HOW THE OIL FUNNEL WORKS The funnel is a 40ft tall iron box , weighing 98 tonnes It will be placed over the leak , 5,000 ft down on the seabed BP hopes it will collect 85 % of the leaking oil and pipe it to the surface `` What we 're working on now is we 're gathering some data to help us with two things . 
One is another way to do containment , and the second is other ways to actually stop the flow , '' BP Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles told the Reuters news agency on Sunday . 
`` On the containment side , we 're working two options . 
One is a smaller dome - we call it the ` top hat ' , and the second is to try to find a way to tap into the riser , the piece of pipe the oil is flowing through , and take it directly from that pipe up to the ship on the surface . '' 
BP 's Doug Suttles explains hitch The smaller containment dome would theoretically be less likely to get blocked by hydrates because it would contain less water . 
It could be ready to deploy on Tuesday or Wednesday . 
Tapping into the riser would be difficult , experts say . 
Another solution might be to plug up the blow-out preventer at the well-head , which failed to cut the flow after the explosion on the rig last month , with a `` junk shot '' of rubber and another material , Mr Suttles said . 
Meanwhile , a relief well is being drilled - considered a more permanent solution to the leak - but that is weeks from completion . 
