For all the legislative commotion surrounding the economic crisis , we are still living in the equivalent of `` the phony war '' of 1939 and 1940 . 
War has been declared on the Great Recession , but it 's basically politics as usual . 
The bickering and mismanagement that helped create the crisis are continuing , even though we elected a president who promised a new start . 
History tells us that phony war does n't last forever and that when it ends , all hell breaks loose . 
World War II officially began with Germany 's September 1939 attack on Poland , but for months it was just skirmishing on the sidelines . 
That hiatus ended on May 10 , 1940 , when Hitler invaded Belgium and its neighbors . 
Neville Chamberlain was out as British prime minister , and Winston Churchill arrived as the avenging angel . 
We 're still in the Neville Chamberlain phase when it comes to the economic crisis . 
The government is talking about sacrifice and solutions , but it has n't yet made the tough decisions that will put the economy back together . 
Economist David Smick had it right in The Post this week when he said the administration had a three-pronged strategy : delay , delay and delay . 
The administration announces a rescue package but does n't deliver details ; it promises budget discipline but saves the hard decisions for later . 
One reason this season feels so political is that Obama has stacked his administration with politicians and former government officials . 
You might think that with the greatest financial crisis of his lifetime , the president would want a few business leaders with experience managing large organizations in crisis . 
Here 's the un-businesslike Obama Cabinet : At Treasury , a former government official ; at State , a former senator ; at Commerce , a former governor ; at Defense , a former government official and university president ; at Energy , a former professor ; at Homeland Security , a former governor ; at Health and Human Services , a former governor ; at the White House as chief of staff , a former congressman ; at the White House as economic czar , a former university president and government official . 
All fine people , no doubt . 
But as thin on business experience as a Hyde Park book club . 
Maybe Obama sees business executives as too tainted by the financial crisis to be useful , or confirmable . 
The closest he comes is Paul Volcker 's Economic Recovery Advisory Board -- which includes Jeffrey Immelt , chief executive of GE ; Jim Owens , chief executive of Caterpillar ; and venture capitalist John Doerr . 
The culture of immobilism starts on Capitol Hill . 
These people are still working a four-day week , taking Fridays off so they can run home and tell constituents how diligent they are . 
They may talk about a crisis , but they do n't act like it 's real . 
Republicans and Democrats are sticking to party-line votes on many key issues . 
The Democrats were egregious in packing the stimulus bill with pet projects that wo n't stimulate much except campaign contributions and in sticking with earmarks -- a symbolic outrage that Obama promised during the campaign he would eliminate . 
But the Republicans have been even worse in their strategy of opposing recovery plans , which has given a legislative face to Rush Limbaugh 's `` I hope he fails . '' 
The legislative pettifoggery was captured by a New York Times headline this week : `` Obama 's Budget Faces Challenge by Party Barons ; Panel Chairmen Oppose a Tax Plan but Want to Reduce Debt . '' 
This nonsense has to stop , folks . 
The party 's over . 
What will happen if Obama 's efforts fail ? 
That 's the question that really worries me when I think about history . 
During the 1930s , European politicians failed to solve the economic crisis through normal democratic means . 
So the public turned elsewhere . 
People became so angry with bankers and business tycoons , and with the bickering parliamentarians , that they turned to authoritarian leaders who promised national action -- in the form of fascism . 
That nightmare scenario may seem far off today . 
But there 's an ugly mood developing , as people start looking for villains to blame for the economic mess . 
Obama administration officials are understandably nervous about taking a leap in the dark -- imposing emergency financial measures that could mean bankruptcy and nationalization for big automakers and giant banks . 
I hope they will find more creative , market-oriented approaches that break up the giants rather than patch them together under government ownership . 
But the phony war has to end . 
The public is demanding action , and if this set of politicians does n't provide it , they may turn to a scarier bunch . 
The writer is co-host of PostGlobal , an online discussion of international issues . 
His e-mail address is davidignatius@washpost.com . 
