President Obama appears serenely confident as he goes about fixing the worst global financial crisis in more than half a century while simultaneously revamping the national health-care system , changing the way Americans use and produce energy , giving tax breaks to 95 percent of all households , and seeking `` a cure for cancer in our time . '' 
Obama is not the first American leader to lay out a vision that seems improbably ambitious . 
George W. Bush did the same thing in seeking to establish a democratic foothold in the heart of the Middle East by launching a war against Iraq -- even as the United States was tied down fighting a war in Afghanistan with a military force that many experts warned was too small . 
It 's easy to be skeptical about overconfidence , especially in hindsight , but what makes it interesting is that history is full of examples of leaders who accomplished improbable things largely because they thought they could -- when everyone said they could n't . 
Stanford University psychologist Deborah Gruenfeld once got to thinking about power during an airplane trip on which she was stuck between two other passengers in economy class . 
The man on one side , a high-powered type sporting a blue suit , a giant gold watch and a ton of swagger , reached up and turned on his air vent so it blasted cold air directly on her . 
She sat in her cramped middle seat , getting colder and colder , her contact lenses getting dryer and dryer , until she realized she could just reach up and turn the vent off . 
Gruenfeld later asked herself why she had not acted sooner -- why she felt deprived of control . 
In a nice demonstration of making a lemon into lemonade , Gruenfeld turned her experience into an experiment : She had one group of volunteers recall a time in their lives when they felt powerful and another group recall a time when they felt powerless . 
All of them were then seated in a room uncomfortably close to a fan blasting air at them . 
Those who had been reminded of feeling powerful tended to switch off the fan or divert the blast . 
The poor volunteers who had recalled feeling powerless mostly sat and shivered . 
Gruenfeld and others have shown in this and other experiments that the central characteristic of power is not that it triggers optimism , self-esteem and action -- all of which are true -- but that it produces a sense of control . 
This may be especially true of those who , like Obama , rise quickly from relative obscurity to great prominence . 
Power can prompt people to venture into domains where they actually possess very little control . 
Those who feel powerless , by contrast , mentally constrain themselves and believe they have less control than they actually do . 
Adam Galinsky , a psychologist at Northwestern University who has conducted a number of experiments with Gruenfeld , said human accomplishment appears to be at least as much about `` cans '' and `` cannots '' as it is about `` haves '' and `` have-nots . '' 
If power tends to corrupt and sometimes leads to arrogance , it also allows people to conceive of possibilities that the powerless can not imagine . 
In an experiment reported in Psychological Science and led by Nathanael Fast , a graduate student at Stanford , the researchers showed that power produces such strong feelings of control that people can come to believe they can control things that are literally uncontrollable : Volunteers made to feel powerful felt they had more control over rolling dice than those who felt powerless . 
This might explain something about the CEOs who helped trigger the ongoing financial meltdown by taking disastrously aggressive risks . 
Financial titans may believe they can get away with extraordinary risks for no better reason than that they happen to be financial titans . 
Between 1998 and 2001 , shareholders of companies that acquired other companies lost $ 240 billion of value after the merger announcements , according to research by Sara B. Moeller at the University of Pittsburgh and others . 
And an unusual 15-year analysis conducted by Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate at the University of California found that personal overconfidence among CEOs appeared to be a potent predictor of excessively risky takeovers . 
Overconfidence among business leaders appears to have much in common with the fairy-tale stories of princesses who transform toads into handsome princes by bestowing their kisses . 
In one of his legendary letters to shareholders , Warren Buffett quipped that `` many managerial princesses remain serenely confident about the future potency of their kisses -- even after their corporate backyards are knee-deep in unresponsive toads . '' 
A final piece of the power puzzle : People who suddenly gain power after a long spell of powerlessness seem especially prone to outlandish ambition , according to a study led by Niro Sivanathan at the London Business School and published last year in Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes . 
Does all this spell disaster for Obama and Democrats in Congress , who have both rocketed from the wilderness to near-total power ? 
The paradox that the research reveals about power is that overconfidence in one 's ability to control things explains both the greatest triumphs and the worst failures of leadership . 
Hubris may just be the name we give to visionaries who fail . 
Vision may be the name we give to hubris that succeeds . 
Interested in how ideas in the social sciences can speak to policy , politics and the unusual creatures that populate Washington ? 
