BP Macondo oil well successfully capped Two offshore oil platform rigs in Port Fourchon , La. , shown under construction in June as cleanup continued on the oil spill . 
-LRB- Saul Loeb -RRB- Saturday , September 18 , 2010 ; 1:48 AM At last , the well is dead . 
BP 's Macondo oil well is physically incapable of leaking another drop , according to the head of the U.S. government 's response effort . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen said Friday that this discovery was made after a `` relief well '' finally broke through into the Macondo well more than 17,000 feet below the Gulf of Mexico floor . 
`` The well presents no further threat of discharge , '' Allen said . 
But just to be sure , BP plugged it a little bit more . 
About 4 p.m. Friday , authorities began the long-awaited - and now , rather anti-climactic - `` bottom kill , '' filling in that empty space with cement . 
The cement should be set by Saturday afternoon , Allen said , and a final pressure test will allow the declaration of death . 
After the American people spent the summer watching the fearsome oil well spill , Allen said this last step was as much for our benefit as it was for the gulf 's . 
He said the intent was `` psychologically , for people in the gulf to understand that there is a stake in the heart of this beast . '' 
BP 's well spent about three months repelling all attempts to kill it - eventually spilling 4.9 million barrels , or 205.8 million gallons , into the gulf . 
Then , it spent the next two months dying : The well was sealed off July 15 , and cement was forced down its central pipe in a so-called `` static kill '' in early August . 
Through it all , a rig in the gulf was slowly drilling down to provide the final nail in its coffin . 
The relief well 's progress was slowed by passing storms - which made the gulf too choppy - but also by the depth of its target . 
Drilling began on the gulf floor a mile down and continued for another 2.4 miles into the earth . 
Finally , on Thursday afternoon , the drill hit its target , a seven-inch shaft . 
It opened a hole into the space between the shaft 's wall and the outer layer of pipe . 
There was no camera recording it , but engineers could learn about the outer space around the Macondo well pipe by studying fluid that rose from the other well 's drill pipe . 
When no oil came up , they knew that the Macondo well was plugged at its source . 
That was a good thing for the gulf . 
But it could also be a good thing for BP 's legal case , because it could be a signal that the blowout was not caused by a problem with BP 's design for the well 's pipes . 
