By the CNN Wire Staff Gadhafi appears on Libyan TV NEW : The U.N. Security Council is scheduled to meet on Libya on Tuesday Witness says troops fired `` indiscriminately '' at protesters Gadhafi says he 's still in Tripoli Eastern Libya appears under opposition control Have you witnessed protests and unrest in Libya ? 
Share your photos and videos with CNN via iReport . 
-LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi made a brief television appearance early Tuesday to announce that he was still in charge , denying reports that he had fled the country in the face of a spreading revolt . 
Speaking to a state television reporter in front of his Tripoli home , Gadhafi said he wanted to show people `` that I am in Tripoli , not in Venezuela . 
Do n't believe those dogs in the media . '' 
His 40-second appearance came after his government unleashed warplanes and helicopter gunships Monday in an attempt to bottle up the revolt that captured Benghazi , the country 's second-largest city , over the weekend . 
Witnesses said the aircraft were attacking anti-government demonstrators around Tripoli , the capital . 
Libya 's government denied it was turning its air force against civilians . 
Gadhafi 's son , Saif Al-Islam Gadhafi , told the state news agency Al-Jamahirya the warplanes were targeting weapons depots in remote areas . 
But one witness , who agreed to be identified only as `` Adam , '' said helicopters landed troops `` armed to the teeth '' in Tripoli 's Green Square on Monday to scatter anti-government protesters with automatic weapons and grenades . 
`` They have been using aerial tactics , along with men on the ground , to disperse and shoot indiscriminately into crowds , '' he said . 
The force included both government troops and mercenaries working for Gadhafi , he said . 
But residents were responding by barricading themselves in their homes and setting up makeshift checkpoints to keep cars full of gunmen out of their neighborhoods . 
Travelers ' ` scary ' experience in Libya Libyan soldiers reportedly burned alive Libyan protests threaten oil prices Libyan Amb . 
to Libyans : Do n't compromise In eastern Libya , groups of men in armed civilian clothing were guarding the streets , and opposition leaders appeared to be in firm control , CNN correspondent Ben Wedeman reported . 
Wedeman is the first Western television correspondent to enter and report from Libya during the crisis . 
Meanwhile , Gadhafi 's regime faced defections from prominent officials who declared their solidarity with the Libyan people . 
Justice Minister Mustafa Abdul Jalil resigned , saying he was protesting the `` bloody situation '' and `` use of excessive force '' against unarmed protesters , according to the Libyan newspaper Quryna . 
And Libya 's deputy ambassador to the United Nations called the crackdown `` genocide , '' adding , `` The mass killing has reached a stage where no one can stay silent about it . '' 
`` Whenever people are getting to the streets , whenever they are demonstrating peacefully , the army and militias are shooting at them , '' the diplomat , Ibrahim Dabbashi , told CNN on Monday . 
But Gadhafi `` can not survive '' this uprising , Dabbashi said . 
`` The Libyan people are determined to get rid of him . 
It 's a matter of time . 
I do n't know how long it will last , but it will be soon , '' he said . 
The U.N. Security Council scheduled a Tuesday morning meeting on Libya at Dabbashi 's request , the first time the council has held consultations over any of the revolts that have swept the Arab world since January . 
Moammar Gadhafi : An iron grip on Libya 2009 : Gadhafi says he leads a revolution ... whenever they are demonstrating peacefully , the army and militias are shooting at them -- Ibrahim Dabbashi , Libya 's deputy ambassador to the U.N. CNN could not immediately confirm reports for most areas beyond Benghazi . 
The Libyan government maintains tight control on communications and has not responded to repeated requests for access to the country , though CNN has interviewed numerous witnesses by phone . 
Libyan state television reported that government security forces were demanding citizens ' cooperation . 
It showed a crowd in Green Square chanting pro-government slogans and holding a sign supporting the regime . 
But a woman in Tripoli reported that warplanes and helicopters were attacking parts of the capital , and armed men in cars were firing at anyone on the streets . 
The leader of an opposition movement told CNN that helicopter gunships were firing into crowds , and two Libyan pilots defected to Malta after being asked to bomb Libyan citizens , a Maltese government source said . 
The defecting pilots ' French-built Mirage F1 jets were armed with rockets and loaded machine guns when they landed in Malta , the Maltese source said . 
Video posted on YouTube showed what CNN was told were the charred remains of six Libyan troops in open body bags . 
Opposition sources in Libya say the dead were soldiers who refused to shoot at anti-government demonstrators . 
The minute-long video was captured on a mobile phone camera and posted on Monday , but it was not clear when it was taken . 
It depicts a crowd gathered around the bodies , which were burned beyond recognition , and the opposition sources said many more bodies were found in an adjacent military barracks . 
Citing hospital sources , Human Rights Watch said Monday that at least 233 people had been killed in the past week of upheaval . 
CNN has been in communication with medics and witnesses in Libya , whose accounts appear to corroborate the Human Rights Watch report , but Dabbashi said the toll could be as high as 800 . 
Libya is the latest Arab nation to fall into turmoil since January 's ouster of Tunisian strongman Zine El Abidine Ben Ali . 
Similar protests toppled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak on February 12 and have spread across the region from Morocco to Bahrain . 
Gadhafi has ruled Libya since a 1969 coup d'etat , but questions about his whereabouts swirled Monday after his son delivered a televised address on the crisis . 
In that speech , the younger Gadhafi acknowledged that protesters had seized heavy weapons from government troops in Benghazi and that the country faced a civil war that could smash it to pieces and release `` rivers of blood . '' 
`` We have a very dangerous decision to make , '' said Saif al-Islam Gadhafi , the country 's `` general coordinator '' and one of his father 's top lieutenants . 
`` We are all the same , we all have weapons , we are all Libyans , and this is our country , our homeland . '' 
U.N. General-Secretary Ban Ki-moon `` had an extensive discussion '' with the Libyan leader Monday , the United Nations said . 
Ban `` expressed deep concern at the escalating scale of violence and emphasized that it must stop immediately , '' a U.N. spokesman said . 
`` He reiterated his call for respect for basic freedoms and human rights , including peaceful assembly and information , '' the spokesman said , and Ban `` underlined the need to ensure the protection of the civilian population under any circumstances . '' 
Quryna , a traditionally pro-government organ that did not mention the protests when they began last week , reported that African mercenaries had opened fire on unarmed civilians in Tajouraa , about 40 kilometers -LRB- 25 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli . 
A Quryna reporter also said snipers had shot an unarmed woman in the same area . 
In Tripoli , a woman who asked not to be identified reported seeing violence in the streets . 
`` I 've seen myself red Hyundai cars with tinted windows that had armed people inside it shooting random people , '' she told CNN in a telephone interview . 
`` Three victims have fallen in the street where I live . '' 
During a meeting with EU ambassadors in Tripoli , Prime Minister Baghdadi Mahmudi blamed the upheaval on `` terrorists and destructive plans '' and stressed that Libya has the right to `` take any measures '' to protect its unity , stability , people and resources , Libyan state television reported . 
The Arab League will hold an urgent summit Tuesday to discuss Libya , Egypt 's official news agency MENA reported Monday , and Arab League Secretary-General Amre Moussa called for an end to the violence . 
He criticized the younger Gadhafi 's assertion during a speech early Monday that Tunisians and Egyptians were to blame for Libya 's revolt , saying demands for reform , development and change were the `` legitimate rights '' of the Arab people . 
In Washington , the United States condemned the violence and called for a halt to the `` unacceptable bloodshed '' in response to civil unrest , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said in a statement . 
`` The government of Libya has a responsibility to respect the universal rights of the people , including the right to free expression and assembly , '' Clinton 's statement said . 
CNN 's Richard Roth , Ben Brumfield , Amir Ahmed , Eve Bower and Salma Abdelaziz and journalist Natalino Fenech contributed to this report . 
