` Either you are with us , or you are with the terrorists , '' President George Bush told the world after September 11 2001 , and he has made it clear ever since that he means it . 
But in that black and white universe , where do you put Josh Rushing ? 
Rushing is a blue-eyed son of Texas , a marine for all his adult life whose clean-cut friendly charm made him the ideal public face for the US military during the Iraq invasion . 
But he has now joined the Arab television channel al-Jazeera as an `` on-screen personality '' , a move which , in the eyes of many Americans , is one step short of signing up with al-Qaida . 
The US defense secretary , Donald Rumsfeld , has accused the Qatar-based satellite channel of lying to the world and spouting terrorist propaganda . 
Its journalists have been boycotted by American officials and thrown out of Iraq . 
One of its reporters has recently been jailed for seven years by a Spanish court for collaborating with al-Qaida . 
In joining al-Jazeera 's forthcoming English-language service , Rushing points out that he is in good journalistic company . 
He will be surrounded by former BBC employees , including Sir David Frost . 
But they are Europeans and journalists , two species generally associated with perfidy in the minds of the American right . 
Rushing is an American and a marine . 
For many conservatives here , he has joined a pantheon of turncoats alongside Benedict Arnold -LRB- who switched to the British side halfway through the war of independence -RRB- and `` Tokyo Rose '' -LRB- who broadcast for the Japanese in the second world war -RRB- . 
The conservative blogs hum with bile . 
The comments on freerepublic.com include : `` He was crap to begin with - he stinks even worse now . 
He is no longer an American '' . 
Another writes : `` He is a leftist , terrorist sympathiser who infiltrated the US marines . 
Now he is home '' . 
A third adds : `` I sure hope he do n't have some kinda accident or sumtin -LRB- sic -RRB- ... '' There have been quite a few along the lines of that last remark , enough for the former marine captain to take a few security precautions at his new Washington home , and he admits to feeling the strain . 
`` It 's kind of hard for a guy who 's dedicated his entire adult life to the health and wellbeing of this country to be called a traitor by people who , I feel , have probably sacrificed a lot less than I have , '' he said . 
He was talking in an elegant and quiet corner of Washington 's Army and Navy Club , where he still enjoys privileges , despite his choice of employer . 
He dresses in the manner of many former officers on both sides of the Atlantic - a tweed jacket over a boldly striped shirt - and has the crispness in his talk and the direct gaze drilled into him at marine charm school . 
Those qualities , plus his degree in classic civilisations and ancient history , got him the job of presenting the Pentagon 's side of the Iraq war to the local media in Qatar 's capital , Doha . 
It made him an unwitting star . 
An Egyptian-American film-maker , Jehane Noujaim , was hanging around the media center with a video camera , and most of the officers , including the then Lieutenant Rushing , thought she was making a student film about media coverage of the war . 
But her documentary , Control Room , became one of last year 's surprise hits . 
The film is a largely sympathetic portrayal of al-Jazeera , but it also shines a bright light on the multi-million dollar publicity machine the Pentagon built in Doha . 
Among all the gung-ho on-message military information officers , Lt Rushing stuck out . 
He listened to what some of the Arab journalists were saying about the war and appeared to reconsider some of his assumptions . 
In one memorable scene , he declared himself sickened by al-Jazeera 's decision to screen pictures of dead Americans , but then realized he was not as outraged to see Iraqi bodies on the same network the following evening . 
`` It upset me on a profound level that I was n't bothered as much as the night before , '' he said in the film . 
`` It makes me hate war . '' 
The film caused an uproar , and abuse from military and militaristic types began to flood in . 
His favorite was : `` Six months in the desert does n't make you fucking Lawrence of Arabia . '' 
Rushing recalls : `` I saved that one , because I do n't claim to be Lawrence of Arabia - just a guy who says it may be worth us trying to understand their perspective . '' 
Displaying an apparently genuine innocence , he still can not understand why the defense department was annoyed by the film , and why he was subsequently forbidden to talk to the press . 
`` The Pentagon missed an opportunity with my case in that movie , '' he says . 
`` I would have liked to have come out and said that there are a lot of people in the military that would have reacted in the same way in that film , trying to understand the other side and wanting to do the right thing . '' 
He left the marines last August and spent some miserable months , unemployed and eating into his modest savings , before he accepted al-Jazeera 's offer . 
The danger Rushing now faces is that he may be accused of going from one one-sided media operation to another . 
After all , he is shown in Control Room criticising al-Jazeera 's bias , comparing it to Fox News `` at the other end of the spectrum '' . 
He admits that he is unaware whether al-Jazeera 's Arabic broadcasts have got any better . 
`` I do n't know where they 're at right now . 
I do n't get a chance to watch it , and if I could I do n't understand it , '' he says . 
`` I think there 's going to be a difficult time overcoming the brand in America . '' 
It may turn out to be impossible . 
The new English-language al-Jazeera International has yet to find a US cable outlet prepared to carry its broadcasts . 
