The war in Iraq has had at least one redeeming feature . 
Along with events in Afghanistan , it has revived serious debate into some of the most important and long-standing issues in history and politics . 
Type the four words `` Iraq '' , `` Afghanistan '' , `` America '' and `` empire '' into Google , for instance , and you get around 3.5 million hits . 
There are the usual mad bloggers and propaganda rants but there is also a wealth of discussion on offer that expands every day . 
Is the US an empire ? 
If so , what sort of empire ? 
Is imperialism good or bad , or sometimes both ? 
And , of course : why has it proved so hard for America , the most formidable military and economic power the world has seen , to effect its will ? 
The passion behind this on-screen questioning is evident . 
So , very often , is a limited understanding of what imperial ventures have usually involved . 
In part , this is understandable . 
Before 1939 most of the world was still ruled by empires of some kind , as had been the case for much of recorded history . 
Since the second world war and decolonisation , however , most people have drawn their impressions of empire as a mode of rule less from direct experience than from one of two powerful mythologies . 
Some still veer towards the old , conservative mythology of maps drenched in pink and brave pith-helmeted sahibs doing selfless , transforming work for `` native '' peoples . 
But this view has increasingly retreated before a rival , post-colonial mythology . 
According to this , empires -LRB- especially European ones -RRB- always rested overwhelmingly on force and invariably provoked desperate resistance that ultimately painfully triumphed . 
Clearly antagonistic , these two selective visions none the less have something in common . 
They both make empires out to have been more powerful than historically was often the case . 
Some variants and examples of empire have proved powerful and durable . 
China , for example , is essentially a land-based empire , forged over the centuries by conquest and migration , which has managed to reposition itself as a nation state . 
And the kind of `` informal empire '' that Britain ran in parts of the world in the 19th century is also very much with us today . 
The US has no conventional colonies and may be in trouble in Iraq . 
But it retains military and naval bases in some 130 countries , and consequently the potential for influence over and intervention in them ; and it possesses - as every mighty empire has done - a network of supportive and tractable client states , including , arguably , Britain . 
Direct overseas empire , however , has tended to be more uncertain and more vulnerable . 
As the political scientist Stephen Walt has written , in words that should be inscribed in gold in the Oval Office and at 10 Downing Street , it is `` extremely difficult to project power across water and on to a foreign shore '' . 
The histories of the old European empires demonstrate this clearly enough . 
Even at the height of their imperial power , there were countries - such as Afghanistan - where the British were never able to establish themselves successfully ; and others - such as Egypt - where their rule was only tenuous . 
As for India , the jewel in Victoria 's Crown Imperial , the British only held on to it for as long as they did by way of an army and police force that were overwhelmingly made up of Indians , and by collaborating with Indian princes who continued to rule a third of the subcontinent . 
But the most difficult form of empire by far to carry off successfully - and this is where imperial history becomes acutely relevant - has been the well-meaning , transformative variant . 
Neocon politicians and intellectuals who are willing to admit to the existence of a US empire , such as Dinesh D'Souza , often argue that American interventionism is better and purer than old-style , Old World imperialisms , because to a unique degree it strives to make the world a better place . 
Yet such American idealism - which is real enough - represents one of the ways in which present-day foreign policy closely mirrors imperial ventures in the past . 
Ancient Rome , Qing China , Napoleonic France and conspicuously imperial Britain did not simply invade and occupy other people 's lands out of economic greed . 
In each case , empire was also driven at times by the desire to spread improvement , and to export cultural and political practices that were seen as better , fairer and more civilised . 
Viewed this way , George Bush 's desire to implant US-style democracy in the Middle East , along with greater religious freedoms , women 's rights and the rule of law - by force of arms if necessary - is profoundly reminiscent of past British imperial practices , which may be one reason why Tony Blair and the new Tory leader have supported the project so enthusiastically . 
In the 19th and early 20th centuries , British imperialists too frequently sought to deploy their power to export representative government , the rule of law , women 's education and the abolition of slavery , and sometimes even secured a measure of success . 
This week 's elections keep open the prospect that Iraq might also ultimately be regarded as a success . 
But there is an obvious difficulty involved in this kind of aspirational imperialism . 
It is hard to convince people that you mean them well if you are looking at them down the barrel of a gun . 
Moreover , imperial idealism frequently loses out to the practicalities of rule . 
Instead of exporting what they perceived to be rational , modern , humane government to their colonies , the British often found themselves propping up deeply unattractive and corrupt princelings and client rulers because this was the cheapest way of maintaining control . 
It remains to be seen how far , and how durably , the US will achieve anything better in Iraq . 
The gulf between imperial ideals and empire on the ground has customarily proved disillusioning not only for colonial peoples but also for some in the occupying power . 
In the past , anti-imperialists in Britain , such as Richard Cobden or George Orwell , regularly argued that overseas adventurism was detracting from the nation 's decency and liberty . 
British anti-imperialists also argued , exactly like the author and journalist Chalmers Johnson is doing now in the US , that heavy expenditure on an overseas presence and military action abroad undermined the economic wellbeing of ordinary working people at home . 
But , while current events have revived awareness that seeking to remodel other countries can be a difficult and chancey business even for the invaders , there is one respect in which this has come to be true in the present to a degree that never applied in the past . 
Adam Smith , who distrusted empire , argued that only when `` all the different quarters of the world '' were able to inspire `` mutual fear '' would nations finally begin to respect the integrity of each other 's borders . 
In the most horrible of ways , al-Qaida is after a fashion testing this very premise . 
In the past , the imperialism of the west , like that of the rest , was often difficult - for the doers as well as for their victims ; but western states were none the less usually able to dispatch forces overseas against non-western peoples without any fear of being attacked themselves . 
That kind of immunity is probably now a thing of the past . 
