By Jonathan Marcus BBC Diplomatic Correspondent International efforts to bring pressure to bear on President Bashar al-Assad 's regime in Syria have collapsed in acrimony . 
Disagreements over the resolution have led to acrimony between the two sides The decision by Russia and China to veto an Arab League-inspired resolution at the United Nations Security Council has created serious strains especially between Moscow and the West . 
Worse , it has probably sent the wrong signal to President Assad , who many analysts believe is determined to step up the violence . 
The annual Munich Security Conference in Germany has provided a ring-side seat as this diplomatic drama played out . 
The touring company of world leaders , diplomats and experts who do the rounds of these policy gatherings have made Munich the premier event of its kind . 
It always has a good cast-list and this year was no exception . 
Both US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and her Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov were in town , fresh from their starring roles in the negotiations at the UN in New York . 
Almost from the outset of this crisis , all eyes have been on Moscow . 
Russia is Syria 's only prominent ally . 
Moscow has long had close military , economic and diplomatic ties with the Syrians . 
Russia is expanding its use of the Syrian naval base at Tartus and has maintained arms supplies to Damascus throughout this crisis . 
The Russians and Chinese had put themselves on the wrong side of history , and they will regret it '' End Quote US Senator John McCain So all eyes were on Sergei Lavrov when he began his brief intervention . 
Was Russia now ready to join in concerted international action to condemn the Syrian regime ? 
The answer quickly became clear - No , it was not . 
For all the hopes in the West of a last-minute compromise , with Mr Lavrov and Mrs Clinton hurrying off for bilateral talks in the margins of the conference , there was probably no deal to be done . 
At one level it is quite simple . 
Russia is , as I have said , Syria 's most prominent ally and that is that . 
This , together with Russia 's traditional antipathy towards what it sees as the UN Security Council 's interference in a sovereign nation 's affairs - here China takes much the same view - was enough to prompt the Russian veto . 
But it is a little more complicated than that . 
The killing of more than 50 people in Homs came on the day of the vote I listened closely to Mr Lavrov 's comments . 
`` Russia , '' he said , `` supported the call of the Syrian people for change . '' 
It had backed the Arab League observer mission and had persuaded the Syrian authorities to accept it . 
But , he went on , Russia was not going to accept any resolutions that might open the way to foreign intervention or that would pre-determine the political outcome in Syria . 
Mr Lavrov was clearly sceptical about what any UN resolution might achieve . 
`` What was the West 's game plan ? '' 
If the violence continued , he argued , would you simply go back to the UN for another resolution ? 
This was simply `` not a serious policy '' . 
If the draft resolution did not apply equivalent restrictions on all parties - for the Russians that means the `` armed groups '' who they believe are fomenting the violence as much as the Syrian government - it was going to be unacceptable to Moscow . 
Similarly , if it referred in any way to the Arab League peace plan which involves President Assad stepping aside according to a tight schedule , then this too was unacceptable to the Russians , as was anything that they believe might pre-determine the outcome in Syria . 
Contrast all this with the Western view and the context of Saturday 's talks - reports of hundreds killed by Syrian government artillery in Homs . 
The fact that the death toll was significantly scaled down by the evening does little to alter the horror of the events there . 
Western leaders believed the Syrian government 's escalation of the violence required a prompt and unanimous condemnation from the international community . 
Russia fully supports the rights of the Syrian people for a better life . 
We are not friends or allies of President Assad '' End Quote Sergei Lavrov Russian Foreign Minister But the broader context matters too . 
In general terms , the West is far more enthusiastic than the Russians about the upheavals in the Middle East . 
Moscow has welcomed the advent of the Arab Spring in cautious terms , concerned by instability and the potential overthrow of established diplomatic patterns . 
In the West there has been an altogether more jubilant tone . 
Syria is seen as the next outdated regime to fall and its departure would be a blow to Iran . 
After hoping that President Assad might deliver reform , he has turned his guns on his own people and the consensus in the West , along with the Arab League , is that he must go . 
So where does diplomacy go from here ? 
The sense of anger in Western diplomatic circles is palpable , and that is bound to have an impact on broader relations with Moscow . 
`` The Russians and Chinese have put themselves on the wrong side of history , and they will regret it , '' said veteran US Senator John McCain who is leading a Congressional delegation to the Munich conference . 
`` Did n't Mr Lavrov though have a point ? '' 
`` A UN resolution is not going to change President Assad 's approach ? '' 
`` No '' he said , such resolutions mattered . 
`` Secretary Clinton had gone the extra mile with Mr Lavrov here in Munich . 
She was willing to make changes to the resolution . 
It was n't set in concrete , '' he said . 
`` But Mr Lavrov wanted to gut the resolution , it 's as simple as that . '' 
Western diplomats insist that the quest for a UN resolution condemning Syria will continue . 
Mr Lavrov is heading to Damascus for some bilateral diplomacy of his own . 
What message will he carry with him to the Syrian capital ? 
Russia of course does not want to lose an ally , but it is undoubtedly in an uncomfortable position . 
It wants any new Syria that may emerge to maintain its alliance with Moscow . 
But there was perhaps just a hint of Moscow 's thinking in Mr Lavrov 's comments here in Munich . 
`` Russia fully supports the rights of the Syrian people for a better life . 
We are not friends or allies of President Assad , '' he said . 
He said it again a few moments later : `` We do n't have any special concern for President Assad . '' 
That is one straw in the wind , though . 
With the Assad regime struggling for its survival , Moscow may find that its efforts to manage regime change in Syria is just as fruitless as the diplomatic pressures coming from the West and the Arab League . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
