New problems arose in the struggle to contain the Gulf of Mexico oil spill as bubbles and seepage appeared in four areas around the damaged BP well , but Obama administration and company officials agreed to keep the new well cap closed for at least 24 more hours as they weigh the gravity of the developments . 
Meanwhile , at a hearing in Louisiana , attorneys for crew members of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig did battle with one another and members of a government panel investigating the April 20 explosion while revealing new details about fateful choices made hours before the blowout . 
In Washington , the Interior Department moved to defuse tensions with shallow-water drilling firms and Gulf Coast lawmakers over how to speed up the permit process . 
BP said that one of the seepage areas , less than two miles from the Macondo well , is a natural leak not linked to the well . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , the national incident commander , said concerns are focused on other `` anomalies '' -- some seepage within several hundred yards of the well and bubbles appearing near the original blowout preventer on the sea floor . 
In addition , video provided by BP showed drops of oil and gas leaking from a piece of the new containment cap just below three rams designed to cut off the flow from the well . 
The leak has caused the formation of some hydrates -- slushlike crystals of natural gas and water that torpedoed earlier containment efforts . 
But , Allen said , `` we do not believe this is consequential at this time . '' 
Allen and , in another briefing , BP senior executive Kent Wells said the company might make a second attempt to kill the well by shooting drilling mud into the blowout preventer . 
An earlier attempt was aborted , but Wells said stopping the flow even temporarily would make killing the well easier . 
The latest events added to tension that had begun to dissipate over the weekend as the new containment cap appeared to be holding fast without causing problems . 
And the developments highlighted the unappealing tradeoffs associated with every decision carried out a mile below the sea surface . 
Allen said that the four-day-old effort to close the well had complicated the prospects of containing the spill by channeling oil through four lines to surface ships . 
He said that if the new cap must be opened , it would take several days to make sure sand would not clog the lines , to finish building flexible riser pipes to the surface and to hook up surface ships designed to suck oil from the cap . 
During that time , oil and gas would flow into the gulf . 
But with the cap closed , the risk of broader damage to the well itself and surrounding geological structures looms large . 
If the well is so damaged that oil and gas is leaking throughout , the hydrocarbons could seep into surrounding rock formations high above the reservoir and then into the sea . 
Or they could come out the top of the well . 
Vessels using seismic equipment were scouring the area for evidence of such seepage , but their presence kept other ships from getting close enough to finish building the infrastructure that would be needed if the cap were opened . 
Meanwhile , pressure in the well continued to rise Monday , albeit slowly , reaching 6,811 pounds per square inch , Allen said in the late afternoon . 
He said the pressure was rising about one pound per hour . 
This , too , has triggered debate among BP and U.S. officials , who had expected the pressure to hit 8,000 psi and who thought that lower pressure readings would be a sign that oil and gas was leaking into rock formations through damaged well equipment . 
But because of the steady increases in pressure , BP and government scientists are wondering whether so much oil and gas had been spilled already that the pressure in the partly depleted reservoir has been reduced . 
The fight to control the well was just one piece of the picture Monday . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
