In the altered version of the photo , three of the screens show different images than in the original . 
John Aravosis of Americablog.com pointed out alterations , including jagged white edges around the silhouettes of the photo 's subjects . 
-LRB- BP p.l.c. -RRB- Scott Dean , a spokesman for BP , said that there was nothing sinister in the photo alteration and provided this original unaltered version . 
He said that a photographer working for the company had inserted the three images in spots where the video screens were blank . 
-LRB- BP p.l.c. -RRB- Apparently BP is no more adept at doctoring photos than it is at plugging deep-sea oil leaks . 
A blogger has noticed that the oil giant altered a photograph of its Houston crisis room , cutting and pasting three underwater images into a wall of video feeds from remotely operated undersea vehicles . 
The altered photo is displayed prominently on the company 's Web site . 
An enlarged version of the photograph reveals flaws in the editing job . 
One of the 10 images sticks down into the head of one of the people sitting in front of the wall , while another piece of the image is separated from the other side of the head by jagged white space . 
The right side of the same image also hangs down below the area on which the video feeds were projected . 
John Aravosis pointed out the alterations Monday evening on his Americablog.com and observed , `` I guess if you 're doing fake crisis response , you might as well fake a photo of the crisis response center . '' 
The photo doctoring comes as BP has promised transparency in a bid to regain the public 's trust . 
Scott Dean , a spokesman for BP , said that there was nothing sinister in the photo alteration and provided the original unaltered version . 
He said that a photographer working for the company had inserted the three images in spots where the video screens were blank . 
`` Normally we only use Photoshop for the typical purposes of color correction and cropping , '' Dean said in an e-mail . 
`` In this case they copied and pasted three ROV screen images in the original photo over three screens that were not running video feeds at the time . '' 
Dean said BP usually has a couple remotely operated vehicles on the surface at any given time for maintenance . 
`` We will replace the Photoshopped version currently on bp.com with the original image tonight , '' he added . 
`` We 've instructed our post-production team to refrain from doing this in the future . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
