KUALA LUMPUR | Sun Jun 7 , 2009 10:57 am EDT KUALA LUMPUR -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Demand for air travel could decline further despite signs of a more stable global economy , and prospects of a recovery this year look slim , industry executives said at a meeting of the world 's airlines on Sunday . 
Cargo demand may have stabilized , but a pick-up is unlikely until demand recovers in the United States , said the CEO of Korean Air , the world 's top air cargo carrier . 
`` I think we have hit the bottom , '' Cho Yang Ho told Reuters . 
European aircraft manufacturer Airbus said it was sticking to its 2009 sales target of 300 gross orders but that it would be more difficult to accomplish . 
`` It is more of a stretch now , '' Airbus Commercial Director John Leahy told Reuters . 
`` We see the market improving , and we have negotiations for orders ongoing . '' 
International Lease Finance Corp -LRB- ILFC -RRB- , the world 's largest plane-leasing company , said it was negotiating for more planes with Airbus and Boeing Co , but `` at the right price . '' 
The annual meeting of the International Air Transport Association began on a somber note , with last week 's still unexplained crash of an Airbus A330-200 adding to the woes of an industry hurt by the financial crisis and volatile oil prices . 
But several airline executives were quick to defend the plane . 
`` It 's a safe plane , it 's a good plane , '' said Chew Choon Seng , the chief executive of Singapore Airlines , which has 16 A330-200s on order . 
`` We should not jump to conclusions . '' 
All 228 people on board the Air France plane were killed when it crashed in the Atlantic Ocean , the world 's worst air disaster since 2001 . 
Airline chiefs saw other concerns ahead , from rising unemployment to a surplus of plane capacity that could hurt profitability . 
`` I think it 's probably going to get worse , '' Rob Fyfe , chief executive of Air New Zealand , told Reuters on the sidelines of the meeting . 
The bearish comments contrast with the more positive outlook from some global policymakers and economists about a global recovery in the wake of recent data such as the slowing pace of U.S. job losses . 
Airlines have cut capacity and jobs in response to a slide in profits , and some have delayed or canceled orders for new aircraft from Boeing and Airbus . 
The chairman and founder of India 's Jet Airways said the airline may defer its orders for 10 Boeing 787 Dreamliners because of the economic crisis . 
NareshGoyal told Reuters that no decision had been taken , but that it would depend on economic conditions . 
But Deutsche Lufthansa 's Chief Executive Wolfgang Mayrhuber said his airline , which has about $ 15.8 billion in orders for new aircraft , had no plans to delay or cancel any of them , although it was difficult to predict the outlook for the industry . 
`` We have very little visibility , '' he said . 
More recently , outbreaks of the new H1N1 swine flu virus have added to the gloomy prospects for global air travel and tourism . 
According to the World Health Organization , the new influenza strain has been found in 64 countries , and remains most prevalent in North America . 
WHO labs have confirmed nearly 19,000 infections . 
