President Barack Obama waves after arriving at Tyndall Air Force Base in Panama City , Fla. , Saturday , Aug. 14 , 2010 . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- President Obama on Saturday promised Gulf Coast residents that the federal government wo n't abandon them once efforts to stop the oil spill are finished . 
`` I 'm here to tell you that our job is not finished and we are not going anywhere until it is , '' Obama said at a Coast Guard Station in this Florida Panhandle city . 
The president , first lady , daughter Sasha -LRB- sister Malia is at summer camp -RRB- and family dog Bo visited the Sunshine State for a brief weekend trip -- part vacation , part sales pitch -- as the president sought to boost a tourism industry reeling after the spill . 
On a warm , muggy afternoon , Obama said he brought his family to Florida , `` to let our fellow Americans know that they should come down here . 
And not just to support the region , but also because it 's a beautiful place to visit . '' 
It was his fifth trip to the region since April 20 explosion on a deepwater rig that caused the spill . 
Obama said he knows Gulf Coast residents have been frustrated by the slow payment of claims from a $ 20 billion BP fund for those who have suffered damages as a result of the spill , and he pledged to rectify that . 
`` Any delays -- by BP or by those managing the new fund -- are unacceptable , and I will keep pushing to get these claims expedited , '' Obama said . 
Perhaps the most intriguing question of the Obamas ' 27-hour dash south was whether the president would take a dip in the Gulf . 
The president and first lady were joined at a roundtable discussion by Florida Gov. Charlie Crist , Navy Secretary Ray Mabus , a former Mississippi governor appointed by Obama to develop a long-term Gulf restoration plan ; the mayors of Panama City and Panama City Beach ; the general manager of a three-hotel chain that has had 1,000 room night cancellations due to the spill , translating into more than $ 191,000 in lost room revenue alone ; the owner of a charter boat company ; and the co-owner of a restaurant and two fishing boats . 
Tourism officials say the region typically brings in 70 percent of its yearly income between June and August . 
Although only 16 of the 180 beaches in the western part of the Panhandle were affected by the spill , tourism officials say many potential visitors have stayed away , deterred by images of oil-slicked waters and tarball-strewn beaches in other parts of the region . 
The head of the U.S. Travel Association has proposed that BP , responsible for the oil spill , set aside $ 500 million for a marketing campaign to help draw tourists to the Gulf states . 
Alabama 's attorney general on Thursday sued BP and others companies associated with the spill , seeking unspecified economic and punitive damages . 
At least 300 federal lawsuits have been filed in 12 states against BP and the other three main companies involved in the explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon drill rig . 
The White House scheduled the Obamas ' trip after facing criticism that the president was n't heeding his own advice that Americans vacation in the Gulf . 
`` This is still a place that 's open for business and welcoming so vacationers and people can have a wonderful holiday here , '' Obama said during a June trip to Pensacola , Fla. -- one of his four to the region before this weekend . 
The first lady went a step further during a July visit to Panama City Beach . 
`` One of the best ways that fellow Americans can help is to come on down here and spend some money , '' she said . 
Obama has vacationed in North Carolina this summer and is heading to Martha 's Vineyard , off the Massachusetts coast , later in August . 
Mrs. Obama also traveled to Spain this month with Sasha . 
The government 's point man on the spill , retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , said Friday that the blown-out well was not securely plugged to his satisfaction . 
He said that drilling a relief well -- long regarded as the only way to ensure that the hole at the bottom of the Gulf never leaks oil again -- must go forward . 
Work on the relief well was suspended this week because of bad weather . 
