This Sept. 2010 photo provided by Discovre Team 2010 shows deep sea corals on the bottom of the northern Gulf of Mexico , not far from where BP 's underwater oil well blew out on April 20 . 
AP\/Discovre Team 2010 ON THE FLOOR OF THE GULF OF MEXICO -- Just 20 miles north of where BP 's blown-out well spewed millions of gallons of oil into the sea , life appears bountiful despite initial fears that crude could have wiped out many of these delicate deepwater habitats . 
Plankton , tiny suspended particles that form the base of the ocean 's food web , float en masse 1,400 feet beneath the surface of the Gulf of Mexico , forming a snowy-like underwater scene as they move with the currents outside the windows of a two-man sub creeping a few feet off the seafloor . 
Crabs , starfish and other deep sea creatures swarm small patches of corals , and tiny sea anemones sprout from the sand like miniature forests across a lunar-like landscape illuminated only by the lights of the sub , otherwise living in a deep , dark environment far from the sun 's reach . 
Scientists are currently in the early stages of studying what effects , if any , BP PLC 's April 20 oil well blowout off Louisiana and the ensuing crude gusher has had on the delicate deep sea coral habitats of the northern Gulf . 
So far , it appears the area dodged a bullet , but more research is needed . 
Some of the deep sea corals near the spill site were only discovered just last year . 
`` Originally , when we saw the trajectory for the oil spill and where it was going , we were very concerned that these habitats would be impacted , '' said researcher Steve Ross of the Center for Marine Science at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington . 
Ross and others are conducting research from a Greenpeace ship in the Gulf , using a two-man sub as they work to determine if the corals have suffered damage , or may take a hit from long-term impacts , such as stunted reproduction rates . 
`` We thought certainly that ... we would see signs of damage , '' Ross said . 
`` And we 're very pleased to say so far , that in these locations , we have n't seen a large scale damage to the coral habitats . 
We 're still looking , but so far , it 's good . '' 
Ross was part of a team of researchers that studied deep sea corals in the Atlantic Ocean between North Carolina and Florida . 
The research eventually helped lead to added federal protections for a roughly 23,000 square-mile network believed to be among the largest continuous distribution of deep water corals in the world . 
Ross and others have now turned their attention to the Gulf . 
While fishermen have for centuries dragged up corals from the deep sea , it was n't until the early 1900s that scientists discovered these extensive cold-water reefs . 
And it was n't until the 1970s that researchers were able to use subs and cameras to reach the sea floor to document them . 
It had long been thought coral reefs only formed in shallow , warm waters . 
Deepwater reefs and pinnacles are much more slow-growing and can take several million years to form . 
Science is only now beginning to understand these underwater `` frontier zones . '' 
Researchers are looking to these regions for the development of additional pharmaceuticals since these cold-water critters have adapted to live in such unique environments void of sunlight , they possess unusual qualities that federal scientists say could aid in creating new drugs for cancer , heart disease and other ailments . 
`` We are very interested in any potential damage to deep sea corals , '' said Steve Murawski , chief fisheries scientist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , which is currently conducting research into oil in Gulf sediments , among other studies . 
The federal government maintains much of the oil is now gone from the Gulf , but some studies indicate it remains in significant amounts on the sea floor . 
Microscopic particles have also been found in the water column . 
It is now a prime time for coral spawning in the Gulf , when the corals release tiny larvae that eventually form new corals . 
`` It could alter the reproduction of these animals , '' Murawski said . 
`` Even though the adults may survive the event , did we lose the opportunity to have more juveniles produced ? '' 
Sandra Brooke , coral conservation director at the Marine Conservation Biology Institute , who is also participating in the research , agreed . 
The corals ' reproduction rates will be studied over the coming weeks , she said . 
`` We have to be careful with our conclusions about this kind of data , '' Brooke said , noting it will take more than just a few dives to determine the extent of the damage . 
`` We 'll take further analysis but from what we 've seen so far , it seems like they 've dodged a bullet . '' 
Long-term impacts , for instance , from 1989 's much smaller Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska took years , even decades to understand . 
`` We 're just going to have to continue watching , '' said Margot Stiles , a marine scientist with the conservation group Oceana . 
