Still the best political coverage . 
Lawmakers attack plans oil companies had in place to deal with a spill Five oil giants . 
Five plans for coping with an oil spill , all written by the same tiny Texas subcontractor . 
The government-mandated plans all came under attack at a congressional hearing Tuesday : Three of them listed the phone number for the same University of Miami marine science expert , Peter Lutz , who died in 2005 . 
Four talked about the need to protect walruses , which , as Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
dryly noted , `` have not called the Gulf of Mexico home for 3 million years . '' 
The plans also mentioned protecting sea lions and seals , which are n't found in the gulf , either . 
The five oil companies submitted these plans -- each more than 500 pages long and each relying on the same reassuring language -- as part of their applications for permits to drill deepwater wells in the gulf . 
The firms assured the government that they could handle oil spills much larger than the one now threatening the region 's environment and economy . 
And each time , the Minerals Management Service approved the plan and gave the go-ahead for drilling . 
Yet House Energy and Commerce Chairman Henry A. Waxman -LRB- D-Calif . -RRB- 
said that the `` cookie-cutter '' plans show that `` none of the five oil companies has an adequate response plan '' for a spill like the one that began April 20 with a blowout on a BP well . 
`` It could be said that BP is the one bad apple in the bunch , '' Rep. Bart Stupak -LRB- D-Mich . -RRB- 
said at a hearing of the House Energy and Environment subcommittee . 
`` But unfortunately they appear to have plenty of company . 
Exxon and the other oil companies are just as unprepared to respond to a major oil spill in the gulf as BP . '' 
The firms ' top executives offered a mixture of regret and defense . 
Exxon Mobil chief executive Rex Tillerson said provisions for walrus protection in gulf plans are `` an embarrassment . '' 
Grilled by Stupak about how the companies could say they could handle spills many times the size of the current one , Tillerson also conceded , `` We are not well-equipped to handle them . '' 
But he asserted that whenever large spills happen , `` there will be impacts , as we are seeing . '' 
And he added , `` We 've never represented anything different than that . '' 
He said the company 's plans contain a worst-case scenario `` that the MMS and the Coast Guard require us to calculate using their methodologies , and that 's why it 's in there . '' 
Tillerson said that prevention was the best strategy , and he and the executives from Conoco Phillips , Chevron and Shell Oil criticized BP 's handling of the well blowout , which killed 11 workers and sunk the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
`` We would not have drilled the well the way they did , '' the Exxon chief said . 
Lawmakers stressed the need to have plans in place in case all else failed . 
And whereas the companies have hired top-tier contractors to carry out their search for oil and gas , but relied on smaller less well-known companies to handle spill planning . 
The spill response plans for all five companies were written by the same firm , the Response Group . 
Although it has operations in at least seven cities nationwide , the Houston-based firm 's Web site says the company has about 35 employees . 
-LRB- One current assignment : calling 50,000 people who have visited BP offices and getting their e-mail addresses and emergency contact information . -RRB- 
Waxman also noted that the five companies rely on Marine Spill Response to provide equipment . 
`` When you look at the details , it becomes evident these plans are just paper exercises , '' he said . 
The response plans , which the committee posted on its Web site , show that the companies also used common assumptions for different exploration wells . 
BP used the same model for all its wells in the gulf , using a location about 33 miles away from the where the accident occurred . 
