Where 's Dick Cheney on the BP oil spill ? 
So where s Dick Cheney ? 
Writing for Newsweek , Ravi Somaiya observes that in the aftermath of the Deepwater Horizon disaster , the former vice president has remained notably silent . 
What s notable , Somaiya points out , is that , When the Obama administration , or the media , or just about anybody contradicts Dick Cheney 's views on national security , he is far from shy about responding . 
So as a hawk for big oil , one might expect Cheney to defend his pro-petro views in the face of withering -LRB- and near-universal -RRB- opprobrium from both public and president . 
For eight years , of course , Cheney played dual roles as vice president of the United States and as unofficial at-large congressman for the petroleum industry . 
The former vice president s murky ties to Halliburton , the Houston oil services company he once ran , are well documented , and he continues to face ridicule for having allowed executives from oil companies to dictate American energy policy during the George W. Bush presidency . 
At Mother Jones , Kate Sheppard looks extensively into the potential cause-and-effect relationship between Cheney s infamous 2001 energy task force and the gulf catastrophe . 
The task force 's final report , Sheppard writes , presented a rosy picture of the offshore drilling industry . 
Newer oil and gas drilling methods , it said , practically eliminate spills from offshore platforms and enhance worker safety , lower risk of blowouts , and provide better protection of groundwater resources . 
Symbolic of Cheney s connection -- past , present , and future -- to Big Oil is BP s hiring of Anne Womack-Kolton as its chief of U.S. media relations . 
Womack-Kolton served as Cheney s press secretary during the 2004 campaign and later worked for President Bush s Department of Energy . 
While this small bit of employment news is far too circumstantial to gin up serious outrage , it nonetheless puts a nice bow around the questionable coziness between government and industry that Bush and Cheney encouraged during their time in the White House . 
Perhaps the blatancy of this connection is contributing to the veep s reticence . 
Whatever the reason , Cheney seems content to let his daughter , Liz Cheney , defend Big Oil and the family legacy , as she did -- ineffectively -- on ABC 's `` This Week '' earlier this month . 
If you have a better defense to offer , Mr. Cheney , now might be the time . 
By Katrina vanden Heuvel | June 16 , 2010 ; 5:08 PM ET Who the hell cares ? 
He 's not VP anymore . 
All the attempts to blame Bush and Cheney for this -LRB- and everything else -RRB- does n't change that . 
This left wing whack job does n't have any kind of grasp on reality . 
Is she talking solutions ? 
Is she talking about what needs to be done ? 
No , she is talking about some guy in his 80s who used to be the Vice President . 
earth to nit-wit come in . 
It 's important to continually remind people about that dark period and the consequences of putting ideological extremists like Cheney and Bush in power . 
It 's been proven over and over again that Americans have extremely short memories , so it 's critical that commentators like you `` connect the dots '' between the deregulatory zeal and cozy government-big oil , big finance policies of the Bush years , and the disasters we 're facing now . 
It 's not surprising that wingnuts and right wing apologists like bbface21 are eager to change the subject , but please do bring this back to the disaster that was the Cheney\/Bush years every chance you get ! 
Our level of dependence on oil is so great ... if anything serious had happened to our suppliers in other parts of the world bringing our country into a shortage situation , any administration would have been crucified by the left for not being proactive and cooperative with our own oil industry . 
All this barf about `` ties to big oil '' is as misinformed as most of the junk the democrat party coughs up . 
Do they think democrat elites have no ties to Big Oil ? 
Can someone remind me how much money BP gave to Obama 's campaign ? 
Not much of THAT talk going around , is there ? 
Those secret meetings where BP , Exxon , the coal and nuclear industries were invited to write -LRB- i 'd say gut -RRB- the environmental and safety regulatory laws for the energy industry . 
Where 's Cheney now ? 
In the bunker , no doubt . 
You did n't get the memo ? 
Obama\/Biden have been in the White House for over a year and a half . 
Bush\/Cheney is no more to blame for this horrible disaster than Obama\/Biden . 
From Katrina 's posting all I see is innuendo -LRB- some broad who worked for Cheney 's campaign works for BP -RRB- and a hatred that borders on the pathological . 
But no , it 's Bush 's fault . 
Corporate negligence - Bush 's fault . 
Inept federal response - Bush 's fault -LRB- even though he left office 18 months ago -RRB- . 
Dog pooped on the carpet-Bush 's fault too . 
I 'm no fan of the guy , but blaming him for everything that goes wrong after leaving office a long time ago is getting ridiculous . 
As written by real people and not Rove . 
He is also probably trying to pull a few strings to get the Halliburton subsidiary KBR a `` No Bid '' job on the clean-up . 
When there is big money up to something Cheney will be there eventually . 
He can make talks on policy issues , its his perogative ... after all Mr. Carter won a Nobel for damning America right ? 
But he has no policy input . 
Now Mr. Cheney may be influential as a pundit . 
And probably a lot more influential than for instance ... oh . . 
say ... let me think . . 
say for instance ... . 
YOU , who have never done SQUAT in your life to safeguard your country except to vomit on it . 
Ms Vanden Quibble ... how about writing about people who do control policy . 
you say that 's no fun ? 
You ca n't bring yourself to hold a blue-stater responsible for his\/her actions ? 
I see ... I see , Posted by : wjc1va | June 16 , 2010 11:05 PM | Report abuse Vanden Heuvel seems on a quest to top each previous op-ed piece with something more absurd and nonsensical . 
For eight years , Cheney was vice-president and unofficial congressman for the oil industry ? 
What a complete fabrication . 
His `` murky ties '' to Halliburton ? 
More inane tripe - there was nothing murky about his position at that company , from which he cut all financial ties when taking office . 
With so little of substance to say , on virtually any topic , leftists such as Katrina would be better served doing something more productive with their lives . 
Dick Cheney was made fabulously rich for his `` services '' to Halliburton . 
Mind you this man was not star student in college . 
He did not possess a degree in engineering , geology or physics . 
He parlayed connections , political connections . 
There should be a full scale reexmination of his so called `` energy summit '' . 
The public should become aware of what deals were cut . 
While we are on the subject of oil , let 's ask George W. Bush what he thinks about the oil `` leak '' . 
If gushing millions of gallons of oil is a `` leak '' I shudder to think of what a blow out would be . 
You add deregualtion and Bush\/Cheney and you receive the catastrophe in the Gulf of Mexico . 
That led to a serious oil spill that is threatening the Gulf Coast . 
Those are purely physical problems and a national crisis . 
Vanden Heuvel and other have done their best to make this a political issue , because that 's all they know how to do any more . 
The Obama Administration is failing because they have done the same . 
Rather than deal with this as a national emergency , they are treating it as a political issue and an opportunity to advance a political agenda . 
Shame on all of them . 
The saddest thing of all is that , regardless of one 's political differences with Dick Cheney , there is probably no one in America better qualified or more prepared to coordinate the federal response to this crisis . 
As a former member of Congress , former White House Chief of Staff , former Secretary of Defense , former Vice President , and former CEO of Halliburton , he knows where the levers are and who to mobilize . 
Most of the left that hates him seems unaware that Halliburton is an oil field service company and works with everyone across the world involved in petroleum engineering . 
Cheney could probably have drafted an action plan in a few hours in longhand on a legal pad that was superior to two months of so-called `` work '' by the Obama Administration . 
He could likely have done it from an undisclosed location barely referring to his rolodex . 
He knows how the military , and departments and agencies of government interact and what would have to be done to facilitate their coordination , not just with one another , but with state authorities and potential industry and international partners . 
The well might not yet be capped , but the shores would be safe . 
It is a sad day for this country when nothing can be accomplished because of the political venom of the left . 
The important thing now is to get this done . 
We can worry about everything else later . 
It seems that BP must take full responsibility for all wrongs notwithstanding that an enquiry has not taken place . 
One should consider the contributions to the failures by BPs never mentioned partners and the approvals given by State and Federal Governments . 
There will be litigation over Obama 's declaration of guilt . 
It seems that there is no need for courts in the case of BP and Guantanamo Detainees as far as the US is concerned . 
Americans are rightly outraged by the oil spill and the damage that is being caused but would n't an equivalent amount of damage be caused by ordinary people if they put that oil into their car engines ? 
How many of them care about Pacific and Indian Ocean island nations that are suffering from rising seas because of the oil that is burnt by car engines around the world ? 
I say stop screaming , remain calm and work solutions out calmly . 
If he opens his mouth , he must fear that the American people will recall , with no little amount of disgust , that it was Mr. Cheney who brought all those CEOs of the U.S. mega-oil companies once upon a time to the White House and there , shamefacedly , asked them to write U.S. Energy Policy . 
Of course , it was to be expected that the George W. Bush Energy Policy would favor those big oil companies , including probably exempting those oil companies with oil rigs in the Gulf of Mexico from making sure that their rigs would be secure from blowups . 
And under Bush\/Cheney leadership , the United States relaxed oversight . 
There was always a plan to deal with such a horrific spill . 
It was , however , never funded or advanced beyond the planning stage . 
And it allowed one of the worst corporate offenders to put life and our resources at risk so they could maximize profit . 
For Cheney and others of his ilk , profit goes before human life or our environment . 
Telling lies in pursuit of profit is considered no more wrong than bribery , spying or packing the Supreme Court . 
My thanks to Ms. Vanden Heuvel for reminding us that a brash , mean-spirited liar helped lead us into this mess we 'll be dealing with the rest of our lives . 
His silence at the moment speaks volumes . 
The daily tweets from Sarah `` Drill Baby '' are also an example of someone who has been more than ready to share her views on a miriad of subjects . 
That she has now resorted to gabbing about her `` push-ups '' is no surprise . 
She has really only one subject of conversation , Sarah . 
Her followers love her meglomania it would seem . 
Now that we 're talking about the profound silence of Dick Halliburton , what about Condoleeza Chevron ? 
Donald Enron not to mention all the other corporate blockers that filled the Bush administration or Papa Bush and his Carlyle Hedge fund . 
In the Washington Times people are moaning about the history of squandering energy since the seventies . 
It 's a sign of the poverty of various administrations since that time that fuel efficiency is still regarded as a luxury . 
What 's amusing is that energy efficiency is a `` conservative '' idea but the republican party has long turned its back on conservativism and moved towards a reactionary destructive agenda . 
The wingnut righties who sat complacently by and uttered not a word while Cheney set us up for this catastrophe , want us to forget about that period . 
I live on the coast and I resent people who have no clue , trying to make us forget what actually helped cause this disaster . 
You may want us to forget Bush\/Cheney ... we wo n't . 
And , based on his exemplary record of avoiding service in Vietnam , Mr. Five Deferments is a gutless coward . 
This is just further proof of that . 
The media need to hold this criminal accountable for his past remarks and actions on energy policy in light of this unprecedented disaster -LRB- note : same phrase could be applied to the entire 8-year reign of his co-presidency -RRB- . 
Well , I would like to see the minutes of meetings Obama and his Obamanistas held with ACORN when they were working on this disastrous administration 's agenda . 
And let 's throw in the minutes of the 20 odd meetings Andy Stern of the SEIU had at the White House . 
Since Obama was elected , only the milkman has been to the White House more than Stern . 
The fact that we are oil dependent makes oil production a matter of the first importance . 
The envoirmental laws promulgated by decades of good works by concerned citizens have been used to literally push oil production off of land and near shore where it is safe to produce . 
Lets put aside the sophistry claiming alternative energy sources like wind , thermal , and ethanal can meet more than a tiny fraction of our consumption . 
It was not President Obama 's fault but it is on his turn at watch . 
If there was some loosening of the inspection agencies charged with preventing blowouts they can only be held responsible to the extent that they did thier job poorly because there are and always will be blowouts when drilling for presurized deposits of oil . 
Was it something done by former Vice President Cheney . 
No it was not . 
When this first happened , I thought that Cheney -LRB- and company -RRB- might have `` orchestrated '' this spill to upend and end the Obama presidency . 
Perhaps in some subversive , clandestine way , he and\/or Halliburton set it up by selling bad products to BP . 
It 's not beyond the imagination . 
The fact that Cheney has remained silent on a subject that is `` his baby '' is very suspicious and speaks volumes . 
I do want the notes , policy discussions and\/or changes , and all documentation that came of his energy summit that is `` to sensitive '' for the American public to see . 
Of course , he is not talking . 
He does not want to be rightly linked to this . 
Sorry Mr. President , you need a little more help than this hack !!! Posted by : billstraley1-drgolf | June 17 , 2010 9:51 AM | Report abuse You do n't honestly expect anyone from the bush administration to accept responsibility , do you ? 
Bush has never accepted responsibility - his disasterous presidential administration was too large of a mess for even daddy and all his cronies to bail him out of . 
He walked away , scott free again , and the nation paid the price . 
Well folks , welcome to the results of small government and deregulation - the basis of the teabagger and republican ideology . 
Without adults in the room , the results are disasterous . 
Borrow and spend - fiscal conservatism republican style . 
Now their effects of their `` fiscal conservatism '' will once again be paid for by the middle and lower classes , while they laugh all the way to the bank . 
The wall street and banking fiascos , the deregulation of the oil and mining industries all led to disaster - but yet , there 's still clammoring for less government . 
Industries can regulate themselves , right ? 
Cheney and bush made their benefactors very wealthy , and the nation suffered . 
There 's a special place reserved for people the likes of bush and cheney . 
Cheney deserves much more scorn than he receives . 
He was the puppetmaster in this oil disaster , yet he 's invisible . 
Well , I would like to see the minutes of meetings Obama and his Obamanistas held with ACORN when they were working on this disastrous administration 's agenda . 
And let 's throw in the minutes of the 20 odd meetings Andy Stern of the SEIU had at the White House . 
Since Obama was elected , only the milkman has been to the White House more than Stern . 
bugger - you braindead moron . 
If you would have escaped your delusional echo chamber even momentarilly , you would be aware that just recently ACORN was found to be completely clear of any wrongdoing . 
This is the intellect of the folks on the right . 
This , to a company that has received 760 citations for `` egregious '' safety violations since 2007 . 
The rest of the oil industry received one . 
Since the disaster , Obama placed a moratorium on 33 deepwater exploratory wells , but allowed the continuing production of 591 deep water wells . 
What 's even worse , BP has a deep water well , Atlantis , operating in the Gulf in waters DEEPER that the Horizon rig . 
According to congressional documents , this platform lacks required engineering certification for as much as 90 % of its subsea components ! 
On May 19th , 2010 , twenty-six congressmen sent Salazar a letter calling for the immediate shut done of the BP Atlantis rig . 
All the above info has been reported by Rolling Stone Magazine . 
You would think a newspaper like the Washington Post would be the one leading the way in this investigation . 
You can only blame your predecessor for so long before you have to take responsibility . 
So it seems that the Obama administration is continuing the terrible policies of the Bush-Cheney administration , in deepwater oil drilling -LRB- remember `` Drill , Baby , Drill '' ? -RRB- 
and also carrying on two wars in Iraq & Afghanistan . 
Is it too much to ask President Obama and his media sycophants to pull up their collective `` big boy & girl pants '' and take a modicum of personal responsibility for fixing the oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico ? 
It is not 2008 and this ai n't Iowa . 
Grow up already kids . 
You are in charge . 
As frightening as it is for some of us to say , you are now `` The Man . '' 
Clearly , he donned a wet suit , dived a mile down , and personally attached a timed explosive change to the BP well . 
Ernst Starvo Blofeld where are you now that we need you ? 
I do n't think it 's any coincidence that we 've got these 24\/7 paid bloggers constantly bashing President Obama who has already kept us MORE safe than the Bush Administration was able to do . 
Plus it seems we have the entire Republican party in complete denial about all the harm the Republicans did last time they were in office . 
It 's well known fact that the Bushes want to hold on to the White House for generations to come to push their agenda which is completely selfish and centered around their own personal interests . 
We 've already seen what they will do , if given the opportunity , and it has nothing at all to do with the health and well being of the United States of America . 
Dick Cheney disciples have been taught to never accept blame , just blame others . 
Their contortions are amusing . 
Small government conservatives now claim the government -LRB- well Obama specifically -RRB- should have been maintaining an army of oil spill prevention and recovery infratsurtcure and people sitting idle in case such a spill would happen - even with their assurances it never would . 
Laissez Faire conservatives now claim that Obama should have stepped in and removed BP and conducted the spill containment and clean up himself , which of course if he would have done this it would be just another claim to a socialist take-over . 
Now Tea Party conservatives are claiming Obama has `` shaken down '' BP to put a $ 20 billion slush fund in place when it `` has not even been proven what fault really is '' , instead of assuring that BP -LRB- who has years of history of never fulfilling its commitments -RRB- fulfils its commitments to the people of the gulf . 
The have it both ways conservatives are a walking prtzel of distorted logic , with only one aim which is to trash Obama . 
They make criticisms and statements that directly contradict their principles time and time again . 
I think that is because they have no principles , only hatred of Obama . 
Dick `` deficits do n't matter '' Cheney was their neocon leader , and set the stage for everything that is playing out now . 
They can not have their ideological leader called out for his years of failed policies or it makes them look like the fialures that they are . 
It was conservative ploicies -LRB- combined with failed liberal policies -RRB- that have dug us into a huge deficit situation , crashed our banking system and economy , stripped our individua rights and made a disaster of our gulf . 
And now , like these conservatives have any credibility , have the nerve to defend oil company profits and the right to continue deep water drilling when it has been demonstrated that NONE of the oil companies have the ability to respond any better then BP has . 
This is a private sector disaster , compounded by private sector influence in government to turn a blind regulatory eye towards private sector safety responsibilities . 
It is a private sector mess that the private sector is responsibe to clean up . 
Just one more example of how `` Danger Dick '' Cheney 's laissez faire ideology has failed , and how conservatism has failed , the same way the lack of oversight over unregulated mortgage backed securities , credit default swaps and derivatives speculation have failed this country . 
Another worthless , info-less column . 
Why would anyone care what Cheney 's thoughts on the rig are ? 
Why does the Post carry this shell of a columnist ? 
Is she talking about what needs to be done ? 
No , she is talking about some guy in his 80s who used to be the Vice President . 
Earth to nit-wit come in . 
I haven t heard Republicans offer up any solutions at all either , and you re certainly not offering any . 
Sounds as though Republicans and these other miscellaneous Tea Baggers and naysayers liked it a whole lot better when our threat level was being raised up and down depending on Republican popularity . 
Heck , even MSNBC liberal talking heads Olbermann and Matthews blasted BO 's oval office speech so I guess Rahm and Axelrod are reaching out to their friends in the media and saying ... `` why do n't you ask where cheney is in all this '' Posted by : bushido11 | June 17 , 2010 11:54 AM | Report abuse Where 's Dick Cheney on the BP oil spill ? 
Jesus , Mary , Joseph , he 's SILENT . 
This is something some of us have been awaiting since 2000 . 
PLEASE do n't try to lure him from his cave . 
A silent Dick is the best Dick . 
Some folks here have suggested he would be the most qualified person to handle this disaster . 
For his own interests , certainly , for America 's , certainly not . 
May he live out his days in a bunker or cave far from the rest of humanity . 
What VP Cheney does n't comment on and visa what he does comment on is irrelevant . 
To sandwich his silence on an issue around the actual argument -LRB- that the former VP 's cozy relationship with the oil companie sis in part to blame for the gulf -RRB- is totally irrelevant to the actual argument . 
It neither contributes nor detracts from the real argument but is usually employed when the real argument can not stand on it 's own merits . 
I make no comment on the real argument just that this one is poorly constructed . 
Today is Jun 16 , 2010 . 
That 's 1 year 4 months 28 days . 
17 months is `` a long time '' ?? 513 days ??? Really ? 
Bush was blaming Clinton for economic , trade and international events into his 2nd term and you were probably shouting `` Amen ! '' 
and now 17 months is `` a long time '' ??? Even a gop sycophant such as yourself can appreciate the irony of your position . 
Bush could never seem to get the Clinton monkey off his back but now he is absolved from all blame for the results of his best efforts ? 
Meanwhile , Dick Cheney has inserted himself into various discussions as an expert when he has proven total ineptness -LRB- remember how the Iraqis would welcome us with flowers just the French did when we liberated towns in WWII ??????? -RRB- . 
Fake News , your personal gop news service , harrumphed and kissed his ring . 
So , finally , we have an issue where he might actually be apt -LRB- hahaha ... I have to laugh when I see Cheney and `` apt '' in the same sentence !!! -RRB- and where is he ? 
It is a legitimate question . 
Barry the incompetent boob Obama , the inept bungler , issued drilling permits to that oil rig WITHOUT SAFETY INSPECTIONS . 
The Obama administration issued those permits , not Dick Cheney the civilian . 
Of course , we could always try asking Jim Whittingham -LRB- sp -RRB- about it , since his buckshot wounds have probably healed nicely by now . 
He was about to talk anyway before Cheney shot him in the face as a warning to any others who might consider spilling the beans , or oil , as the case may . 
We 'd also see that Cheney and Bush had planned the war in Iraq to get their grubby hands on their oil long before cooking up the WMD lies . 
Things are starting to unravel , Dickey Boy . 
Do n't forget to change your batteries . 
What 's good for the goose ... Posted by : WhitneyDavid | June 17 , 2010 12:27 PM | Report abuse Anyone think that SOB gives a rat 's about dead ecosystems ? 
Whose lax rules for big business created the environment for what happened on April 20 , 2010 ? 
So for all those pretending with glee that this is `` Obama 's Katrina '' . . 
let 's do open an investigation into why the rules were thrown to the wind , let 's open the files on those secret meetings , etc. -- our government became pure evil -LRB- i.e. , for corporations and rich cronies only -RRB- and lax -LRB- who cares , let 's make $ $ -RRB- during the last administration and we 'll probably find other areas we 'll have to clean up before it 's over . 
Cheney 's quiet because he knows what they created , and he 's quietly praying to his Satan to deliver him from his evil without having to go to jail . 
Dick Cheney is with Albert Haynesworth at the bank -- laughing at the rest of us . 
Dick Cheney has been one of the most vocal and partisan ex-VPs in our history . 
He has no problems with partisan attacks on the elected government officials from the other party . 
He has now problem criticizing every foreign policy initiative because he is n't in charge of it . 
True - this oil spill happened on Obama 's watch , and the current Administration is `` responsible '' . 
But the MMS leaders who should have been the first regulatory line were empowered in the Dick Cheney years . 
And Republicans have been totally obstructionist in allowing up or down votes on numerous new appointees to key Executive Branch jobs . 
They have a strategy to harm , harrass and delay anything the incoming Administration tries to do . 
Face it - this environmental disaster was predicted by many , and the Drill Baby Drill crowd pretended it could never happen -- and many of them -LRB- Dick Cheney at the lead -RRB- have tremendous personal financial incentives to support Big Oil with no strings attached . 
Voters for bush\/cheney unwilling to admit their mistake , just like bush\/cheney . 
Well , I 'm glad you asked , and the answer is THIRTY YEARS . 
When we recall the worst rulers in European history , people exchange knowing glances and solemnly say , `` We must never forget ... '' But when we recall the worst leaders in American history , conservatives look you straight in the eye and say , `` Time to forget ! 
Time to forget ! '' 
I share the angst of those watching the complete devastation of the area . 
However , regulation , or lack thereof have little to with this mess or the financial one proceeding it . 
Laissez faire means leave it alone , not turn a blind eye . 
BP officials are alone in the responsibility arena here . 
If you look at the laundry list of shortcuts taken to get back on schedule , it is clear that , as in the financial mess , that even the basic fundamentals of their business were ignored , so all the rules and regs in the world would not have changed a thing . 
They were willing to break them all . 
If our justice dept. does not arrest and convict the ones who ordered these actions , along with the ones who ordered the orders , then it will be clear that these corps rule our world and we do need new leadership . 
These BP officials must be convicted of negligent homicide at a minimum . 
As the officials at Goldman , et al , should have been tried for fraud . 
Let us never forget that eleven people lost their lives because BP could not wait a few more days for billions in revenue . 
Also , never forget , that every time we insert a nozzle in our fuel tanks , use plastic , and all the other petro-based products , we aid and abet , so , in a way , we are all responsible . 
And he 'll lay low because there IS no pro-oil position here as that moronic Joe Barton found out today . 
Ms. Katrina vanden Heuvel is a VERY left-winger who works for `` The Nation '' which has very extreme left-wing views . 
It 's really amazing how the new left-wing Democrat Party keeps reaching to the `` past '' . 
I guess that 's because their PERFORMANCE with everything else as been a real MESS ... This rich elite self-serving liberal\/progressive likes to wear a lot of black clothes ... ... probably like the numbers ... .666 too ... . 
Who the hell cares ? 
He 's not VP anymore . 
All the attempts to blame Bush and Cheney for this -LRB- and everything else -RRB- does n't change that . 
The day Linda actually has something intelligent to say is the day Barack Hussein Obama releases his grades . 
OUCH !! Posted by : godwithfire55 | June 17 , 2010 1:32 PM | Report abuse This is a new definition of News : No wonder Newspapers like the Post are going out of business . 
Of course , Ms. Vanden Heuvel overlooks the most obvious reason for Dick Cheney remaining silent at this time : When your political opponent is busy shooting himself in different body parts every day , do n't do anything that might upset the trend . 
Mr. Cheney wo n't say a word until President Obama either runs out of bullets or body parts . 
Liz Cheney , his daughter , is probably hiding him out in her basement somewhere . 
Any other time you ca n't get that old scoundrel to shut the hell up . 
The real question is Where is Al Gore ? 
Oh yeah ... ... . 
he 's with his new girlfriend . 
Maybe he and John $ 400 Edwards are buddies now ... ... ... lol . 
The real question is Where is Al Gore ? 
Oh yeah ... ... . 
he 's with his new girlfriend . 
Maybe he and John $ 400 Edwards are buddies now ... ... ... lol . 
This is the president that you voted for . 
The administration is responsible for these permits and they did not do thier jobs . 
Bush and Cheny did not have anything to do with this . 
Actually they would have a better handle on this problem than this administration who 's only experience is in the class room Posted by : maryvpoole | June 17 , 2010 1:45 PM | Report abuse Nice try honey . 
Once again , desperate liberals are in high dudgeon trying to ensare their favorite boogeymen , Bush and Cheney , into this BP spill . 
Preznit Baruch Odinga is the Preznit , it happened on his watch . 
It 's his baby . 
No two ways about it . 
When this first happened , I thought that Cheney -LRB- and company -RRB- might have `` orchestrated '' this spill to upend and end the Obama presidency . 
Perhaps in some subversive , clandestine way , he and\/or Halliburton set it up by selling bad products to BP . 
It 's not beyond the imagination . '' 
Gee whiz , you could use the same -LRB- empty -RRB- imagination as say that Obama may have orchestrated this , and the mining disaster in WV , and the natural gas explosion , as a way to further his cap-and-trade overly green agenda . 
But , it would n't be any fun if we did n't pull politics in on this , nor would it be any fun to not fault Bush\/Cheney , blah blah blah . 
I guess the question is , who is to fault ? 
BP for one , because in the name of the almighty dollar , they cut costs and took risks . 
The Obama administration , because they have had their head so far up their butt and have done little except politicize this disaster . 
Turn down skimmers three days after it first happened ? 
Refuse help from 13 countries ? 
WHY ??? For love love of all those poor folks down there in the Gulf Coast - STOP TALKING , STOP POINTING FINGERS , and DO SOMETHING ! 
We do n't need another speech from Obama , or know that he 's on his fifth trip to the area ... I want to hear about money being poured into the area , giving shrimpers the equipment they need to help skim , or clean the beach , or the marshes . 
You hear NOTHING about a ramp up of resources , just more political BS ... Posted by : uncasquig | June 17 , 2010 1:49 PM | Report abuse I believe Cheney would say he 's for SAFE drilling ... like what has been done in the Gulf for 60 years with thousands of rigs . 
He 'd also point out that it was Halliburton that tried tell the BP people there that what they were doing was unsafe ... The difference between Cheney and vandenHeuvel is Cheney lives in the REAL WORLD . 
Were whether you like it or not we NEED oil . 
See Republicans support safe ways to drill for oil . 
In fact if this happened on land in ANWR it would have been capped in a DAY !!! It 's Liberals like vandenHeuvel that force oil companies to do deep sea oil drilling . . 
He who made his first priority in office the setting up of a new energy policy with secret meetings with his old partners . 
This disaster can be laid directly at the feet of Dick Cheney\/George Bush 's so-called energy policy - really just a another scam to fleece the America people . 
Too bad you 're all too busy blaming them to actually start coming up with solutions . 
This article is thin on its connect the dot facts . 
The loose fittings to former employees getting jobs and dredging up the Energy Task Force 's lack of transparency are sad . 
Next time your calling Dick a dick , please do a better job . 
This article shows little research and does a poor job of bringing any new information to light . 
I feel like my 15 year old could write a better researched and more sufficient piece . 
Cheney is evil and deserves someone doing just that . 
Yes , Shrub and Dick left office 18 months ago , but the damage they did in 96 months takes more than 18 months to clean up . 
Finding all the regulations they gutted takes time , and then they have to be rebuilt to offer some semblance of protection for US citizens . 
Well , I 'm glad you asked , and the answer is THIRTY YEARS . 
Not for the rest of your lives ? 
Sarcasm aside , Katrina 's post was more of a sleazy hit piece than journalism . 
Innuendo , supposition and raw hatred does n't substitute for actual evidence . 
Voters for bush\/cheney UNWILLING TO ADMIT their mistakes , \*\* just like bush\/cheney . 
The atmosphere of relaxed and non existent regulation over any part large corporations reached it 's zenith under them . 
Particularly , they favored the oil industry . 
Both men were oil men and still have ties to the industry . 
Cheney will not say a word because he simply does not want to go on record at all . 
Silence is his protector . 
I 'm sure he 's up to no good . 
What I do n't understand is why President Obama just does n't take a boat out there and wave his hand over the water and make the oil stop ! 
After all he can cool down the planet and make sea levels stop rising . 
This should be easy for him . 
No doubt while he was with Haliburton Cheney and his big oil buddies were not only plotting tax cuts for the rich , but they put something in the oil so the Obama could n't use his superpowers to stop it , like he did when he paid all our mortgages gave free gas and health care . 
The question still remains where is the leader of Haliburton , whose company performed the cemeting of the well to discourage an eruption and explosion . 
Where is Mr. Cheney now ? 
We will leave out the fact that Haliburton ripped the taxpayers to the tune of over $ 100M in Iraq services for direct services to service members in the War theater . 
I lose count of all the unsubstantiated and irrelevant claims in this short piece . 
I 'm surprised she did n't refer to Cheney as a known homo sapien . 
Majority of BP 's lobbyist are former Democrat hill staffers . 
BP was out front on pushing cap-and-trade . 
Yet she wants to know where Cheney is at ? 
Get with reality lady ! 
God help the poor little neocommies who ca n't change their mind and wo n't change the subject . 
They know not what they do -LRB- but that does n't shut them up -RRB- . 
It 's perfectly legitimate to ask why this person who is the face of big oil has nothing to say all of a sudden when the POLICIES OF BUSH\/CHENEY\/SATAN are the reason it happened in the first place . 
Yet it is their fault , thay are to blame . 
It would be no different that asking sara i dont have a brain but mindless sheep love me palin if she still advocates drill baby drill in light of current circumstances . 
but anything more complex than american idol or one of those dance shows being over the heads of repiggers certainly is n't a surprise . 
that 's why there 's a whole industry of people making huge fortunes telling the what to think , because they 're not capable of it on their own . 
huge horde of mindless sheep who lack functioning brains Posted by : red2million | June 17 , 2010 2:29 PM | Report abuse Cheney is busy crafting fiction for real Amerikans . 
Living it up on his multi million dollar bonus from Arab oil company Halliburton . 
Arab Oil company Halliburton ; it is not based in Houston it has an office there same as BP do but it is an Arab oil company based in Dubai . 
It moved there to avoid US taxes and regulations . 
When Democrats stop driving cars and using oil-based energy resources , then and only then will they have the high ground on this issue . 
Until then , they really do n't have much to gain by finger-pointing . 
`` Murky ties to -LRB- the boogyman -RRB- Haliburton '' , ooooohhhhh . 
Do you mean like divesting himself from his company holdings before taking office ? 
By your logic where is Algore ??? Probably b \* oning laurie david in her prius being shipped in the cargo hold of Al 's private jet -LRB- so titanic like -RRB- . 
didnt he show the same love of offsore drilling abd its safety just weeks before the accident . 
Go back to writing for your commie loving and failing magazine . 
well , if you watch the news then you 've heard of this oil rig that blew up , and you understand that there is over 50,000 barrels of oil spilling into the Gulf Of Mexico if you have a computer -LRB- and we know you do stupid -RRB- then you can see live video of the oil spewing into the Gulf THAT IS WHAT IS WRONG WITH THE GOVERNMENT HAVING A COZY RELATIONSHIP WITH THE OIL COMPANIES can you figure that out ??? there is a TOXIC SPILL , polluting the planet , because george bush and dick cheney decided that regulating the oil industry is bad for the oil business are YOU in the oil business ??? because the toxic spill in the Gulf of Mexico is bad for LIFE FORMS are you a life form ??? maybe you should rethink your priorities assuming you are alive , and not in the oil business having cheap gas does n't help us if we 're DEAD Posted by : nada85484 | June 17 , 2010 2:44 PM | Report abuse The CURRENT administration is failing miserably . 
The CURRENT administration signed off on the safety of Deepwater Horizon . 
The CURRENT administration golfed or played beer pong for 60 days . 
The CURRENT administration just delivered the worst Oval Office address in this history of the Oval Office -LRB- yes , even worse than Jimmy the Sweater Wearing Peanut Farmer -RRB- . 
And the CURRENT administration has lost all credibility with the American people for its incompetence . 
Nothing you have had to say here changes that fact . 
But you keep going on blaming George Bush and Dick Cheney for your miserable life . 
I 'm sure that 's psychologically healthy . 
This paper reported on that last week , and it was around 40k that obama got from the cheney industry , with repukes getting ten times that amount . 
bull hockey , how wash , B.S. take your choice , but that 's just a complete crock and a joke of a suggestion . 
Everyone knows the history of cheney and big oil , and in fact many of the bushies had direct ties to the industry . 
but since you moronatards are always wrong as to the issues I understand that you have to believe in an alternate reality and grasp at straws . 
nice try , but obama has n't been sleeing with anyone tied to the cheney industry for the last two century or so as repiglets have . 
middle class people who vote republican are the dumbest people to ever live . 
joe barton was practically in tears , because helllooooh geniuses , him and his kind do n't work for you completeandutterfool they work for exxon mobil , and bp , and the insurance industry , et al. . 
god you people are blind ignorant mindless sheep . 
put down the paper and turn on american idol or some of that garbage , that 's all your little acorn brain can handle ! 
that 's why they pay rush and sean and the rest to think for you . 
quit trying to think for yourselves , that option does n't come with the conservative package Posted by : red2million | June 17 , 2010 2:51 PM | Report abuse For anyone looking for dicky cheney at any time , just rememeber this simple thing : he bears the mark of the beast and sits always at the right hand of Satan . 
He 's not hard to find . 
They think that in 18 months he should have cured cancer , saved the manatee , won two wars , and fixed all the under-the-table dealings with big oil from the Bush administration . 
I like the guy but even I knew he could n't do all that ! 
You wingnuts iz crazy ... Posted by : arancia12 | June 17 , 2010 2:59 PM | Report abuse Where is Otrauma 's BP campaign contribution and what is he going to do with the lucre ? 
Satan must have grown a whole host of right hands because he has them up the tuchies of everyone at the White House right now and you can see him moving their lips from here . 
All the safety guides in the world wo n't help you if you ignore them . 
A jet plane operated safely does n't hurt anyone . 
A plane hi-jacked and flown into a building kills thousands . 
A blowout preventer works fine if the problem comes from underneath the well head . 
If the rig collapses around it , it really does n't have much of a chance . 
Since we 're now finding out that our government refused the offer of help from several experts , I doubt Chaney had anything to do with that . 
Or it could be the guy has more class than anyone of the left leaning dolts that ca n't take responsibility for their own problems or short comings . 
Stop the leak -LRB- the Russians have successfully used nukes to collapse well bores -RRB- 2 . 
Put the millions of unemployed to work cleaning up the beaches -LRB- every BP dollar spent paying someone gives an average of 22 cents back in taxes -RRB- 3 . 
Open the Artic Wildlife Refuge for drilling -LRB- It 's a hell of a lot easier to clean up oil on land than at sea -RRB- Posted by : thensell | June 17 , 2010 3:07 PM | Report abuse That is the most sophmoric column I have ever read . 
`` Murky ties to -LRB- the boogyman -RRB- Haliburton '' , ooooohhhhh . 
Do you mean like divesting himself from his company holdings before taking office ? 
By your logic where is Algore ??? Probably b \* oning laurie david in her prius being shipped in the cargo hold of Al 's private jet -LRB- so titanic like -RRB- . 
didnt he show the same love of offsore drilling abd its safety just weeks before the accident . 
Go back to writing for your commie loving and failing magazine . 
Noooo , I believe she refers to the secret meeting Cheney held with the oil companies , including Halliburton\/KBR and the most odd coincidence that Hallliburton\/KBR scored incredibly lucrative contracts in both Iraq and Afghanistan . 
Cheney received deferred compensation from Halliburton even after taking office and he retained stock options . 
According to Cheney 's 2001 financial disclosure report , the vice president 's Halliburton benefits include three batches of stock options comprising 433,333 shares . 
He also has a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- retirement account valued at between $ 1,001 and $ 15,000 dollars . 
You 're a very angry little person , j. Deep cleansing breaths , and then into your jammies and off to bed with you ! 
I just wish she were not so angry about everything . 
It is several pages long , so most of you do n't have the attention span to read it . 
Look how long the ` Reagan deregulations ' of financial industries took to implode . 
And I am always looking for references to ACORN and Obama 's former preacher and that 1960 ' radical he had some vague dealings with . 
of executive privilege , with the blessings and condoning by the 5 to 4 vote of the conservative republican dominated US supreme court after 8 years of looting and plundering rode out into the sun set . 
Leaving behind a scorched , economically terror besieged , ideologically divided , polarized nation on a fast track of self destruction from within . 
Cheney the shooter opens his loud snotty mouth when he need to hype up the terror propaganda , foment hate , fear , wrap himself in the flag , fart patriotism , or churn up the republican patriotic feeding frenzy to control the hearts and minds of a mislead and gullible nation . 
Let lets the like of Karl Rove , Palin , Hannity , Glen Beck , Limbaugh . 
Ann Coulter and others do his bidding . 
We now continue to pay the price for their staggering incompetence and hatefulness . 
It was their mindless ideological pursuit of total deregulation that led to this mess . 
And no , it makes no difference that they have been out of office for months , they are still responsible . 
After all , Republicans of all stripes continue to blame Clinton , and even Carter , for the messes that those very same Republicans made . 
-- Haiti Earthquake : `` Dems made them sign a pact to -LRB- sic . -RRB- 
the Devil ... '' -- California Wildfires : `` If the Dems had n't stopped us from cutting all the trees down , this would n't have happened ... '' Deepwater Horizon : `` Those horrible Democrats are picking on poor little BP ... Awwwww ! '' 
Sometimes , you gotta fight fire with fire . 
I only wish that the Democratic Party had started to `` man-up '' sooner and stopped apologizing for being Progressive . 
This is their area of expertise , so why are they so quiet ? 
Is it that they only know how to make secret deals with the oil industry , and start wars that they can not justify , and do not know how to fight ? 
Where are these empty heads with mouths that do not stop ! 
agency overseeing their lovers , big oil . 
He should rot in hell . 
Do you see a conspiracy here or was this just a quick column spoken into your voice recorder on the way to work ? 
You had better look out the window and see if little black helicopters with Halliburton painted on the side are hovering outside your office . 
What significance does this article have to anything concerning the Gulf disaster ? 
While her post is nothing more than innuendo , I have found Cheney 's silence curious and more curiouser . 
This is a guy that ran the federal energy program for eight years , such as it was . 
To ask what role the Bush , and for that matter every administration going back to Reagan , had in this mess is not unfair or trying to blame Obama 's predecessor . 
That every major oil company had the same disaster plan on file , with the same errors and deficiencies should make all of us demand an accounting of what happened , why it happened , and just what in h#e@l*l is going to be done about it . 
For all any of us knows , Cheney may have some answers , and to think he might have been part of the problem is not far fetched . 
So , why has a man that probably knows more about the oil industry than anyone in the White House , and who has taken every opportunity to trash the Obama presidency , been so quiet on this matter ? 
Who f ` in cares where the VP from almost 2 years ago is now ? 
Grow up and join the present , maybe it will help you get over your anger for losing 8 years of your life to Bush hatred . 
All she wrote about are closed door meetings and some woman working for BP and is deliberately trying to make a spurious connection between Cheney and what is happening in the Gulf . 
Hell , even the Downing Street memos have more red meat than this . 
Why does n't she try telling us what took 57 days for the Federal government to actually do anything ? 
I do n't think it was because Cheney was standing in the way . 
He really belongs in jail for war crimes , and now crimes against the people of the coast . 
He really can not hide much longer and the Obama administration needs to call him to justice . 
Remember No One is above the law . 
However , I know where he should be and that is standing trial in The Hague . 
He is a criminal and should not be allowed to go free . 
They have the con now ! 
However , if my vote counts , they will not be -- I 'll never vote for any Republican again . 
Yeah , yeah , lets all forget about anything that did n't happen in the last year , and pretend like there is no cause and effect from previous actions -LRB- whoever 's actions , I do n't care who -RRB- that take time to work their way from twisted , high-profit dreams to explosive reality . 
I love me some right-wing , ` lets not regulate those guys ' folks wanting it all cleaned up in 10 seconds . 
The main goal is to not have these disasters to clean up at all . 
How does that happen ? 
Regulation is not enough either , you actually have to oversee and enforce -LRB- that cost money and requires people to be hired to actually DO that -RRB- , or it is just a good idea , not reality . 
I can already hear the screams of ` government interference ' from Big Oil , but they are happy to take massive tax incentives -LRB- they sure need a break , the paupers -RRB- and return it to shareholders who do n't pay the taxes or live in this country . 
Talk about sneaky redistribution of wealth ! 
It is fine to have the opinion that Big Oil is all good and this disaster is an act of God or whatever , but you really ca n't -LRB- logically -RRB- have it both ways . 
It is not realistic at all to want safe drilling and then refuse to pay for the oversight . 
How do you expect it will happen ? 
An immaculate oversight perhaps ? 
Which is more important , the cheap fuel , subsidised by enormous tax breaks to the most profitable businesses on the planet , or the expectation of safety and less risk of more such disasters ? 
Jesus , Mary , Joseph , he 's SILENT . 
This is something some of us have been awaiting since 2000 . 
PLEASE do n't try to lure him from his cave . 
A silent Dick is the best Dick . '' 
Now if we could just get Dick 's MiniMe Liz to shut up also . 
Along with all the right wing loonies who can only bash the current administration for what was the result of eight years of cronyism under the previous administration . 
While the righties delight in blaming Obama for this mess , they can not tolerate fingers being pointed at the real villain , Cheney , whose dark , secret shenanigans have caused the U.S. irreprable harm . 
Maybe 's not too late for ` Dick ` to face the music on corruption charges . 
Try getting money out of those guys when it collapses and kills hardworking Americans . 
We have to continually ask : Why are we selling our precious resources to foreigners who ca n't always be held responsible for their misdeeds ? 
subpoena the log of Halliburton 's deep water submersible for the last 56 days ... Posted by : toconn2 | June 17 , 2010 10:19 PM | Report abuse When Cheney is finally brought up to answer for his crimes , the Republicans will begin to turn their page ... Posted by : mccenroe | June 17 , 2010 10:29 PM | Report abuse I have no doubt that it is really worse than most of us know , including yours truly . 
One thing I do know is that Haliburton signed contracts with the government of Iraq before the government was reconstituted . 
I certainly ALWAYS opposed it !! We have always spoken up for SOLAR , WIND , GEO-THERMAL and most of all , for REDUCTION and CONSERVATION of energy usage . 
NO environmentalist worthy of the name EVER advocated DEEP WATER drilling - -LRB- What is that ? 
... some kind of stupid `` out of sight , out of mind '' crap ? -RRB- 
I have even testified AGAINST off-shore drilling - ... So please stop repeating these bald-faced LIES !!! The next time you feel inclined to say something so blatantly stupid and untrue , just take your `` Drill , Baby , Drill '' T-shirt , banner or pillow case , and stuff it deep into your throat . 
Let 's see , Bush and Cheney have been out of office for going on two years now . 
Katrina is such an original thinker , writer , philosopher and story-teller , is n't she ? 
Let 's see , Bush and Cheney have been out of office for going on two years now . 
Katrina is such an original thinker , writer , philosopher and story-teller , is n't she ? 
There are so many different individuals and agencies to blame . 
It is not just BP -LRB- or the British , you morons -RRB- that is at blame . 
However , the inept , stupid and incompetent Chicago Machine lives and survives in the hearts and minds of the Libtard Nation across America . 
Just me tonight praying we wake up to the threat within . 
jdc Posted by : jdclegg55 | June 17 , 2010 11:53 PM | Report abuse IS it Dick or Barry\/Barock , and what difference does it make . 
We have the largest man made problem in history under Obama . 
What we need is planning to deal with the end of the Gulf of Mexico as we have known it and the attending problems . 
We need the adults in charge . 
The Republicans have done nothing but criticize Obama and then defend BP ! 
Proving once again that the majority of conservatives in this country are greedy and careless people who care only for their own coffers and nothing for the people who are enduring this crisis . 
The same kind of uncaring disregard those same Republicans had for the Katrina victims . 
Conservatives are a sorry , unpatriotic , unchristian and uncharitable lot . 
They 'd sell their own mothers for a buck and that 's what they 're doing when they sell the American people out to the likes of BP , big oil , big energy and deny people health insurance . 
People like Bachman will only start supporting the American people when the oil slick actually hits her state and Barton is obviously in bed with the oil companies . 
This does n't surprise me though . 
Cheney is a freakin coward ! 
And his absence during the oil spill is no different from his absence from military service during Veitnam . 
For those bloggers whose attitude is `` so what ! '' 
should consider what their attitudes were when Cheney was insatiably deriding everything the sitting President did to protect America . 
Coward Cheney & his stank daughter never passed up a change to undermine America . 
This fact should never be glossed over . 
>> -RRB- Are n't you paying attention Jimbob ? 
There 's this big oil spill in the gulf ... Posted by : fantasyva | June 18 , 2010 9:42 PM | Report abuse The comments to this entry are closed . 
