\* Vietnam says naval drills `` routine '' \* China , SE Asian neighbors trade accusations \* U.S. senator wants clear signal to China -LRB- Adds U.S. senator 's comments , paragraphs 13-16 -RRB- HANOI , June 13 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Vietnam 's navy was due to hold live-fire drills off the central coast Monday but a senior naval source sought to downplay the exercises to avoid exacerbating escalating tensions with China over territorial disputes in the South China Sea . 
China and Vietnam have hurled accusations at each other for weeks over what each sees as intrusions into its territorial waters by the other in a swath of ocean crossed by key shipping lanes and thought to hold large deposits of oil and gas . 
Such accusations are not uncommon between China , Vietnam and the Philippines , Malaysia , Brunei and Taiwan , which are also involved in long-standing maritime disputes in the South China Sea , but this bout of tension has run longer than usual . 
The senior navy source , who declined to be identified , said the naval drills were `` routine , '' pre-planned and not related to the territorial disputes . 
`` We should n't pay too much attention to them so as to not add to the tension . 
They 're not aimed at confronting any country , '' said the source , who declined to be identified . 
He declined to confirm that the drills were under way . 
An article in the Vietnamese newspaper People 's Army on Sunday blamed China for creating disputes `` through provocative actions , hostilities aimed at its neighbors and threats to the interests of maritime navigation of other countries -LRB- that -RRB- will not bring good results for China . '' 
SE Asia wary of China as disputes intensify -LRB- ID : nL3E7HA1IZ -RRB- Two sessions of live-fire naval drills were scheduled for Monday in the sea off the coast near the town of Hoi An , a popular tourist destination south of Danang . 
The Vietnamese foreign ministry declined to comment on the drills Monday , but described them last week as routine . 
China 's Global Times , a popular tabloid with a nationalist bent run by Communist Party mouthpiece the People 's Daily , said the drills were `` a military show of force to defy Beijing . '' 
In Vietnam , the government has actively publicized two incidents in recent weeks in which it says Chinese vessels intentionally damaged gear in use by Vietnamese seismic survey vessels in Vietnamese waters , including within Vietnam 's 200 nautical mile -LRB- 370 km -RRB- exclusive economic zone . 
China has denied that its ships have done anything wrong . 
In Washington , a key Democratic lawmaker on Asia policy said he would introduce a U.S. Senate resolution urging China to cease military actions and enter into multilateral talks on maritime territorial disputes with its neighbors . 
`` We need to send a very clear signal to the Chinese , '' said Senator Jim Webb , chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations East Asian and Pacific Affairs Subcommittee . 
`` We need to do our part as a balancing force to bring these issues to the table , '' he said in a speech at a think tank . 
Washington must `` back up what we said '' last year , when Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stressed U.S. support for a collective regional solution to the mosaic of territorial disputes in the South China Sea , Webb added . 
Computer hackers on both sides of the border have taken matters into their own hands , according to media accounts , posting pro-China or pro-Vietnam messages on scores of the other country 's websites , including some belonging to the government . 
Monday , Hanoi publicized a June 10 directive from Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung ordering government agencies to enhance their digital security and develop contingency plans in the face of `` serious threats . '' 
The Philippines , which has also quarreled with China recently over maritime territory , said Monday it would refer to the South China Sea as the West Philippine Sea from now on . 
