Mon Jun 13 , 2011 4:16 am BST -LRB- Corrects first paragraph to show money supply growth at 30-month low -RRB- \* China May new yuan loans ease to 551.6 bln yuan as credit curbs bite \* M2 money supply in May expands at slowest pace in 30 months \* But analysts say c. bank facing tough battle to tame inflation BEIJING , June 13 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Chinese banks extended fewer new loans than expected in May , while broad money supply growth hit a 30-month low , as the government kept its foot on credit brakes in a bid to tame persistent inflation . 
Chinese banks lent 551.6 billion yuan -LRB- $ 85.1 billion -RRB- in local currency loans in May , missing market forecasts for 610 billion yuan , the People 's Bank of China said on Monday . 
Yuan loans outstanding at the end of May were 17.1 percent higher than a year ago , the central bank said in a statement on its website : -LRB- www.pbc.gov.cn -RRB- Annual growth in China 's broad M2 measure of money supply slowed to 15.1 percent in May , the weakest expansion in 30 months , following a rise of 15.3 percent in April . 
The median forecast of economists was for a 15.4 percent increase in M2 and a 17.1 percent rise in outstanding loans . 
`` The lending growth last month was slower than market expectations , showing that tightening measures are biting , '' said E Yongjian , an analyst at the Bank of Communications in Shanghai . 
`` But it is still too early to say that the loan demand is declining because of a slowing economy , and we should not read too much into a single month 's loan data . '' 
Credit curbs are the center piece of China 's monetary policy aimed at the root cause of inflation , which is still running near 3-year highs . 
The central bank has raised banks ' required reserves and interest rates . 
Commercial banks have also been told to scale back lending to the property sector and to financing vehicles run by local governments . 
Even so , analysts believe Beijing still faces a tough battle ahead . 
There is a growing pool of credit in China that falls outside traditional bank loans , including trust loans and bankers ' acceptance bills . 
JPMorgan estimates that such alternative forms of credit have reduced the share of bank lending in China 's total financing to 59 percent last year , from 92 percent in 2002 . 
Xu Nuojin , the deputy head of the People 's Bank of China Guangzhou branch , said in comments published on Monday that inflation could become entrenched because price rises are still driven by too much cash in the economy . 
`` The current inflation level is achieved through the forceful policy intervention by the government , an all-around rebound is very likely to occur once such administrative measures are relaxed , '' he said . 
China 's annual inflation is expected to have edged up to 5.4 percent in May from 5.3 percent in April , matching a 32-month high recorded in March . 
-LRB- $ 1 = 6.480 yuan -RRB- -LRB- Reporting by Aileen Wang , Koh Gui Qing and Kevin Yao ; Editing by Ken Wills -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
