\* Referendum will block atomic power for decades \* Major impact from Fukushima ROME , June 13 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Italians looked set to ban nuclear energy for decades on Monday in a referendum that was strongly influenced by the Fukushima disaster but was also a resounding political vote against Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi . 
Official figures showed turnout easily exceeding the 50 percent quorum needed to validate four referendums , including one on a ban on nuclear power . 
Supporters of the proposals were considered far more likely to vote than opponents and early results showed well over 90 percent of votes cast were in favor of the ban . 
The referendum abrogates a law passed last year restarting Italy 's nuclear program , which had previously been halted in 1987 by another referendum following the Chernobyl disaster . 
The government , conscious of the backlash from Fukushima , had recently suspended the nuclear program in an attempt to undermine the referendum . 
But the vote was seen as ending any prospect of atomic energy in this country in the foreseeable future . 
It extended the global impact of the Fukushima disaster after Japan was hit by a massive earthquake and tsunami in March . 
Germany shut down its seven oldest plants after the disaster and decided last month to close all its reactors by 2022 , in a major policy reversal by Chancellor Angela Merkel . 
Polls show most Italians , like Germans , are against nuclear energy , an emotion increased by Fukushima in a country which is prone to frequent earthquakes . 
Berlusconi is a strong supporter of nuclear power . 
His centre-right government had argued atomic electricity generation was essential for energy security in Italy , which imports almost all its power and has some of the highest prices in Europe -- partly because of the lack of any nuclear plants . 
But Fukushima , combined with a strong effort by the centre-left opposition to get out the vote as a political slap in the face to the prime minister , made selling such plans an uphill battle . 
Rome resident Flavio Rellandini said after the vote : `` I am really happy . 
I mean twenty years ago we said the same thing against nuclear power . 
I just do n't understand why they spent all this money to reconfirm this ... We do not want nuclear plants . '' 
Berlusconi said on Monday , before the referendum result was announced , `` We must probably say goodbye to the possibility of nuclear power stations and we must strongly commit ourselves to renewable energy '' . 
Shares of Italian renewable energy companies rose after his comments , made at a news conference . 
Italy , which imports nuclear-generated power from France , gets more than 50 percent of its electricity from gas , most of which is imported . 
The nuclear vote was one of four successful referendums that are a further setback to Berlusconi , already severely weakened by local elections in May , when centre-right candidates suffered humiliating defeats , including in his powerbase of Milan . 
Analysts say his second political miscalculation in a few weeks -- he urged Italians not to vote in the referendums -- would increase pressure on his coalition partners the Northern League to pull out the rug from under Berlusconi 's government before scheduled elections in 2013 . 
The other referendums were on water privatisation and trial immunity for government ministers -- the latter condemned by Berlusconi 's opponents as part of a strategy to get him off the hook in four concurrent trials for fraud , corruption and paying for sex with a teenage nightclub dancer . 
