The British rescuers searching for signs of life in the rubble of Port-au-Prince The BBC 's David Loyn has met UK rescuers in Haiti as they search for survivors following the devastating earthquake that hit the country . 
Men with the physique of rugby players are as agile as ballet dancers when it comes to crawling through narrow holes in ruined buildings ; and gentle too when it comes to carrying survivors out through unlikely tunnels that they dig through the rubble , sometimes with their bare hands . 
Rudy Parkes , two years off retirement , says that the Haiti earthquake was the worst he has seen in more than 20 years of responding to international disasters . 
But , along with the worst , came the best moment in all that time in the rescue of two-year old Mia , found in a space in the basement of a nursery school on Friday night . 
`` She was under that rubble when we left England in the snow , '' he said , emotional as he remembered the moment Mia was pulled out unhurt and reunited with her mother Cormelle . 
Because of a logistical bottleneck at Port-au-Prince airport , the heavy equipment that the fire officers rely on was not available until after Mia was pulled out , so they had to improvise with a locally-bought shovel and a pickaxe to force their way through the rubble to the void where she was sitting . 
They might have water or food - there is always a chance The following day , the fourth since the earthquake , the fire officers set out more in hope than expectation , as the statistical brutality was that most of those who survived the initial earthquake would now have died through lack of water , food , air or willpower . 
But the rescuers , who are all volunteers with the expenses of their work here paid for by the UK Department for International Development , continued their work anyway . 
Rudy Parkes saw the statistics as defeatism . 
`` They might have water or food . 
There is always a chance , '' he said as the teams , including two dogs , Holly and Echo , were called to site after site where people said there had been voices since the earthquake . 
But each time they found no sign of life . 
The decision to leave and move on was a harsh one for families who still hoped beyond hope . 
In other places people called desperately to the fire officers for people to come and take away bodies as the smell of death and threat of disease have become intolerable . 
But on Saturday afternoon , another British team , from the charity Action UK , were called to a house where a woman was calling out . 
Fire officers joined them and soon made contact with the woman . 
When they had dug in through the side of her house , working from the top of a pile of rubble , pictures from a camera sent down the tunnel showed that she was lying flat on her back in a space not much deeper than herself , with her toes touching the roof . 
A BBC cameraman at the scene , Rob Magee , who speaks fluent French , was called on to help translate and helped to console the woman , Sonia Delmas , 39 , as fire officers inched closer towards her . 
Her daughter was lying dead beside her , but Sonia was pulled out alive and in one piece , crying out thanks to Jesus as she blinked in the open air after almost 100 hours confined with little hope of rescue . 
There is enormous emotion among all those at the scene of a successful rescue . 
It rises up , catching some unawares , and few of these tough men would would deny that a tear comes to their eyes at some point . 
When I asked Martin Fisher , from the Greater Manchester Service , why he does this work , hazardous and uncomfortable as it is , he said : `` Because it makes me feel better '' . 
And he spoke for many in that . 
This has been the largest ever international response to a disaster , with 1,700 rescue workers from more than 40 countries involved . 
They have an extraordinary skill in being able to go deep into damaged buildings and save lives , and they do it in the interests of a common humanity . 
Among 100,000 dead , the 50 or so survivors that have been pulled out by the international rescue teams are a sign of hope for Haiti . 
