Roger Federer & stars play tennis match in aid of Haiti Federer -LRB- left -RRB- , Djokovic and Nadal -LRB- right -RRB- put their rivalry aside to help Haiti Roger Federer was delighted after a series of exhibition games ahead of the Australian Open raised funds for the victims of the Haiti earthquake . 
The world number one was joined by Rafael Nadal and Serena Williams on Sunday at a packed Rod Laver Arena . 
`` I was following it on TV and saw the devastation and I thought we should do something , '' the Swiss star said . 
`` It was a lot of fun . 
It 's a great thing and I 'm happy the players were also in such good spirits . '' 
Haiti was devastated by Tuesday 's earthquake , measuring 7.0 on the Richter scale , and the Red Cross has estimated the death toll at between 45,000 and 50,000 , with millions more injured , orphaned or made homeless . 
National Football League , Major League Baseball and the National Basketball Association in the United States also pledged sums of money . 
Greg McLaughlin , president of the Tiger Woods Foundation , said the foundation staff were evaluating `` the most appropriate role '' to help the Haitian people . 
Just 24 hours before the start of the first major tournament of the season , many of the world 's top tennis players sacrificed last-minute training to help provide some funds for the victims of the tragedy . 
Spectators were charged A$ 10 -LRB- # 5.60 -RRB- to see a number of doubles matches , which also included Belgium 's US Open champion Kim Clijsters , Australian Lleyton Hewitt , American Andy Roddick and world number three Novak Djokovic . 
More than A$ 200,000 -LRB- # 114,000 -RRB- was raised in the event called ` Hit for Haiti ' . 
With players wearing microphones , Federer , who lost to Spain 's world number two Nadal in last year 's Australian Open final , teamed up with reigning Australian Open champion Serena Williams , along with Hewitt and Samantha Stosur . 
`` It was a fun afternoon for all of us . 
But most important is that we can help Haiti , '' Federer told the showpiece center court crowd . 
