Haiti earthquake : Your stories Sunday 17 January The delivery of aid to victims of Haiti 's earthquake is still being slowed by bottlenecks according to aid workers . 
BBC News website readers have been describing how the earthquake has affected them . 
Many people are sleeping on the streets . 
Photo : Thomas Oronti The huge problem about this awful situation is that no-one in Haiti realizes how big this thing is . 
This is because we have too much to worry about and guess what the future is going to be . 
There must be only one or two schools left in my hometown , the hospital is totally destroyed and many houses too . 
There are corpses all over Port-au-Prince , refugee camps with no resources . 
There are thousands of people sleeping in the streets and many criminals were let free . 
I 've seen more horror in the last four days than in my entire life We wo n't be able to live like that for more than a month . 
The situation is disgusting . 
There are people who want to take advantage of this tragedy by selling water and gas at much higher prices . 
That 's so selfish . 
Many of my friends and their parents have already left for the US or the Dominican Republic . 
It took us 200 years to get here , do we have to wait another 200 years now ? 
And who 's going to help rebuild all this if we all chicken out ? 
I wish it could just be a bad dream . 
I 've seen more horror in the last four days than in my entire life . 
Thomas Oronti , Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic I and my fellow co-workers took relief food and water to Port-au-Prince on Saturday . 
We filled two SUVs -LRB- Sports Utility Vehicles -RRB- and one closed-door truck with food and water . 
Survivors urgently need food and water . 
Photo : Thomas Oronti We had heard lots of rumors suggesting the border is closed , roads are impassable and there are riots . 
From our experience this just was n't the case . 
It took us only three-and-a-half hours to get to the Haitian border and an hour to get into Port-Au-Prince . 
The roads were mostly clear and travel was very straightforward . 
We went to a refugee camp and the local police helped organise a queue . 
At first it was fine but as our supplies got low , the people queuing became restless . 
I am surprised there were n't more people handing out aid This was the scariest part of the trip . 
I was so glad we had followed advice and brought a closed door truck rather than an open pick-up . 
We gave the rest of the supplies to some families who were living by the side of a pile of rubble that used to be their apartment . 
People have nowhere to go and are just staying by the ruins that were once their homes , salvaging whatever they can . 
Apart from the slight unrest when handing out our aid , we did n't see any violence or looting . 
The people we saw were very grateful and I am just surprised that there were n't more people handing out aid . 
The NGOs will eventually distribute their aid but they are taking too long and a direct response is needed now . 
The Haitian people need to know someone cares and at the moment no way near enough is being done to give out that message . 
Alastair Cameron , British survivor now back in the UK I was working for a bank - the International Finance Corporation - the non-government arm of the World Bank . 
I and a French lady colleague had left our office . 
The Pan American Health Organization put the death toll at 50,000-100 ,000 . 
Photo : Thomas Oronti I was intending to go back to my apartment in the hotel . 
So we left the office early , but we had a last-minute meeting outside the office , which went on longer than expected and we were delayed . 
Had we been in the office or in the hotel , we would have been dead . 
We were in the car when the earthquake happened . 
We were tossed around incredibly violently , buildings were falling down around us . 
Initially I thought it was an explosion , all you could see was dust . 
It was like a giant was shaking the car ; we were jerked up , down and sideways . 
Natural disasters are tragic events but Haiti had the advantage of a huge number of UN personnel in position . 
They could have started to distribute food and water , but they did nothing . 
I suspect that losing their administrative HQ may account for their lack of action but I find it hard to believe that senior officers at the many well-established bases could not have acted on their own and shown a little initiative . 
