Many young earthquake survivors are filling Haiti 's ophanages The people here in Port-au-Prince have been dealt a terrible blow by Mother Nature , but with tens of thousands dead , the majority of Haitians in this city - in its center and in its suburbs - stand tall and resolute . 
They have seen unimaginable horrors . 
On a rubbish tip lies the body of a baby - his or her parents probably victims of the earthquake too ; other bodies litter the streets and the grounds of hospitals . 
In one , a child with severe head injuries and two broken legs is lying on a dirty floor . 
Her foot is hanging from the bottom of her leg but her father tells us : `` She is a fighter , she does n't want to die but I am not sure how long she can survive without help . 
I hope they will come soon . '' 
They are surrounded by many others , all with horrific injuries . 
Foreign rescue teams have thousands of collapsed buildings to sift through The injured lie side-by-side with the dead , the corpses loosely covered by bloodstained white sheets . 
But the living still cling to hope . 
People walk through the streets of Port-au-Prince wearing face masks . 
Those without them hold their elbows to their noses or pinch their nostrils . 
The pungent smell of death in the searing heat is an awful reality in this city . 
It is hard to avoid it here where so many have died and days later have still not been buried . 
At a collapsed nursing college a crowd quietly waits as a search and rescue team from Brazil desperately looks for survivors in the flattened five-storey building . 
The certificates of those due to graduate blow around in the breeze , a poignant reminder that more than 200 who died here on Tuesday were training to help others . 
There is hushed silence on the street as one of the rescuers hears something from inside . 
Word that someone may have survived spreads among those who have gathered around . 
They stare at the building , a look of hope in their eyes . 
As evening light fades and day turns to night the rescue teams leave . 
The locals hope they will return tomorrow - there are rumors that 25 people here may still be alive , trapped by rubble , dehydrated and in need of food But despite knowing that there may be survivors , as the sun rises the following day , the search teams do not return . 
Stanley does not ask us for help . 
He and his family have picked themselves up and they are getting on with their lives On Friday one young man , Stanley , who has helped us get around the city , tells us he is going to visit his sister for a short time and he will be back later . 
It was only later in the day we discovered that he had left to attend his grandmother 's funeral . 
When he returned to see us he never spoke of the funeral and later we learned that his family are sleeping outside next to the rubble of their former home . 
They have nowhere else to go . 
Even so , Stanley does not ask us for help . 
He and his family have picked themselves up and they are getting on with their lives in the harshest of conditions . 
He is a dignified young man and I respect him greatly . 
I wonder if , in the face of such adversity , I would be as strong as Stanley , or the many other Haitians that I have met in the last few days since this tragedy struck . 
Would I stand tall and resolute ? 
