Mr Wooldridge was a keen skier and mountaineer A British man has been confirmed dead after the devastating Haiti earthquake . 
Frederick Wooldridge had been working in the country for the United Nations , which lost dozens of workers when its Port-au-Prince headquarters collapsed . 
A family statement said the 41-year-old from Kent had `` loved '' his work and `` had many friends in the UN and beyond '' . 
The Foreign Office says more than 30 Britons are safe and well , and it is in touch with worried families of others after Tuesday 's 7.0-magnitude quake . 
The first Briton confirmed dead in the disaster `` was a much-loved member of a close family '' , the relatives ' statement said . 
`` He leaves behind his wife , his parents , brother and sister , grandmother and extended family . '' 
The prime minister is hugely grateful for the work that Frederick and others were doing to build a stronger Haiti , and giving people hope where they had none Mr Wooldridge was a senior political affairs and planning officer at the UN , for which he had worked in Geneva and Liberia before moving to Haiti in 2007 . 
A Downing Street spokesman said : `` The prime minister is hugely grateful for the work that Frederick and others were doing in the UN Stabilisation Mission : helping to build a stronger Haiti , and giving people hope where they had none . '' 
He added that Gordon Brown 's thoughts were also with the loved ones of UK nationals whose whereabouts were yet to be confirmed . 
It is unclear how many Britons remain unaccounted for in Haiti , after the earthquake which killed tens of thousands . 
Steven Fisher , the UK 's ambassador to Haiti and the Dominican Republic , said the Foreign Office 's rapid deployment team was `` doing quite well '' in their efforts to account for expatriate Britons . 
Relatives say hope is fading for missing UN worker Ann Barnes But he added : `` Even getting out and visiting a few sites in the city takes an awful lot of effort . '' 
The Foreign Office said it was beginning to repatriate UK nationals , and had `` located and checked on over 30 other Brits , who have confirmed they are safe and well '' . 
Another UN worker , Ann Barnes , 59 , of Leigh-on-Sea , Essex , is feared to have been killed in the collapse of the headquarters in the capital . 
The UN has lost at least 40 workers , including the head of the local mission , Hedi Annabi , who has been found dead in the rubble . 
Ms Barnes 's sister , Irene Marquet , said : `` She must be still there in the rubble which is an awful thing to know . '' 
British search-and-rescue workers are to begin hunting for survivors in a town near the epicentre of the earthquake five days ago . 
A 71-strong British search-and-rescue team , which includes a number of firefighters and two search dogs , have been deployed the region . 
The workers were due to travel to Leogane , about 19km -LRB- 12 miles -RRB- west of Port-au-Prince , at 0900 local time -LRB- 1400 GMT -RRB- on Sunday . 
UK airlines have flown aid to Haiti In Port-au-Prince , the British rescuers have pulled several survivors from collapsed buildings , including a two-year-old girl removed from the rubble of a nursery on Friday . 
But Wiltshire firefighter Dan Cooke , who is part of the rescue team , warned : `` The people are very tough as a nation and the weather conditions help to keep people alive but as the days go on the chances of people surviving fall massively . '' 
On Sunday , the Bishop of St Albans held a service dedicated to victims of the Haiti earthquake . 
In the service in New Barnet , Hertfordshire , the Rt Rev Alan Smith asked `` parishes , church schools and chaplaincies throughout the diocese to pray fervently and to give generously '' . 
Britons have so far donated # 15m to the Disasters and Emergency Committee , an umbrella group of 13 major British-based charities which has broadcast appeals on TV and radio . 
The group says a # 25 donation buys a kit of household essentials , # 50 is enough to feed a family for a fortnight and # 100 funds temporary shelter for two families . 
The DEC appeal for victims of the earthquake in Haiti Separately , the government has allocated # 2m to deal with `` logistical problems '' on the ground in Haiti , such as the provision of cars and lorries to distribute aid , and to improve communications links . 
A British Airways plane carrying aid has landed in the neighbouring Dominican Republic , while Virgin Atlantic has sent an airliner carrying aid and medical personnel to Miami , with further flights to Orlando and Jamaica due in the coming days . 
Among DEC members ' initial responses to the disaster , an Action Aid emergency team is delivering clean water , shelter and blankets to 20,000 people . 
Oxfam has 10 tonnes of aid arriving over the weekend , including plastic sheeting , chlorine for drinking water as well as body bags . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by telephoning 0370 60 60 900 British Red Cross staff and volunteers have distributed kitchen and personal hygiene kits , blankets , tarpaulins and water containers . 
The UK 's ambassador said there was `` concern '' about the safety of aid workers . 
Search-and-rescue worker Dan Cooke said : `` You hear gunfire , you see gangs of youths carrying machetes but to some extent that is part of the culture here . 
`` We are doing quite well . 
The UN security forces are attaching themselves to us and some teams have brought their own armed security . 
`` We have been working with other teams and local people and they have been fantastic . '' 
The organization United Haitians in the UK has asked for donations of clothes , medicine and money . 
The Red Cross has set up a website to help people abroad to try to contact their relatives . 
A similar site has been created by two Haitians in the US . 
