More quakes will happen and more planning is needed , scientists say The lack of earthquake planning by the international community is a `` disgrace '' , a leading seismologist has said . 
Professor John McCloskey said that governments must prepare for quakes , rather than act after the event . 
The University of Ulster expert led the analysis of the quake that started the Indian Ocean 2004 tsunami . 
`` It is an international disgrace that we appear not to have made the smallest progress in preparation , '' he said . 
`` The ` international community ' is very good at preparing for war but has failed completely to prepare to help the poor , who are always the ones to suffer in these events . 
`` If we want to claim to be civilised we need to ensure that we never see these scenes again . '' 
In a letter to the journal Nature Geoscience he and his team warn that a huge wave-generating quake capable of killing as many people as in the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami could strike off the Indonesian island of Sumatra , with the city of Padang in the path of destruction . 
The danger comes from a relentless increase in pressure over the last 200 years on a section of the Sunda Trench , one of the world 's most notorious earthquake zones , which runs parallel to the western Sumatra coast . 
This section , named after the Mentawai islands , `` is near failure , '' the letter warned . 
Professor McCloskey said that governments were `` refusing the accept the inevitable '' . 
`` Earthquakes happen , they kill people , they will kill more and more people if we do n't organise ourselves properly , '' he said . 
He said the earthquake which rocked Padang , western Sumatra in September last year killing more than 1,000 people was not the `` great earthquake '' scientists were waiting for but it may have made the next massive earthquake more likely . 
Professor McCloskey is the head of the Geophysics Research Group at the UoU 's Environmental Sciences Research Institute . 
He said that while earthquake prediction was `` as far off as ever '' all the indicators are pointed to western Sumatra as a massive quake location . 
`` Scientists can not forecast the exact size of the earthquake but in this case there is complete agreement that it will be very strong , probably bigger than magnitude 8.5 , dwarfing the energy release in the Haitian quake , '' he said . 
`` We also can not say for sure what size the tsunami will be but it has the potential to be very destructive - maybe even worse than 2004 . 
`` But the future need not look like Haiti . 
We know this earthquake is coming and we might have years or even decades to prepare . 
`` Given the unfolding scenes of carnage following the Haiti earthquake and the completely inadequate speed of the international response , the responsibility on the Indonesian government , the international community and the international NGOs is enormous . 
`` We must work urgently to prepare for this earthquake if we are not to witness again the awful scenes of children dying for want of a few stitches or a cast for a broken leg . '' 
