The Great Depression of the 1930s was the most momentous economic event of the 20th century . 
It was a proximate cause of World War II , having fed the Nazis ' rise in Germany . 
It inspired a new American welfare system as a response to mass misery . 
Everywhere , it discredited unsupervised capitalism . 
Given today 's economic crisis , our renewed fascination with the Depression is natural . 
But we ought not stretch the parallels too far . 
The Depression was exceptional in its economic ferocity . 
As Liaquat Ahamed writes in his book '' Lords of Finance '' : `` During a three-year period , real GDP -LRB- gross domestic product -RRB- in the major economies fell by over 25 percent , a quarter of the adult male population was thrown out of work ... The economic turmoil created hardships in every corner of the globe , from the prairies of Canada to the teeming cities of Asia . '' 
Anyone who wants to know why should read this engrossing book . 
Ahamed , a professional money manager , attributes the Depression to two central causes : the misguided restoration of the gold standard in the 1920s and the massive inter-governmental debts , including German reparations , resulting from World War I. His story builds on the scholarship of economists Milton Friedman , Anna Schwartz , Charles Kindleberger , Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temin . 
But Ahamed excels in evoking the political and personal forces that led to disaster . 
His title refers to four men deeply implicated in the era 's perverse policies : Montagu Norman , governor of the Bank of England ; Benjamin Strong , head of the New York Federal Reserve Bank ; mile Moreau , head of the Banque de France ; and Hjalmar Schacht , head of Germany 's Reichsbank . 
Their determination to reinstate the gold standard -- seen as necessary for global prosperity -- brought ruin . 
Under the gold standard , paper money was backed by gold reserves . 
If gold flowed into a country -LRB- normally from a trade surplus or a foreign loan -RRB- , its money and credit supply were supposed to expand . 
If gold flowed out , money and credit were supposed to contract . 
During World War I , Europe 's governments suspended the gold standard . 
They financed the war with paper money and loans from America . 
The appeal of restoring the gold standard was that it would instill confidence by making paper money trustworthy . 
Unfortunately , the war damaged the system beyond repair . 
Britain , the key country , was left with only 7.5 percent of the world 's gold reserves in 1925 . 
Together , the United States and France held more than half the world 's gold . 
The war had expanded U.S. reserves , and when France returned to gold , it did so with an undervalued exchange rate that boosted exports and gold reserves . 
Meanwhile , German reparations to Britain and France were massive , while those countries owed huge amounts to the United States . 
The global financial system was so debt-laden that it `` cracked at the first pressure , '' writes Ahamed . 
That came after a rise in American interest rates in 1928 forced other countries to follow -LRB- no one wanted to lose gold by having investors shift funds elsewhere -RRB- and ultimately led to the 1929 stock market crash . 
As economies weakened , debts went into default . 
Credit and industrial production declined . 
Weakness fed on weakness . 
Sadly , this tragedy has modern parallels . 
Like the 1930s , a worldwide credit collapse is a danger . 
Global stock , bond and bank markets are interwoven . 
Losses in one may prompt pullbacks in others . 
Money flowing to 28 `` emerging market '' countries in 2009 will drop 80 percent from 2007 levels , projects the Institute of International Finance . 
Currency misalignments have , as in the 1920s , distorted trade . 
China 's renminbi is clearly undervalued . 
Still , striking differences separate now from then . 
The biggest is that governments -- unencumbered by the gold standard -- have eased credit , propped up financial institutions and increased spending to arrest an economic free fall . 
The Federal Reserve and the International Monetary Fund have made loans available to emerging-market countries to offset the loss of private credit . 
Nor is there anything like the international rancor that followed World War I and impeded cooperation : In 1931 , the French balked at rescuing Austria 's biggest bank -LRB- Creditanstalt -RRB- , whose failure triggered a chain reaction of European panics . 
When countries left the gold standard -- the United States effectively did so in 1933 -- their economies began to recover . 
Some indicators now imply that the present decline is ebbing -LRB- '' glimmers of hope , '' says President Obama -RRB- . 
China shows similar signs of improvement . 
All this diminishes the dreary comparisons with the Depression . 
But if these omens prove false , a more somber conclusion could emerge . 
The mistakes of the Depression were rooted in prevailing economic orthodoxies , which had been overtaken by new realities . 
The present policies likewise reflect today 's orthodoxies . 
But what if they , too , turn out to be misguided because the world has moved on in ways that become obvious mostly in retrospect ? 
