Haiti quake rescuers pull man from rubble after 11 days A French rescue worker said the man may have had access to food A Haitian man has been pulled alive from the rubble of a ruined hotel after 11 days , as the official search for quake survivors was declared over . 
The 23-year-old man was carried on a stretcher from the Napoli Inn Hotel in the capital , Port-au-Prince . 
Haitians and rescuers cheered as the man , seen to be smiling , was taken towards a waiting ambulance , the BBC 's Adam Mynott reports from the scene . 
Earlier , Haiti 's government said search-and-rescue operations had ended . 
UN spokeswoman Elizabeth Byrs in Geneva said the decision was `` heartbreaking '' but that it had been taken on the advice of experts . 
Mendji Bahina Sanon , 11 - trapped for eight days Lozama Hotteline , 25 - pulled out after seven days Elisabeth Joassaint , 15 days - buried for seven days , half her life Ena Zizi , 69 - rescued after seven days She said most search-and-rescue teams would now be leaving Haiti , although some with heavy lifting equipment might stay to help with the clean-up operation and with aid distribution . 
Rescuers said the man found on Saturday appeared to be in good condition , but thirsty . 
French Fire Commander Samuel Bernes had earlier told AFP news agency he was thought to have been trapped under a piece of concrete but may have had access to food . 
Two people , an 84-year-old woman and a 21-year-old man , were pulled alive from the rubble in Port-au-Prince on Friday . 
The woman , who was found in the wreckage of her home seriously injured and severely dehydrated was taken to the main city hospital for treatment . 
Her son said he had heard her cries on Thursday morning and , almost a day later , he dug her out with the help of friends . 
The 21-year-old man , Emmannuel Buso , was pulled out alive by an Israeli search team and is said to be in a stable condition . 
Speaking from his hospital bed , he described how he had had no food , and had drunk his own urine to keep thirst at bay . 
The head of the Israeli team , Major Amir Ben David , said the rescue had given hope more people could be found alive . 
Broadcasting on the radio daily at 0910 local time -LRB- 1410 GMT -RRB- Twenty-minute program in Haitian Creole Broadcasting on FM in Haiti 's six largest cities Also available on satellite and online , and via social media More than 1,000 mourners gathered on Saturday by Port-au-Prince 's shattered Roman Catholic Cathedral for the funeral of Haiti 's Archbishop Joseph Serge Miot and a vicar , Charles Benoit . 
President Rene Preval attended the service , joined by New York Archbishop Timothy Dolan and the Vatican 's ambassador to Haiti . 
`` I came here to pay my respects to all the dead from the earthquake , and to see them have a funeral , '' mourner Esther Belizair told AP , saying that she had lost a cousin . 
Few funeral services have been held in Haiti for those killed by the quake . 
At least 75,000 bodies have so far been buried in mass graves , Haiti 's government has said . 
Many more remain uncollected in the streets . 
The BBC has started a new radio service in Creole , one of the country 's main languages . 
The 20-minute long daily broadcast , called Connexion Haiti , will try to give people up-to-date information about the basic services they need to survive - such as where to find food , clean drinking water , medical assistance and shelter . 
An estimated 1.5 million people were left homeless by the 7.0-magnitude quake , which some have estimated has killed as many as 200,000 people . 
The UN says 130,000 people have now been relocated out of Port-au-Prince , easing the pressure on overcrowded camps in the city . 
