Hope for Haiti Now footage courtesy of MTV George Clooney has hosted a benefit concert for Haiti earthquake victims featuring A-List names such as Madonna , Julia Roberts , Brad Pitt and Jay Z. Other acts who appeared in the two-hour Hope for Haiti telethon included Bono and Rihanna , who pre-recorded their performances in London on Friday . 
It was shown on all major US TV channels , YouTube and on MTV in the UK . 
It was broadcast on Haiti 's Radio One . 
An estimated 1.5 million people have been left homeless by the earthquake . 
The official death toll from the 7.0-magnitude quake has risen to 110,000 . 
The benefit concert took place in New York , Los Angeles , London and Haiti , and is being screened again on UK TV channel MTV and its sister channel Viva from 2100 GMT on Saturday . 
Clooney , who organised the event , said : `` At the core of every religion is the belief that we care for one another , we take care of each other especially in times of need . 
`` The Haitian people need our help , they need to know they 're not alone , they need to know that that we still care . '' 
The telethon 's organisers were hoping for a record global audience . 
Its performances from London included Beyonce singing her hit Halo , accompanied on the piano by Coldplay 's Chris Martin . 
She changed the lyrics , and sang `` Haiti we can see your halo , we pray you wo n't fade away '' . 
Jay Z also debuted a song , Stranded -LRB- Haiti Mon Amour -RRB- with U2 's Bono and The Edge . 
Coldplay 's Chris Martin and Beyonce Knowles dueted It featured Jay Z rapping about the earthquake while Bono and singer Rihanna 's lyrics included `` Not going to leave you stranded . '' 
As well as musical collaborations , the show broadcast shocking images from the earthquake and interviews with Haitians . 
More than 100 Hollywood and music stars took part . 
Some of them performed while others , including director Steven Spielberg , singer Stevie Wonder and TV star Ellen DeGeneres , took telephone pledges from viewers . 
The line-up featured the cream of Hollywood , including Clint Eastwood , Meryl Streep , Nicole Kidman , Brad Pitt , Robert De Niro , Matt Damon , Cameron Diaz , Denzel Washington , Will Smith , Robert Pattinson , Halle Berry , Julia Roberts , Leonardo DiCaprio , Jack Nicholson , Tim Robbins , Ben Stiller , Michael Keaton , Tom Hanks and Michael Keaton . 
Actress Julia Roberts took donations from the public for the people of Haiti LA-based journalist Sandro Monetti told BBC Radio 5Live : `` Hundreds of millions are pouring in from what has been a very effective telethon . 
`` It was quite a line-up all brought together by George Clooney . 
`` The tone was very sombre and classy , different from the upbeat nature of telethons we have in the UK . 
With that turnout of stars it was quite something . '' 
He added that Madonna gave $ 250,000 -LRB- # 155,000 -RRB- , Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie gave $ 1m -LRB- # 620,000 -RRB- and supermodel Giselle Bundchen gave $ 1.5 m -LRB- # 0.93 m -RRB- . 
Clooney had donated $ 1m during the telethon , his spokesman told Reuters news agency . 
Actors Mel Gibson , Drew Carey , George Clooney and Daniel Craig were at the gig Actor Leonardo DiCaprio signed a cheque for $ 1m to the Clinton Bush Haiti Fund , which was started by former presidents Bill Clinton and George W Bush . 
Haitian-born rapper Wyclef Jean - who set up the charity foundation Yele Haiti - Bruce Springsteen , Jennifer Hudson , Mary J Blige and Shakira performed in New York . 
Madonna sang Like A Prayer with the backing of a choir , while Sting sang Driven To Tears . 
Rihanna , meanwhile , performed a cover version of Bob Marley 's Redemption Song , which she has released to raise money for the people of Haiti . 
The live program could be seen online via YouTube , MySpace , Hulu , Fancast , AOL , MSN , Yahoo ! 
, Bing.com , BET.com , MTV.com , CNN.com , VH1 . 
Sting and Madonna each performed at the show As well as donations from viewers , more money will be raised through the sale of songs performed on the show , via iTunes . 
Meanwhile , Rod Stewart , Leona Lewis , JLS and Michael Buble have signed up to provide vocals for a Haiti charity single , organised by Simon Cowell . 
They will record a cover of REM 's ballad Everybody Hurts . 
Wyclef Jean 's charity foundation has taken on a new accounting firm after the rapper admitted on Friday it had made mistakes . 
The finances of the Yele Haiti Foundation were questioned last week after it was revealed it had paid Jean , 37 , to perform at fund-raising events and bought advertising air time from a television station he co-owns . 
On Wednesday , the Grammy-winning artist told talk show host Oprah Winfrey the charity had `` learned from our mistakes '' . 
`` In moving forward , I think we 're going to be stronger than ever , '' he said . 
