Haiti quake victim rescue operation declared over Humanitarian relief is being scaled up as rescue efforts come to an end Haiti 's government has made the `` heartbreaking '' decision to declare the search and rescue phase for survivors of the earthquake over , the UN says . 
The announcement came a day after two people , an 84-year-old woman and a 21-year-old man , were pulled alive from the rubble in Port-au-Prince . 
The UN spokeswoman Elizabeth Byrs says 132 people have been rescued since the earthquake 11 days ago . 
On Friday the official government death toll from the quake rose to 110,000 . 
Speaking in Geneva , Ms Byrs said that the decision to end the rescue operation was `` heartbreaking '' but that it had been taken on the advice of experts . 
She said most search and rescue teams would now be leaving Haiti , although some with heavy lifting equipment may stay to help with the clean-up operation and with aid distribution . 
She added that humanitarian relief efforts were still being scaled up in Port-au-Prince , as well as in the towns of Jacmel , Leogane and other areas affected by the earthquake . 
The BBC 's Adam Mynott , at a university building in Port-au-Prince where many people are feared buried , says there has been some disquiet among Haitians about the decision to end search efforts . 
But although two people were pulled out alive in the capital on Friday , it is believed rescue teams have detected no new signs of life under the rubble for the past three days , our correspondent says . 
Rescued after 10 days in rubble On Friday an 84-year-old woman was found in the wreckage of her home seriously injured and severely dehydrated . 
She is being treated by doctors at the main city hospital with intravenous fluids and drugs . 
Her son said he had heard her cries on Thursday morning and , almost a day later , he dug her out with the help of friends . 
Meanwhile , a 21-year-old man , Emmannuel Buso , was pulled out alive by an Israeli search team and is said to be in a stable condition . 
Mendji Bahina Sanon , 11 - trapped for eight days Lozama Hotteline , 25 - pulled out after seven days Elisabeth Joassaint , 15 days - buried for seven days , half her life Ena Zizi , 69 - rescued after seven days Speaking from his hospital bed he described coming out of the shower when the earthquake hit . 
He said he had no food , and drank his own urine to keep thirst at bay . 
The head of the Israeli team , Major Amir Ben David , said the rescue had given hope more people could be found alive . 
No decision has yet been taken on whether the Israeli team will now go home , the Associated Press news agency reported . 
More than 1,000 mourners gathered on Saturday by Port-au-Prince 's shattered Roman Catholic Cathedral for the funeral of Haiti 's Archbishop Joseph Serge Miot and a vicar , Charles Benoit . 
President Rene Preval attended the service , joined by New York Archbishop Timothy Dolan and the Vatican 's ambassador to Haiti . 
`` I came here to pay my respects to all the dead from the earthquake , and to see them have a funeral , '' mourner Esther Belizair told AP , saying that she had lost a cousin . 
Few funeral services have been held in Haiti for those killed by the quake . 
At least 75,000 bodies have so far been buried in mass graves , Haiti 's government has said . 
Many more remain uncollected in the streets . 
The BBC has started a new radio service in Creole , one of the country 's main languages . 
Broadcasting on the radio daily at 0910 local time -LRB- 1410 GMT -RRB- Twenty-minute program in Haitian Creole Broadcasting on FM in Haiti 's six largest cities Also available on satellite and online , and via social media The 20-minute long daily broadcast , called Connexion Haiti , will try to give people up-to-date information about the basic services they need to survive - such as where to find food , clean drinking water , medical assistance and shelter . 
An estimated 1.5 million people were left homeless by the 7.0-magnitude quake , which some have estimated has killed as many as 200,000 people . 
The UN says 130,000 people have now been relocated out of Port-au-Prince , easing the pressure on overcrowded camps in the city . 
Meanwhile the UN agency the World Food Programme says it has increased its food aid to survivors . 
Speaking after a two-day evaluation mission to Port-au-Prince , the executive director of WFP , Josette Sheeran , said that on Friday the agency had delivered about 2 million meals . 
`` This is the most complex operation WFP has ever launched , '' she said . 
`` Haiti 's entire supply chain infrastructure has been devastated , and we have been faced with launching an operation from scratch . '' 
A benefit concert featuring more than 100 music and Hollywood stars has been broadcast around the world to raise money for the victims of the earthquake . 
