Dr Ernest Benjamin says the woman is `` critically ill '' Two people have been rescued after spending 10 days under rubble following the devastating Haiti earthquake . 
Doctors say the woman , who is 84 , is in a grave condition , but that they are doing all they can to save her . 
And an Israeli search team pulled a 21-year-old man alive from the rubble . 
He is said to be in a stable condition . 
The rescues came as the official government death toll from the earthquake rose to 110,000 . 
But the search operation is almost over . 
UN spokeswoman Elizabeth Byrs said some rescue teams were leaving , as they were exhausted and there was now little hope of finding more people alive under the rubble . 
Those that remained were `` concentrating more and more on humanitarian aid for those who need it '' , she said . 
A benefit concert featuring more than 100 music and Hollywood stars has been broadcast around the world to raise money for the victims of the earthquake . 
The 84-year-old woman survivor , rescued on Friday after 10 days in the rubble , is being treated by doctors at the main city hospital with intravenous fluids and drugs . 
`` I 'm trying to find out how I can help her survive , '' Dr Ernest Benjamin said . 
`` It 's worth everything to try to save her . '' 
Her son told the agency he had heard her cries on Thursday morning and , almost a day later , he dug her out with the help of friends . 
The Israeli team which rescued the young man , Emmannuel Buso , told the Associated Press news agency that they had called out to him near the debris of his home and to their surprise , he responded . 
`` I felt the house dancing around me '' In an interview with AP from his hospital bed , he describes coming out of the shower when the earthquake hit . 
`` I felt the house dancing around me , '' he said . 
`` I did n't know if I was up or down '' . 
He described passing out in the rubble , dreaming at times that he could hear his mother 's voice . 
He said he had no food , and drank his own urine to keep thirst at bay . 
The head of the Israeli team , Major Amir Ben David , said the rescue had given hope more people could be found alive . 
In Port-au-Prince , life is slowly returning to normal , with shops opening and buses running - although many residents are continuing to leave the devastated capital . 
Christian Fraser , BBC News , Jacmel Jacmel , a former colonial coffee town , is desperate for help . 
Perhaps one in three buildings in the old town now lies in ruins - more than 100 years of history , shattered in a few catastrophic seconds . 
At the Saint Michele hospital the patients are lying in the garden , baking in the heat , without enough doctors to help . 
The hospital buildings are too unstable to use . 
In the operating theater , nurses swat flies as the surgeons do what they can . 
Outside , the injured scream for painkillers . 
Construction for the temporary centres has already started , the Associated Press news agency says , but it is unclear when they will be populated . 
Aid officials say about 200,000 people have already left the city , many to stay with relatives in other parts of the country . 
Some 122 people have been saved by international search and rescue teams , according to the US government . 
At least 75,000 bodies have so far been buried in mass graves , Haiti 's government has said . 
Many more remain uncollected in the streets . 
An estimated 1.5 million people were left homeless by the 7.0-magnitude quake , which some have estimated has killed as many as 200,000 people . 
Some Haitians have tried to flee abroad , but US Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano warned Haitians not to use the earthquake as an excuse to try to enter the US illegally . 
Haitians need to be there to help rebuild their country , this is not an opportunity for migration She said anyone caught trying to do so would be repatriated . 
`` Haitians need to be there to help rebuild their country , this is not an opportunity for migration , '' she said . 
At least 500,000 people are currently living outdoors in 447 improvised camps in Port-au-Prince , according to the International Organisation for Migration -LRB- IOM -RRB- , with limited shelter and access to water . 
Western countries were hoping to boost donations for the aid effort with a multi-network telethon . 
Hope for Haiti Now , broadcast from New York , London , Los Angeles and Haiti , featured Madonna , Bruce Springsteen , Beyonce and other major artists . 
The concert was shown on all major US TV channels , MTV in the UK and worldwide on YouTube . 
