Aid has reached some in Cite Soleil , but many are still needy In some parts of Cite Soleil the houses are nearly back-to-back . 
Their zinc sheeting is bent and rusted , but they are still standing . 
People are selling yams and other vegetables , and water packed in little plastic bags . 
They shout out the name of their product , but there are hardly any takers - people can not afford it . 
This is the most notorious neighborhood in Haiti and it stretches as far as the eye can see . 
Seafront property in the Caribbean is desirable everywhere apart from here . 
The low-lying ground is muddy in parts . 
You can not quite tell what you are walking in and you do not really want to . 
I head across to talk to Mirilande , who is selling rice with some sort of meat mixed in . 
It smells fantastic and she has a few customers . 
When I ask the price of a plate she tells me five Haitian gourdes , which is about 12 US cents . 
But still many can not afford to buy . 
Some 70 % of the people in this country lived on less than $ 2 -LRB- # 1.20 -RRB- a day and that was before the earthquake , which has destroyed much of what little economic activity there was . 
Flights used for aid drops have been passing over the neighborhood `` They 're willing to buy here because they do n't have food at home - they have water but no food , '' says Mirlande . 
As we chat , another US Navy helicopter flies overhead . 
Areas like Cite Soleil are exactly the kind that the UN and the US military have had concerns over . 
As delays continue and people wonder where the supplies are , there is more anger about the lack of action on the ground . 
Would it cause security problems if - as some had suggested - air drops took place here ? 
After all , the US Air Force is dropping pallets of food and water from C-17 transport planes to those isolated by the quake , but this community is just a few miles away from the tonnes of food and supplies that have come into the airport and still have not been distributed . 
My question gets a mixed response , there are some saying no and others saying yes . 
`` I trust in God '' , says one woman . 
Another , younger woman says she needs to feed her baby . 
`` They 're killing us , '' she says . 
She seems adamant that she would do anything to save her child 's life . 
Some residents expressed fears that dropping food on the central reservation now used by those whose homes had been destroyed might kill people . 
Medical treatment is available in the neighborhood , and a hospital is treating those injured in the quake . 
As we try to get in we are followed by a couple of guys just trying to get past the crowds of people outside . 
People have been receiving medical treatment , but supplies are low Security stops them and there is a heated argument , but it is resolved quickly . 
As we enter , a hand painted sign with an AK-47 on a white background with a red `` X '' through it is a reminder of what life was like here before the quake . 
For now , doctors are treating wounds that should have already have begun healing . 
The lack of medical supplies means that as I walk round I see lots of amputations - crush injuries not treated , leading to infection and loss . 
A young woman lying on the ground next to her daughter asks me if I can help because she has no money for anything . 
The little girl 's lower leg is gone , cut off beneath the knee . 
She just stares out across a packed ward . 
I ask the receptionist how many people the hospital normally treats . 
She does not know , but she tells me they are seeing 400 patients a day . 
It is like a revolving door of pain in Cite Soleil . 
The sound of the latest humanitarian mission can be heard overhead as yet another chopper flies by , whilst on the ground `` Sun City '' remains in the dark . 
