Up-to-date information is vital for the people of Port-au-Prince The BBC has started broadcasting radio programs in Creole to earthquake-stricken Haiti . 
The programs are to provide much-needed information to Haitians struggling to deal with the effects of last week 's devastating disaster . 
Connexion Haiti is a 20-minute daily show , broadcast from 0910 to 0930 local time -LRB- 1410 to 1430 GMT -RRB- on FM in Haiti 's six largest towns and cities . 
It is also available on satellite and online , and via social media . 
Any radio station in Haiti also has free and unlimited access to the programs . 
The show focuses on practical information and public health advice . 
The aim is to provide a lifeline to the survivors of the tragedy and to try to bring information about missing people . 
This is the first time the BBC is broadcasting in Creole , Haiti 's national language . 
Preparations for the new BBC Creole service launch The earthquake has seriously disrupted the country 's communication system , leaving millions of Haitians without crucial information about aid efforts . 
Local radio stations have been doing their best to get news bulletins on air , report on the catastrophe and help families to locate relatives . 
Radio has always been the most popular form of media in Haiti , the poorest country in the Americas . 
Even stations that did not suffer serious earthquake damage are now having problems keeping their programs on air , because they ca n't get enough fuel for their generators . 
The lack of information is of serious concern to the UN , and the national government , and is a major obstacle for the aid operation in the country . 
A significant part of the population still lacks information about where to get help and support . 
The new BBC program is being produced in Miami by a multilingual team assembled especially for this task . 
The daily program is broadcast between 0910 and 0930 Haiti time -LRB- 1410 to 1430 GMT -RRB- on six FM relays on the island : Port-au-Prince 89.3 FM ; Cap-Hatien 105.5 FM ; Gonaves 90.5 FM ; Las Cayes 106.9 FM ; Jacmel 96.9 FM ; and Jrmie 92.7 FM . 
It is also broadcast on shortwave to the country and will be available on the Canal Satellite Antilles , Caribbean-wide radio and TV satellite network . 
