UK rescuers describe Haiti ordeal after flying home Welsh fireman William Howells pulled a two-year-old girl out of the rubble UK rescuers returning home from Haiti 's earthquake have been describing the harrowing conditions on the ground . 
Fireman William Howells said he pulled a woman out of the rubble who was clinging to her dead baby and also managed to save a two-year-old girl . 
He said : `` It was difficult to keep the tears from coming down the face , you were sort of biting your lip . '' 
As many as 200,000 people were killed and two million made homeless following the quake on 12 January . 
Mr Howells , from Mid and West Wales Fire and Rescue Service , was one of about 60 UK firefighters who arrived at Gatwick airport early on Saturday morning along with other rescuers . 
He told the BBC : `` A two-year-old girl was crying for her mother in the rubble , and we tried several different entry points to gain access to her . 
Volunteer Andy Read had been on his first rescue mission `` In the end we managed to pinpoint where she was and eventually freed her . 
She came out with little tassels still in her hair and she was still fully clothed . 
`` It was quite an emotional moment . 
It was difficult to keep the tears from coming down the face , you were sort of biting your lip . 
We could have worked all night after that . '' 
Andy Read , from rescue charity Rapid-UK , said : `` It 's mixed emotions . 
We 've seen many , many sights , good and bad . 
I 'm just very pleased to be part of the UK response , it 's great to have made some sort of difference out there . '' 
The head of the charity , Clive Hodges , said his team was physically and mentally exhausted . 
He said : `` They rushed out there and have n't stopped working since . 
It 's taken them the best part of 24 hours to get back ... they were physically demanding conditions , the weather was hot and that in itself has taken its toll . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by telephoning 0370 60 60 900 `` It was a hard deployment but they can be justifiably proud of what they have achieved . '' 
International Development Secretary Douglas Alexander said : `` We should all be proud of the brave UK firefighters who worked tirelessly to help the Haitians in difficult and dangerous conditions . '' 
A total of 132 people were pulled alive from the rubble , the United Nations -LRB- UN -RRB- has said . 
Officials said Thursday was the first day they had failed to pull anyone out alive and the operation had turned into a relief rather than a rescue mission . 
The rescuers from Gloucestershire-based Rapid-UK said they had done all they could to find survivors of the 7.0-magnitude quake during their deployment alongside other British and Haitian firefighters . 
Mr Howells described the painstaking rescue of a 39-year-old woman who was clinging to her dead two-year-old daughter . 
He said : `` It was a tough job for us because there was a massive slab of concrete which had steel reinforcing in it which was over her top . 
She was hanging on to her daughter who was alongside her , but sadly her daughter lost her life . 
British teams return home as the search and rescue phase in Haiti ends `` It was difficult for us to work in those conditions to free the mother from the hold she had on her daughter . '' 
He said it took two hours to make enough of an entry point to grab her feet and slowly pull her out of a very small opening . 
`` We got her on the stretcher , she had a couple of cuts and bruises and off she went to hospital . 
It was another good result , '' he said . 
The rescuers ' departure came as the Disasters Emergency Committee revealed that UK donations to its appeal for Haiti had so far reached more than # 42m . 
A charity single cover of REM 's Everybody Hurts featuring artists including Leona Lewis , Rod Stewart and the band JLS is also being released to raise money for the appeal . 
Relief workers are heading to the capital with water , food , drugs , telephones and clothing . 
Some supplies of aid from the UK have already been flown out to the country . 
One Briton is confirmed dead in the disaster , with another still missing . 
UN worker Frederick Wooldridge , 41 , from Kent , was the first Briton named among the dead , along with dozens of his colleagues . 
Another Briton , UN worker Ann Barnes , 59 and originally from Leigh-on-Sea , Essex , remains missing . 
