Rescuers say determination is key to survival when trapped Rescue efforts have been declared officially over in Haiti , 11 days after the earthquake . 
The BBC 's Anna Jones examines how people survive in the rubble - and what dictates the duration of search operations . 
The UN usually decides to call off search and rescue attempts between five and seven days after a disaster , once no-one has been saved for a day or two - but people have been known to survive for much longer . 
In 1995 , Park Seung Hyun was pulled from the wreckage of a collapsed supermarket in Seoul , South Korea , 16 days after it collapsed and in January 2004 , Shahr-Banu Mazandarani , an Iranian woman in her 90s was rescued after nine days buried in the rubble of her home after the Bam earthquake . 
In one extraordinary case in December 2005 , a 40-year-old woman was found buried in what had been her kitchen in Pakistan-administered Kashmir , more than two months after an earthquake hit the region . 
Doctors said it was a miracle that Naqsha Bibi had survived so long in a space so small she could not move . 
Julie Ryan , a co-ordinator with UK-based group International Rescue Committee -LRB- IRC -RRB- , says that survival largely depends on what happens the moment the quake first hits . 
`` The ideal situation is you have become trapped and entombed but have some sort of oxygen supply from the outside world , are not injured and also have some sort of access to water , '' she told the BBC . 
`` You have usually managed to get yourselves into some sort of void where you are enclosed by the building but it does n't injure you . '' 
She said an IRC team rescued three boys who had been buried in the ruins of their school for five days after the earthquake in Pakistan in 2005 . 
`` They were laid flat on backs next to each other , with the ceiling touching their noses but totally unhurt , '' she said . 
Another boy alongside them had died . 
After so long in the dark , rescue teams had to cover the boys ' eyes as they pulled them out , to protect them from the strong sunlight . 
Dr Tejsrhi Shah of Medecins Sans Frontieres says many of those injured in earthquakes are so badly hurt they would not reach medical care . 
But she says that if people are trapped , `` just the immobility will reduce your chance of survival '' . 
Being unable to move or having injuries to limbs can lead to crush syndrome , she says , where blood flow to the limbs is disrupted . 
When the crush is removed , a build-up of toxins floods the body and it is unable to cope . 
Mazandarani spent nine days in the rubble of her home `` It causes renal damage and shock , people are in agony with the pain and have a high risk of developing renal failure if do n't get urgent medical care , '' she said . 
Dr Shah says there are reports of people surviving in rubble even longer than two weeks , but such cases are `` incredibly rare '' . 
`` The chances of getting someone out alive decreases with each day , '' she says . 
Being trapped in a confined space also means a rising temperature and an increase in carbon dioxide , which , if it reaches too high a level , leads to suffocation . 
Search teams monitor for rising levels of CO2 in a building - a rise means someone is trapped inside and breathing . 
When CO2 levels stop rising , the search is no longer needed . 
Graham Payne , chairman and founder of rescue charity Rapid , told the BBC trapped people could go quiet for hours at a time if they passed out or fell asleep but teams never gave up on them . 
`` You think you 've lost them but you carry on . 
It might be another eight hours , then they start making noise again . 
`` But if they 're trapped and we can hear , then we get them out , we do n't give up . '' 
If you are uninjured , have an air supply and are in an adequate space - however small - the next priority is water . 
Dr Shah says estimating how long people can survive without water is the `` million dollar question '' , but that the average is between three and seven days . 
`` It depends on the ambient temperature , how much fluid you 're losing through sweat , if you have diarrhoea , how healthy you are , how old you are , '' she says . 
A few fortunate people may find themselves trapped with a clean supply but others will find a trickle of rainwater , condensation or even use water from inside radiators . 
Following the South Korean supermarket collapse , IRC rescued a man who had been trapped for 13 days - he had been drinking drops of rainwater and eating cardboard lying around him to stave off hunger . 
Some of those rescued in Haiti have spoken of being encouraged by hearing voices around them . 
But Ms Ryan says that as time goes on , knowing other people are trapped can be more upsetting than comforting . 
`` The man trapped in Korea was initially lying with quite a few people but one by one they all stopped talking . 
So psychologically , it does n't do any good . '' 
She says the best thing buried survivors can do is stay calm and listen , however hard that may be . 
`` We use sound location equipment to look for survivors , which picks up tapping . 
If you hear tapping , tap back , or shout , '' she says . 
But despite the best preparation and advice , rescuers say survival often comes down to `` sheer determination '' . 
`` It 's the will , '' says Mr Payne . 
`` Some people just accept they are trapped and it 's fate . 
Others just keep going . '' 
