The World Health Organisation literally changed the rules of the game while playing it last week , when it said it was rethinking the criteria it would use to declare a global flu pandemic is underway . 
Britain and other countries affected by the newly-discovered H1N1 virus were pushing WHO Director-General Margaret Chan to pause before raising the six-point pandemic scale to its highest notch , as her United Nations agency 's rulebook says she should do once it is spreading in more than one region of the world . 
Those rules were developed in anticipation of a pandemic from the toxic H5N1 bird flu strain , which kills about half those it infects but so far has not passed easily from person to person . 
The WHO activated that alert system when it saw the new strain -- which has genetic pieces of swine , bird and human viruses -- was killing people in Mexico , including the young and seemingly healthy . 
But it caused milder symptoms as it spread worldwide , and health experts now say that many of those infected may not even realize it . 
So does its global spread still represent a pandemic ? 
After weeks of trying to explain that its alert scale is based on the way a potentially dangerous virus is spreading , not the severity of its effects at the present time , the WHO capitulated to pressure and changed its guidance . 
Top official Keiji Fukuda told reporters on Friday that `` what we are looking for and what we will be looking for is something , events , which signify a really substantial increase in risk of harm to people . '' 
This means that although there are pockets of sustained transmission in Japan , Britain , and Spain , the WHO will not have to issue the top alert unless the virus mutates or reverts to a more dangerous form . 
While many nations are congratulating Dr. Chan for adding `` flexibility '' to the pandemic rules , others are raising questions about whether the WHO erred in yielding to the pressure from the mainly-rich countries with confirmed flu infections so far , who would be compelled to cough up money , drugs , vaccines , diagnostic tests , and other technology to poor nations if the world was on edge about Phase 6 flu . 
A less severe threat level means less urgency in addressing those health-system shortcomings that affect not only poor countries ' response to H1N1 , but also other deadly diseases such as tuberculosis , malaria , dengue and cholera . 
While the WHO has said gaps in the world 's `` pandemic preparedness '' must be addressed as a matter of priority , it is apparent that this particular flu is not seen as enough of a trigger do so . 
And that could have as much to do with politics as with science . 
-LRB- Photo : Japanese students wear masks in Tokyo\/Toru Hanai -RRB- It is n't just `` that this particular flu is not seen as enough of a trigger '' to mend the gaps in worldwide preparedness against a pandemic , it is also such that WHO is trying to avoid unnecessary alarm and public unrest . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
She previously spent five years in Switzerland reporting on diplomacy , banking and energy trading , and before that covered U.S. economic and regulatory issues as a Treasury Department and Securities and Exchange Commission reporter in Washington . 
