SANAA | Wed Aug 10 , 2011 11:51 am EDT SANAA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - In Sanaa 's battle-scarred Hasaba neighborhood , the distant chanting of protesters demanding the removal of President Ali Abdullah Saleh is punctuated by gunfire nearby , reminding residents that Yemen 's torment may be far from over . 
`` We ca n't take much more of this , '' said Arafat Ahmed , shaking his head as he stuffed bags with bread in his tiny bakery . 
`` Life has come to a halt . 
It 's clear that armed confrontation is the only option until the crisis is resolved . '' 
Bloody street fighting rocked Hasaba , home to Sadeq al-Ahmar , a tribal foe of Saleh , in May after the president reneged again on a Gulf-brokered plan to end his 33 years in power . 
The mortar and machinegun clashes subsided after a bomb blast wounded Saleh in his presidential compound , forcing him to seek treatment in Saudi Arabia , where he is recuperating . 
Now , with troops again manning checkpoints around the capital , the crackle of shooting in the crumbling alleyways of Hasaba -- and outbreaks of fighting elsewhere in a country awash with guns -- have reignited fears of civil war . 
For seven months , tens of thousands of Yemenis , including those in a protest camp not far from Hasaba , have demonstrated against Saleh . 
But shootouts between government forces and anti-Saleh gunmen are increasingly marring the peaceful protests . 
Yemen , the Arab world 's poorest state and host to an ambitious al Qaeda branch , borders oil giant Saudi Arabia . 
Gulf and Western powers fear it could collapse into a failed state on the doorstep of some of the world 's largest oil reserves . 
Fighting is on the rise in at least five parts of this rugged , mountainous country on the southern rim of the Arabian Peninsula . 
More and more armed men roam the streets of Yemeni cities as suspicions and frustrations multiply . 
The United States and Saudi Arabia , wary of turmoil that could give al Qaeda more room to operate , have been pressing Saleh for months to accept a transition plan brokered by Yemen 's wealthier neighbors in the Gulf Cooperation Council . 
Saleh has vowed to return to Yemen , even as U.S. officials urge him to stay away , deepening a political stalemate . 
Many Yemenis worry that it is too late to stave off a descent into bloodshed that would only compound their misery . 
`` I think the political solution has been eroded in favor of fighting . 
But even the fighting will not end the battle , '' said Yemeni analyst Ali Seif Hassan , citing the standoff in Sanaa between government forces and military units commanded Ali Mohsen , a powerful general who has defected to the opposition . 
`` When Yemen 's capital becomes divided like this , it means Yemen will be broken into more than one entity , '' he said . 
A similar confrontation between pro-Saleh forces and opposition tribesmen has turned Taiz , 200 km -LRB- 120 miles -RRB- south of Sanaa , into another tense and divided city . 
Fighting has already forced tens of thousands of Yemenis to flee their homes . 
Some are from villages shelled during battles between the army and opposition tribesmen . 
Thousands more have escaped from southern towns engulfed in clashes between troops and suspected al Qaeda militants and other Islamist fighters . 
Hasaba residents are bracing for the worst . 
Many have piled sandbags outside their already shell-pocked homes . 
At the nearby protest camp , some still believe in peaceful change but fear that violence could eclipse their struggle . 
`` We still hope to achieve our demands peacefully , but if we ca n't , it raises the threat of war , '' said leftist activist Samia al-Aghbari , sitting outside the rows of protest tents , her frowning face framed by a bright pink veil . 
Desperation is gripping many Yemenis as fuel shortages and soaring prices overwhelm a country where a third of the people suffer chronic hunger and nearly half live on $ 2 a day or less . 
Some residents , frustrated by their own politicians , are also turning their anger on foreign powers they feel have not put enough pressure on the government to reach a solution . 
`` If Saudi Arabia or America wanted Saleh to go they would have done it , '' complained Sanaa shopkeeper Yahya Musallah . 
`` The situation could be finished in less than a month . 
But they keep waiting and the war will come before they intervene . '' 
