Majority of BP spill ` dealt with ' President Obama : `` The long battle to stop the leak and contain the oil is finally close to coming to an end '' Almost three-quarters of the oil spilled in the Gulf of Mexico has been cleaned up or broken down by natural forces , the US government has said . 
A government report says only a quarter of the oil from the BP well remains and that it is `` degrading quickly '' . 
The majority has been captured , burned off or evaporated , it states . 
But more clean-up is necessary , officials warn . 
Meanwhile , the government has cleared BP to cement the blown oil well , one of the final steps required to seal it . 
The clearance from US Incident Commander retired Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen came after the British-based oil giant announced `` encouraging '' progress on its `` static kill '' effort to seal the leak . 
BP Senior Vice-President Kent Wells said on Wednesday afternoon the company had finished pumping mud from the Gulf surface into the ruptured oil well . 
He told reporters the pressure from the oil bursting out of the ruptured well was being matched by the mud pumped from the surface , a `` static '' condition that leaves it ready for an injection of cement . 
The company will continue drilling a relief well to intersect with the damaged well . 
When that well is complete later this month , BP could pump more mud and cement into the bottom of the damaged well . 
Meanwhile , US President Barack Obama said on Wednesday he was pleased that the operation in the Gulf was `` finally close to coming to an end '' . 
`` Our recovery efforts , though , will continue . 
We have to reverse the damage that 's been done , '' he said . 
The report on the fate of the spilt oil was compiled by 25 of `` the best government and independent scientists '' , the National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- said . 
About a quarter of the oil released by the well evaporated or dissolved in the Gulf in the same way sugar dissolves in water , federal officials said . 
Another one-sixth naturally dispersed when leaking out of the well , and an additional one-sixth was burned , skimmed , or dispersed using chemicals . 
At a press conference , NOAA administrator Dr Jane Lubchenco said degraded oil was not a threat any longer because `` when it is biodegraded it ends up being water and carbon dioxide so if it has been biodegraded , if it is gone , then it is not a threat '' . 
However , nearly 53m gallons -LRB- 200m litres -RRB- of oil remain in Gulf waters , which is close to five times the amount of the 11m-gallon Exxon Valdez spill in 1989 . 
Speaking on the ABC television network , White House energy adviser Ms Browner said : `` The scientists are telling us about 25 % was not captured or evaporated or taken care of by mother nature . '' 
She said the inter-agency report was `` encouraging '' , but added that further clean-up effort was necessary . 
The report said it was unlikely beaches along the Gulf of Mexico would be covered by surfacing oil in the future . 
However , Ms Browner warned the region might continue to be affected by the spill . 
`` Mother nature will continue to break it down . 
But some of it may come on shore , as weathered tar balls . 
And those will be cleaned up . 
They can be cleaned up . 
And we will make sure they are cleaned up , '' Ms Browner said . 
Ms Lubchenco agreed , saying : `` Less oil on the surface does not mean that there is n't oil still in the water column or that our beaches and marshes are n't still at risk . '' 
Efforts to kill the well are becoming increasingly urgent as hurricane season advances in the Gulf . 
Oil began flowing into the Gulf after an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig in April . 
Eleven workers were killed in the blast . 
The leaking oil was stopped on 15 July when BP closed a new cap it placed on the leaking well . 
An estimated 4.9 m barrels of oil leaked into the waters of the Gulf during 87 days , with only 800,000 barrels being captured . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
