There is still oil out there BP has finished pumping cement into the top of its damaged Gulf of Mexico oil well as part of its `` static kill '' procedure . 
The move comes the day after it was announced that almost three-quarters of the oil spilled had been broken down by natural forces or cleaned up . 
Oil leaked into the Gulf from 20 April when the Deepwater Horizon rig explosion killed 11 workers . 
The flow was stopped on 15 July . 
Work on a relief well can now continue . 
Cementing through the top of the well is complementary to a `` bottom kill '' that will be carried out soon . 
The cementing of the well `` will virtually assure that there will be no chance of oil leaking into the environment '' , US oil spill response commander Thad Allen told reporters . 
The relief well is about 100ft -LRB- 30m -RRB- from intersecting with the damaged well . 
It will then be killed with mud and cement from the bottom . 
A government report has said only a quarter of the oil from the BP well remains and that it is `` degrading quickly '' . 
The majority has been captured , burned off or evaporated , it states . 
But more clean-up is necessary , officials warn . 
Meanwhile , US President Barack Obama said on Wednesday he was pleased that the operation in the Gulf was `` finally close to coming to an end '' . 
`` Our recovery efforts , though , will continue . 
We have to reverse the damage that 's been done , '' he said . 
The report on the fate of the spilt oil was compiled by 25 of `` the best government and independent scientists '' , the National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- said . 
About a quarter of the oil released by the well evaporated or dissolved in the Gulf in the same way sugar dissolves in water , federal officials said . 
Another one-sixth naturally dispersed when leaking out of the well , and an additional one-sixth was burned , skimmed , or dispersed using chemicals . 
At a news conference , NOAA administrator Dr Jane Lubchenco said degraded oil was not a threat any longer because `` when it is biodegraded it ends up being water and carbon dioxide so if it has been biodegraded , if it is gone , then it is not a threat '' . 
However , nearly 53m gallons -LRB- 200m litres -RRB- of oil remain in Gulf waters , which is close to five times the amount of the 11m-gallon Exxon Valdez spill in 1989 . 
An estimated 4.9 m barrels of oil leaked into the waters of the Gulf during 87 days , with only 800,000 barrels being captured . 
How the spill affected you and your community ? 
Has your business been affected ? 
Were you part of the clean-up operation ? 
Send us your comments using the form below If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
