UNITED NATIONS | Fri Oct 14 , 2011 4:51 pm EDT UNITED NATIONS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - European members of the U.N. Security Council clashed with Russia and China on Friday by raising concerns about Syria and the looming specter of civil war during a closed-door meeting , council diplomats said . 
Speaking on condition of anonymity , several diplomats said the French , British , German and Portuguese envoys supported a statement issued on Friday by U.N. human rights chief Navi Pillay , who called for international protection of civilians in Syria and warned of a possible civil war . 
Syrian forces shot dead at least six people protesting against President Bashar al-Assad on Friday , activists said , 10 days after Russia and China joined forces on a rare `` double veto '' to kill a European-drafted Security Council resolution that would have condemned Syria and hinted at possible future sanctions . 
Friday 's European push on Syria elicited an angry response from Russian deputy U.N. envoy Alexander Pankin , who complained that French Ambassador Gerard Araud was flouting normal procedure by introducing issues `` not on the agenda of the meeting , '' a diplomat present at the meeting told Reuters . 
The Chinese envoy told the council that since Pillay 's remarks on Syria had not been requested by the Security Council , it should not take them into consideration , envoys said . 
The closed-door council meeting followed the earlier adoption on Friday of two routine resolutions in public sessions . 
Its official agenda was a monthly review by the U.N. Department of Public Affairs on world affairs and conflicts . 
During the meeting , Araud told the council that `` the advocates of inaction on Syria should draw conclusions from the latest appalling developments , '' according to the French U.N. mission 's Twitter page . 
Araud was referring to Russia , China , Brazil , India and South Africa , the five `` BRICS '' emerging markets nations that have resisted the Western push for tough council action on Syria since the government crackdown against pro-democracy protesters began over half a year ago , diplomats said . 
Portuguese Ambassador Jose Filipe Moraes Cabral , one of the co-sponsors of last week 's failed resolution , confirmed he had said the council should revisit the idea of condemning Damascus . 
`` The situation -LRB- in Syria -RRB- is deteriorating fast , '' Cabral said . 
`` The council should come back to it . '' 
German Ambassador Peter Wittig echoed Cabral 's remarks , saying the council should not give up on Syria . 
`` Since the double veto was cast , the situation has continued to be extremely concerning , '' he told reporters , adding that he told the council Pillay 's report `` paints a very grim picture of the continuing repression . '' 
`` We said -LRB- to the Security Council -RRB- that if we let things slide , we will be at the brink of a civil war , '' he said . 
The British and Colombian envoys made similar remarks , though diplomats said U.S. Deputy Ambassador Jeffrey DeLaurentis did not touch on Syria during his remarks . 
Brazil , India and South Africa , which abstained from last week 's vote on the Syria resolution , did not mention the issue when they addressed the council , diplomats said . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
