Nervous BP faces an uncertain future Deepwater Horizon spill may be capped but oil giant is not out of deep water yet Friday 16 July 2010 19.11 BST Oil floats on the surface of the water near a controlled burn above BP 's Deepwater Horizon well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Ann Heisenfelt\/EPA BP insisted it was not yet time to celebrate but there was no mistaking the relief today when a 75 tonne containment cap finally stopped the oil flowing from a rogue well in the Gulf of Mexico after three months . 
The energy group until recently the pride of the British corporate world made clear to investors and the public that a start on rebuilding its future could only be made once the crude had been halted and the environmental damage stemmed . 
A few days will be needed to ensure that the Macondo nightmare has been ended but it will take years if not decades to sort out the legal claims from the worst ever spill in US history . 
Management is starting to think about what a `` new BP '' could look like in a world where a reputation for engineering excellence , entrepreneurial daring and marketing razzmatazz has been beaten from its trademark green and yellow to black and blue . 
The biggest threat is that BP ceases to exist . 
The financial claims have been put at up to $ 70bn -LRB- # 45bn -RRB- compared with its current stock market valuation of # 75bn . 
A 40 % fall in the company 's value since the Deepwater Explorer blew up on 20 April leaves BP vulnerable to hungry predators such as ExxonMobil of America or the emerging oil giants of China and Russia . 
Exxon has sounded out Washington politicians about how they would react to a merger . 
BP 's vilified chief executive , Tony Hayward , has been touring the Middle East looking for a `` sugar daddy '' in the oil producing nations of Kuwait or Abu Dhabi . 
The company has also been preparing to offload up to $ 10bn worth of assets to bolster the balance sheet and help pay the claims . 
The US government has already forced BP to put aside $ 20bn to pay compensate shrimp fishermen and others who have lost their livelihoods in Louisiana and other states . 
The BP brand is heavily tarnished , if not destroyed . 
The Gulf spill comes after the Texas City refinery fire and Alaskan pipeline fractures . 
A ban is in place on all deep water drilling in the Gulf until the causes of the blowout are known , but even if BP is largely exonerated which seems unlikely its ability to operate in America will be constrained . 
A takeover of the US business seems highly possible leaving a question over what happens in the rest of the world . 
China National Offshore Oil Corporation is among companies already talking to BP about buying some of its assets in Argentina while TNK in Russia would like others . 
BP in future will be smaller and presumably more humble , concentrating on its core businesses of exploration and production rather than the lower margin refining and forecourt sales . 
But would the British government allow the company to be split up and consumed by say China and the US ? 
BP has been helped by UK ministers in Libya and elsewhere but they never stepped in to save Rolls-Royce cars , Heathrow or Cadbury chocolate . 
The leak might be capped and the environment safer , but the fight for BP 's future has only just begun . 
A version appeared on p17 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 13.42 BST on Tuesday 20 July 2010 
