BP whistleblower : oil clean-up effort is in disarray Former BP contractor Adam Dillon says `` there 's just so many moving parts and moving pieces , the right hand is just not talking to the left '' Workers use a vacuum hose to clean up a beach in Louisiana polluted by the BP oil spill . 
Photograph : Joe Raedle\/Getty Images If you 've been reading Mother Jones lately , you 've heard about BP 's stranglehold on media access in the Gulf , which has included preventing reporters from visiting oil - soaked public beaches and barring its spill cleanup workers from talking to the press . 
Now , one of BP 's ex-media enforcers is speaking out . 
Former BP contractor Adam Dillon went public last Friday , telling a local news station in New Orleans that he was fed up with BP 's handling of the spill response , not least of all its information clampdown . 
In an interview with Mother Jones this week , Dillon , who claims he was fired for raising concerns about the cleanup with his bosses , elaborated on his experiences in the Gulf and vented his frustrations with BP . 
A retired Army special operations soldier who lives in Wilmington , N.C. -LRB- and is running for sheriff in his home county -RRB- , Dillon first worked management for BP on the beaches of Louisiana . 
In June , a camera crew caught him chasing reporters off a Grand Isle beach . 
Dillon was hired by O'Brian 's Response Management Group , which was in turn contracted by BP to hire an army of subcontractors to aid in various aspects of the the spill response , from cleanup workers to security guards to communications specialists . 
Based on his behind-the-scenes view of the spill response , he describes a cleanup effort in disarray , marred by unclear lines of authority and shoddy communications among the numerous players involved-from BP and its litany of contractors and subcontractors to the Coast Guard and local law enforcement agencies . 
`` There 's just so many moving parts and moving pieces , '' he says . 
`` The right hand is just not talking to the left . '' 
In BP 's attempts to control the flow of information , Dillon says , it has largely compounded these problems . '' 
The Climate DeskBut while Dillon says the company is bungling many aspects of the spill response , he notes that it has done a reasonably good job in one area : blocking the media from seeing the worst of the disaster in Grand Isle , a beach on a barrier island off Louisiana 's coast . 
`` There was all kinds of stuff they did n't want the media to see , '' he says , describing areas thick with oil that were off-limits to journalists . 
`` They kept it very strict what they wanted the media not to see , and what they wanted them to see . 
Where the media was actually given access to really was kind of mundane . '' 
While BP has insisted publicly that it has not prevented spill workers from talking to the press , Dillon says company officials made it perfectly clear to contractors that they would lose their jobs if they spoke to reporters . 
`` There are people down on that beach that are begging to talk to reporters , because they 're having pay issues , having problems , '' says Dillon of the workers in Grand Isle . 
`` Any of those laborers that are down there are being told behind closed doors that if they talk to the media , they 'll be fired . '' 
To enforce its media blockade , Dillon says , the company turned to its security force , largely made up of guys like him , ex-military and law enforcement personnel . 
`` They were given orders to herd the media away , '' he says , and they followed those instructions just like he did . 
`` They did n't know the reason behind it -- they were just told keep the media away from -LRB- the cleanup workers -RRB- . '' 
He adds , `` That 's a First Amendment violation ... You ca n't keep the media away . 
It 's a public beach . 
We were n't under Martial Law . '' 
After working on Grand Isle , Dillon was transferred to the Unified Command Center in Houma , La. , the hub of BP and federal response activities , to work on cleanup logistics . 
He claims he was fired last week `` because he was seen as a threat to superiors . '' 
-LRB- Stephanie Hebert , a spokeswoman at the Unified Command Center , confirms he was a contractor there but declined to comment on his dismissal . -RRB- 
Specifically , he says BP axed him after taking photos of what he described as `` equations on dispersants '' and calling these pictures to the attention of his bosses . 
He says he was `` confined and interrogated for almost an hour '' about what he saw , and within 12 hours was dismissed from the command center . 
Dillon declined to elaborate on the dispersant issue when we spoke , but pledged to avenge his termination by calling attention to BP 's mishandling of the response . 
`` They screwed up royally when they let me go , '' he says . 
`` I was down there to do the right thing , to clean up . 
They just do n't know who they 're messing with . '' 
