GRAND ISLE , La. -- Biologist John Supan thinks he has developed what may be the holy grail for oyster lovers : a hardy breed of the delectable shellfish that stays fat enough for consumers to eat throughout the year . 
And unlike many oysters across the Gulf Coast , ruined by BP 's massive oil spill and the fresh water poured in to fight it , Supan 's oysters are all alive . 
Now , nearly four months after the spill , Supan 's oysters may offer the Gulf oyster industry a chance for a better long-term recovery . 
But his special breed of modified oysters , which some say are prohibitively expensive , could be a hard sell to an industry reeling from the BP disaster . 
Most oystermen agree that few oysters will be harvested from the Gulf Coast in the next year or two , signaling a potential calamity for shucking houses , oyster farmers and people who love a half dozen oysters on the half shell . 
As much as 65 percent of the nation 's oysters come from the Gulf . 
Oysters are particularly susceptible to pollution , taking longer than fish or shrimp to clear oil contamination from their bodies . 
Supan 's oysters are bred for performance , making them more fit to deal with viruses and other contaminants . 
Being sterile , they do n't go through the stress of reproduction , so they stay fat and juicy all year round . 
Supan says his oysters are sweet , plump and meaty in summertime when other oysters become thin and watery . 
But the most crucial advantage this year was their mobility . 
Unlike the vast majority of oysters in the Gulf , which spend their lives on the bottoms of bays and sounds , Supan 's oysters dangle in the water in cages at a hatchery on the inland side of this island . 
When the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on April 20 just a few dozen miles from his hatchery , the 57-year-old Louisiana State University oyster biologist evacuated his broods to a research hatchery in Alabama and a wildlife preserve in western Louisiana . 
Then he brought them back . 
`` In my opinion , this is the most important brood of oysters in the history of the Gulf of Mexico , '' Supan says . 
`` But you know , you ask an oysterman that and they will say , ` Huh ? ' '' 
He said the day is coming when all the Gulf 's oystermen will know what he 's talking about . 
For three decades , Supan has been developing new oysters by mixing up their chromosomes in a process known as triploid production . 
He breeds a rare oyster that has extra chromosomes with a normal oyster and produces a sterile hybrid . 
The process is common on the East and West coasts but still untried in the Gulf , besides Supan 's batch . 
`` I do n't know if it 's the future with a capital ` THE , ' but it 's very important , '' said Bill Walton , an Auburn University shellfish biologist . 
`` It can give you a faster growing oyster . 
It cuts down production time and it does seem to solve the problem of ` water bellies ' in the summer when oysters spawn and you have a tired , thin oyster . '' 
`` For the long-term viability of oysters in Louisiana what -LRB- the hatchery -RRB- is doing is the kind of pioneer work , '' said Mike Voisin , an oyster processor and leader in the Louisiana oyster industry . 
The industry in Louisiana faces daunting threats from the oil pollution , oyster diseases and pressure from state and federal officials who want to reclaim lost marshland by opening up the Mississippi River even more often . 
If that happens , traditional oyster grounds could be ruined in many of the inland bays where they are grown today . 
Helen Skansi , a 75-year-old Plaquemines Parish oyster company owner with more than 1,000 leased acres , is painfully aware of the problems . 
`` Things will never be the same with the bedding grounds they had before with the oil , '' she said . 
Kenneth Fox , who leases 15,000 acres of state waters to grow his oysters , is equally concerned . 
`` I lost 95 percent of my leases with this oil spill , '' he said . 
`` Everything is dead on the west side of the river . '' 
Asked about Supan 's super oysters , however , he was unconvinced . 
`` I think the research is great , and I think what he 's doing is going to be a big help . 
But that is going to be a costly process . '' 
Supan would like to see his special oyster larvae distributed through hatcheries across the Gulf to oyster growers . 
He said he could start distributing the larvae now . 
But a lot has to happen for that to materialize . 
Ideally , the sterile oysters would be grown in cages in special areas designated as marine farms . 
And a host of permitting and zoning issues would have to be resolved . 
Growing oysters the way Supan does is tricky . 
They are raised in structures propped up off the water bottom . 
That requires new harvesting equipment . 
Oystermen currently use mechanical devices like plows to scour their catch from the Gulf floor . 
It also would require new permits . 
It takes about two years for an oyster to grow to market size . 
Once the special summer oysters grow to adult size , then the oyster growers would have to find buyers . 
Typically , a dozen oysters cost about $ 12 at an oyster bar on the Gulf Coast . 
Supan said a cost analysis has not been done to figure out how much the summer oysters would cost . 
He says the market would take care of that . 
`` That 's a big investment on a gamble , '' Fox said of Supan 's experiments . 
`` I 'm not saying it wo n't happen one day , but the way Louisiana is set up , it 's going to be hard to make happen . 
Half the people in the industry would have to get out of the business for the other half to make a profit . '' 
Still , some institutions that fund research are persuaded that Supan 's technique holds promise . 
Supan 's research has been backed by federal and state grants over his 30-year career . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration recently awarded Supan and other researchers a $ 250,000 grant to develop more hatchery technology . 
Inside his algae room , Supan looks like a winemaker as he surveys tanks of algae he feeds to his oysters . 
The bacteria grows under fluorescent light . 
`` It takes a wet green thumb to grow algae , '' he said . 
`` You got to be patient with it . 
It 's very intuitive . 
Just like growing a garden . 
Some people say they talk to their house plants ; well , my algae and myself have conversations all the time . '' 
He hopes the state will build an oyster dock where he can teach oyster farmers to grow oysters in saltier Gulf farms similar to his , where the oysters are reared to market size on platforms that thwart predators such as snails and bottom-feeding fish . 
