By Finlo Rohrer BBC News , Washington There has been protest and direct action There 's been blanket coverage on American rolling news stations . 
Every national politician in the US has the spill at or near the top of his or her agenda . 
And BP itself is already fighting a PR war to try to minimize the damage to its reputation from the oil starting to ravage the northern Gulf of Mexico coast . 
If Facebook groups are a good indicator of rage , then the US is very angry indeed . 
The group dedicated to `` Boycott BP '' is gaining over 30,000 members every day and is already around the 350,000 mark . 
BP invests in a $ 50m ad campaign , NOW ? 
Come on BP - have the fumes gone to your brains already ??? '' Many vow not to buy BP petrol or products again and express visceral anger towards the oil firm . 
Some have designed their own logos , satirical takes on BP 's green and yellow livery , featuring dripping oil and skulls . 
This is an environmental crisis that ordinary people have been able to get to grips with online in a way not possible during the US 's other notorious oil spill , the Exxon Valdez disaster of 1989 . 
Now the webcam of the broken pipe with the oil gushing into the sea has proved to be compelling viewing . 
Hundreds of thousands of people have also watched the footage of robot arms doing their work . 
Florida resident David Kearns has launched a one-man campaign of direct action against BP . 
He has posted videos on YouTube under the alias Stanley Morton III . 
One shows him spreading rubbish from his garden over the forecourt of a BP petrol station . 
Hundreds of thousands have joined a Facebook group demanding a boycott And he attaches banners and placards on fences adjacent to the stations in an effort to get people to stop buying . 
`` I 'm outraged . 
We live here for our beaches , for our seafood , '' he says . 
`` If you get people not to buy the gas at the pumps that hurts them . 
It is an ` annoycott ' . '' 
He perceives success when he sees the price of BP petrol go lower than that of its local competitors . 
`` If the price of gas has gone down , it 's hitting their bottom line . '' 
BP is cagey over the effects on sales of the oil spill so far , and it has yet to be suggested that they are devastating . 
The issue will be complicated for many , and such situations can lead to a `` mild consumer response '' , says Prof Monroe Friedman , author of Consumer Boycotts : Effecting Change Through the Marketplace and Media . 
He says disastrous environmental incidents caused by companies , such as the spill , `` do not necessarily lead to no-buy -LRB- action -RRB- . 
They lead to symbolic kinds of action , things short of boycotts . 
`` Few of these gas stations are actually owned by offending companies , most of them are owned by independent operators . 
`` You are a consumer and you may be offended by the corporate actions but you may continue to buy the gas at your neighborhood station . 
One thing is convenience , you have been doing it for years . 
You may know the guy who owns the station . '' 
It 's a point that has been made by many , who have suggested protesters should only boycott BP products , like Castrol motor oil , but Mr Kearns is not convinced . 
`` The proprietors are used as human shields , '' he says . 
TONY HAYWARD AND THE PR DRIVE One lightning rod for anti-BP rage has proved to be chief executive Tony Hayward . 
Remarks he made at the weekend , when he suggested he wanted the spill to be over and said `` I 'd like my life back '' generated a wave of ire . 
Tony Hayward apologises for the oil spill on the BP website By Wednesday he had to apologise , but bloggers have unkindly noted that BP has had a second gusher in the form of Mr Hayward 's gaffe-prone mouth . 
Some newspaper and television commentators have demanded his resignation . 
One national station ran a segment called `` Fired Up ! 
He 's Gotta Go '' . 
And the idea that BP is spending money on print and television adverts has also drawn criticism - a case of a PR drive proving to be bad PR . 
One Facebook commenter captured the mood , saying : `` BP invests in a $ 50m ad campaign , NOW ? 
That is a huge waste of $ 50m that should be going towards the CLEAN UP . 
Come on BP - have the fumes gone to your brains already ??? '' BP has already had to explain that no money is being diverted from the clean-up effort . 
Mass demonstrations are yet to occur While on the Gulf coast it is easy to see banners and placards attacking BP , the signs of rage may not be visible everywhere . 
The umbrella group seizeBP.org , which wants the federal government to take all of BP 's assets as punishment for the spill , is organising nationwide protests . 
But a demonstration at a BP-related site in Washington DC on Thursday only attracted a couple of dozen protesters . 
Whether the anger will build into mass demonstrations is unclear . 
WHY ARE N'T PEOPLE MORE ANGRY ? 
While it is clear that millions are outraged , their response is not always visible , particularly away from the Gulf states . 
Where the oil is , or is headed , feelings run high `` People do n't feel at liberty to speak of it -LRB- in Louisiana -RRB- , they are dependent on BP to pay them , '' says David Kearns . 
`` In Florida , people do n't want to say too much because it 's going to hurt tourism . '' 
But he thinks the longer the effects of the spill last , the more rage will build . 
`` It 's true we need to be more angry , '' he says . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
