BP 's Doug Suttles explains how the cap is meant to operate A new cap placed over a ruptured oil well in the Gulf of Mexico has begun to funnel oil to the surface . 
US Coast Guard chief Adm Thad Allen said rough estimates showed that 1,000 barrels a day were being captured . 
This is only a small part of the 12,000-19 ,000 barrels a day believed to be leaking and BP says it could take 48 hours to know if the system is working . 
Meanwhile , President Obama arrived in Louisiana for his third visit to the region since the crisis began . 
The visit to the Gulf area comes as beaches in the key tourist area of north-west Florida saw their first major signs of oil . 
Adm Allen stressed that he could not give any certain figures on the amount being funnelled from the leaking well . 
`` Sometime later -LRB- on Friday -RRB- we 'll probably be able to get an approximation of how much oil we are capturing , '' he said . 
Estimated cost of sand barrier project : $ 360m BP scheduled to make a first-quarter dividend payment to shareholders on 21 June At its worst , BP saw 34 % wiped off its value Adm Allen said that the amount should increase as BP shut off vents to capture more of the oil . 
He added : `` Progress is being made , but we need to caution against over-optimism . '' 
But BP chief operating officer Doug Suttles said he was `` pretty confident '' the plan would work . 
`` It probably wo n't capture all of the flow . 
But it should capture the vast majority , '' he said . 
BP says it has spent more than $ 1bn so far on the operation to contain the spill and clean up the oil . 
In a conference call to investors , BP chief executive Tony Hayward said it could take 48 hours before the system was optimised and a determination made on whether it had succeeded . 
He said BP was `` heartbroken '' by the loss of life , damage to the environment and impact on people 's livelihoods caused by the spill . 
Eleven workers lost their lives when the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , leased to BP , exploded and sank in April . 
The estimates for the amount of oil that has already leaked vary widely from 20 million to 45 million gallons . 
BP had previously made a number of unsuccessful efforts to halt the leak and accepts it may not be fully contained until relief wells now being drilled become ready in August . 
The latest stage in BP 's efforts to contain leaking oil has involved lowering a cap onto the failed blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- valve system on the seabed . 
The cap sits on the BOP 's lower marine riser package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- section . 
First , the damaged riser - the pipe which takes oil from the well - was cut where it nears the seabed using a remotely-operated shear . 
This was completed at 1930 CDT on 1 June -LRB- 0030 GMT 2 June -RRB- . 
The next stage was for a diamond wire cutter to saw through the riser close to the LMRP . 
The blade got stuck and had to be removed but BP eventually cut through the pipe using giant shears manipulated by undersea robots -LRB- ROV -RRB- . 
After removing the pipe , the cap was lowered onto the LMRP enabling the leaking oil and gas to be funnelled to a drill ship on the surface . 
Latest estimates suggest more than half of the leaking oil is now being captured . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT Mr Hayward said BP was working hard to rebuild the trust of the American people and to ensure such an event would never happen again . 
He admitted that people wanted to know the cause of the disaster . 
But he said it was a complex accident caused by an `` unprecedented number of failures '' and `` a lot remains unknown '' . 
He said a `` separate stand-alone '' organization would be created within BP to deal with the Gulf of Mexico spill . 
The company also said it would not make a decision on its next dividend payment until late July . 
BBC economics correspondent Andrew Walker says if it does pay the dividend , this will go down very badly in the US , where pressure is mounting for BP to retain the cash for the clean-up . 
President Obama is to meet Adm Allen , other officials , and members of local communities affected by the spill during his visit . 
He told CNN on Thursday that BP had already `` felt his anger '' over the spill and that he was `` furious at this entire situation '' . 
Mr Obama has for the second time postponed a trip to Australia , Indonesia and Guam , in order to deal with the crisis . 
The area affected by the oil slick continues to spread . 
Tar balls have now begun to wash up on the beaches of Alabama and north-west Florida . 
At Pensacola Beach in Florida , swimmers encountered an oil sheen and children picked up tar blobs as big as tennis balls . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
