BP has tried a number of methods to shut down the leak from the damaged oil well - often innovating as subsequent attempts have failed . 
Although some of the methods have been tried and tested at incidents elsewhere in the world , they have not been carried out at such great depth as the Deepwater Horizon leak - 5,000 feet -LRB- 1.5 km -RRB- below the surface . 
2 JUNE : LOWER MARINE RISER PACKAGE After the failure of the top kill procedure , BP attempts to cut the top off the upper section of the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- and place a cap on it , sealing the leak and taking oil to a ship on the surface . 
After a brief setback with some of the cutting equipment , the cap is installed and BP announces on 4 June that it is collecting oil at a rate of 1,000 barrels a day . 
The latest stage in BP 's efforts to contain leaking oil has involved lowering a cap onto the failed blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- valve system on the seabed . 
The cap sits on the BOP 's lower marine riser package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- section . 
First , the damaged riser - the pipe which takes oil from the well - was cut where it nears the seabed using a remotely-operated shear . 
This was completed at 1930 CDT on 1 June -LRB- 0030 GMT 2 June -RRB- . 
The next stage was for a diamond wire cutter to saw through the riser close to the LMRP . 
The blade got stuck and had to be removed but BP eventually cut through the pipe using giant shears manipulated by undersea robots -LRB- ROV -RRB- . 
After removing the pipe , the cap was lowered onto the LMRP enabling the leaking oil and gas to be funnelled to a drill ship on the surface . 
Latest estimates suggest more than half of the leaking oil is now being captured . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT 26 MAY - 29 MAY : TOP KILL OF BLOWOUT PREVENTER - FAILED Turning their focus to the blowout preventer or BOP that sits over the well head , BP try to stem the flow of oil and gas and ultimately kill the well by injecting heavy drilling fluids . 
The procedure includes injecting a `` junkshot '' of golf balls , rope and rubber into the BOP in a bid to block the flow . 
Despite pumping more than 30,000 barrels of heavy mud itno the BOP and a range of junkshot , the operation fails to overcome the flow from the well . 
16 MAY : RISER INSERTION TUBE - SUCCESS BP had some success with a `` riser insertion tube '' - a pipe with rubber diaphragm inserted into the leaking part of the riser pipe that is the source of the main oil flow from the well . 
The insertion tuibe is connected to its own riser pipe that takes the oil and gas to the Transocean Discoverer Enterprise drillship , 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,524 m -RRB- above on the surface . 
Methanol is injected into the tube to stop the formation of hydrates - crystals that could block the flow of oil and gas . 
The tube tool has been able to collect about 3,000 barrels a day of oil and some 14 million standard cubic feet a day of gas . 
The oil is being stored and gas is being flared on the drillship Discoverer Enterprise - which has the capacity to store 139,000 barrels of oil . 
8 - 18 MAY : CONTAINER DOME AND TOP HAT - FAILED Plans to place a large containment dome over the main leak and siphon oil to a ship on the surface is aborted as hydrates or ice crystals build up , blocking the pipes . 
A smaller `` top hat '' dome is lowered to perform a similar task , but engineers decide to use insertion tube instead . 
Underwater efforts to cap oil leak Initially , BP tried to lower a 125-tonne , 18-metre -LRB- 59 feet -RRB- high container dome over the main leak on the sea floor . 
However , this failed when gas leaking from the pipe mixed with water to form hydrates , ice-like crystals , that blocked up the steel canopy . 
Instead , engineers have lowered a smaller device onto the site . 
Dubbed the Top hat , it will sit over the tear in the pipe and partially stop the leak . 
To prevent the build up of hydrates , methanol is pumped into the top hat to disperse the water and gas . 
The top hat is 1.5 m -LRB- 5 feet -RRB- high and 1.2 m in diameter . 
Two special side lines are used to pump methanol into the top hat to displace water and gas leaking from the broken oil pipe . 
This should prevent the build-up of hydrates . 
Once in place , oil can be pumped up to the surface . 
BP plan to lower the original subsea containment dome over the top hat to provide a better seal over the leaking site and pump oil up to the surface . 
This time , it will be attached to a pipe that can pump warm water into the dome to prevent the build-up of hydrates . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT 2 MAY : DRILLING RELIEF WELLS - ONGOING BP is drilling two relief wells in an additional effort to relieve the flow of oil . 
Work on the first relief well started on 2 May , with the second starting on 16 May . 
Both wells are expected to take around three months to complete from the start of drilling . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
