BP will not make a decision on its next dividend payment until late July , chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg has said . 
`` The first priority is to do what is right in the Gulf of Mexico , '' Mr Svanberg said , answering an investor 's question on a conference call . 
The comment came amid US pressure on BP to cut its dividend to help pay for the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . 
He also gave chief executive Tony Hayward the board 's full support , after criticism of his handling of the spill . 
Before the Deepwater Horizon oil spill began , the company had been expected to pay out $ 10.5 bn -LRB- # 7.2 bn -RRB- in dividends over four quarterly payments . 
However , two US Senators called earlier this week for the dividends to be cut , so money could be diverted to deal with the Gulf of Mexico oil leak . 
Mr Svanberg indicated that , with the ultimate cost of the spill so uncertain , a decision would be made closer to 27 July , when the next dividend payment is due to be declared . 
BP 's first quarter dividend of $ 2.6 bn has already been declared , and will be paid on 21 June . 
BP shares fell at the outset of the call at 1400 BST , before recovering sharply . 
Mr Svanberg had appeared to duck the question of dividends in his opening comments , stating merely , `` We are aware of the importance of the dividend to you , the shareholders . '' 
Mr Hayward also avoided any explicit commitment to maintain the company 's dividend on the call . 
`` We will stand behind all of our commitments , '' he said , before going on to note the need to balance paying dividends with other demands on the company . 
`` We will meet the obligations to our employees and other stakeholders , including hundreds of thousands of shareholders , '' the BP head said . 
Mr Hayward said the company had already spent more than $ 1bn -LRB- # 686m -RRB- on dealing with the spill , and expected to continue spending at this rate until some time after the leak is stopped . 
Estimated cost of sand barrier project : $ 360m Second-quarter dividend to be declared on 27 July At its worst , BP saw 34 % wiped off its value since the oil spill began `` It is simply not possible to put a cost estimate on this at the moment , '' he said . 
He added that by the time BP releases its second quarter results , due in July , they hoped to have a better idea of the ultimate cost . 
However , he emphasised that some costs , including fines , remediation costs and lawsuits , would go on for many years . 
Mr Hayward also said it would be another two days before BP knew whether it had plugged the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . 
`` It will be a further 48 hours before the system can be optimised , '' he said , adding that only then would they know how much of the oil and gas from the leak was being captured . 
He said `` everyone at BP is heartbroken '' by the loss of life and economic and ecological damage from the spill , and offered his personal apology . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
