WASHINGTON | Mon May 11 , 2009 5:40 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A new gene map of Mexicans show they are as diverse as their history suggests and could benefit from having their own , unique analysis when it comes to testing drugs and assessing disease risks , researchers reported on Monday . 
They studied 300 mestizos -- people of mixed ethnic heritage -- and found many different genetic variations that pointed to Indian , European and African ancestry . 
They also compared these sequences to those found among 30 ethnic Indians . 
`` This study makes clear that Latin Americans with mixed ancestry are different enough from other people worldwide that a full-scale genomic mapping project would be wise both scientifically and economically , '' said Dr. Julio Frenk of the Harvard School of Public Health , a former Mexican minister of health . 
`` It would allow doctors to analyze fewer genetic markers when diagnosing the risk that a patient will develop a disease that depends on complex factors . '' 
Writing in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , the researchers said they found 89 common gene variations that could not be found in the so-called HapMap Project -- an international collaboration cataloging genetic similarities and differences among human beings . 
`` This effort will contribute to the design of better strategies aimed at characterizing the genetic factors underlying common complex diseases in Mexicans , '' wrote Gerardo Jimenez-Sanchez and colleagues at Mexico 's National Institute of Genomic Medicine . 
`` In addition , this information will increase our knowledge of genomic variability in Latino populations . '' 
The findings apply more broadly than only Mexico , Jimenez-Sanchez and colleagues said . 
`` More than 560 million people live in Latin American countries , and according to U.S. Census Bureau estimates the Latino population reached 45.5 million in 2007 , representing the largest and fastest-growing minority group in the United States , '' they wrote . 
The study may shed light on why the new H1N1 swine flu virus killed so many people in Mexico -- 56 , at last count , compared to three in the United States and one in Canada . 
`` It is not possible today to say genetic variation is responsible for the unique H1N1 influenza A mortality rate in Mexico , '' Jimenez-Sanchez said in a statement . 
`` However , knowledge of genomic variability in the Mexican population can allow the identification of genetic variations that confer susceptibility to common diseases , including infections such as the flu . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Maggie Fox ; editing by Chris Wilson -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
