Mon May 11 , 2009 2:06 pm EDT LONDON May 11 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Thai scientists who infected piglets with the new H1N1 virus spreading around the world said on Monday the strain caused flu-like symptoms in the animals before disappearing , just like many of the human cases . 
An outbreak of the new strain , known as swine flu , that has killed at least 53 people -- mainly in Mexico -- has prompted some countries to ban pork from countries reporting human cases , even though officials have said there is no risk of spreading the virus by eating pork . 
However , some pork producers are unsure how the virus could affect their animals . 
The 22 piglets infected with the new virus showed flu-like symptoms between one and four days after infection and were shedding virus -- meaning they could spread it -- two days after infection , the researchers said . 
None of the animals , also infected with the less dangerous H3N2 subtype , died , Roongroje Thanawongnuwech and colleagues from Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok reported . 
`` The results of this study may assist in the prevention and control of swine influenza virus in Thailand , '' the researchers wrote in BioMed Central 's Virology Journal . 
The new virus is a complex mix of swine viruses with avian and human bits , though nobody knows exactly where the new infection that first emerged in Mexico originated . 
Influenza viruses mutate constantly and they also swap genetic material with one another promiscuously , especially if an animal or person is infected with two strains at once . 
The team found that all infected pigs developed respiratory symptoms such as nasal discharge , coughing , sneezing and conjunctivitis . 
They also developed lung lesions large enough to be seen by the naked eye . 
The lesions were characterised by dark plum-coloured , areas on the lung and were most severe two days after infection . 
This was especially the case in the H1N1-infected pigs , where about a third of the lung was covered . 
`` The results demonstrated that both swine flu subtypes were able to induce flu-like symptoms and lung lesions in weanling pigs . 
However the severity of the disease with regard to both gross and microscopic lung lesions was greater in the H1N1-infected pigs , '' Thanawongnuwech said in a statement . 
-LRB- Reporting by Michael Kahn ; Editing by Maggie Fox -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
