By Maggie Fox , Health and Science Editor WASHINGTON | Mon May 11 , 2009 7:45 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The new strain of H1N1 flu that has killed 56 people in Mexico and has been carried around the world by travelers acts more like a pandemic strain than regular seasonal flu , researchers reported on Monday . 
They said it was transmitted more easily and affects young adults more often than annual flu strains , justifying the World Health Organization 's stepped-up level of pandemic alert , currently a 5 , one step down from a full pandemic . 
As many as 23,000 Mexicans were likely infected with the swine flu virus , Neil Ferguson of Imperial College London and colleagues reported in the journal Science . 
They also found evidence to support the theory that the outbreak originated in the village of La Gloria in the state of Veracruz , which had been the subject of intense speculation . 
`` The dating -LRB- of the outbreak -RRB- was consistent with that , '' Christophe Fraser of Imperial College London said in a telephone interview . 
The World Health Organization Rapid Pandemic Assessment Collaboration looked at both the pattern of disease spread and the early genetic analysis of the virus . 
`` I think the most important thing we found was the rate of spread and the extent of spread is similar to what has been seen in previous pandemics , '' Fraser added . 
`` Our estimates suggest that 23,000 individuals had been infected in Mexico by late April , giving an estimated case fatality ratio of 0.4 percent based on confirmed and suspect deaths reported to that time , '' they wrote . 
`` Thus while substantial uncertainty remains , clinical severity appears less than that seen in 1918 but comparable with that seen in 1957 . '' 
The 1918 pandemic was the worst of the 20th century , killing anywhere between 25 million and 100 million people , depending on estimates . 
It was the first appearance of the H1N1 virus . 
The 1957 pandemic of H2N2 killed an estimated 2 million people globally . 
Seasonal flu kills about 250,000 to 500,000 people annually with a fatality rate of less than 0.1 percent . 
Looking at the pattern in La Gloria , the researchers said it looked as if the virus was transmitted human to human over 14 to 73 generations -- meaning one person infected another , who infected another , up to 73 times . 
`` Transmissibility is therefore substantially higher than seasonal flu , '' they wrote . 
The first case was seen in La Gloria around February 15 , they wrote , citing reports and not hard evidence . 
But quick genetic analysis suggests the virus may have first infected someone around January 12 . 
`` As the epidemic spreads further , it is likely that severity will vary from country to country depending on health care resources and the public health measures adopted to mitigate impact , '' they added . 
Globally , WHO has confirmed 4,694 infections in 30 countries . 
Sixty deaths have been confirmed , most in Mexico with three in the United States and one in Canada . 
While it is widespread across the United States , WHO said the new H1N1 virus shows no signs of sustained person-to-person spread outside of North America . 
-LRB- Editing by Julie Steenhuysen and Will Dunham -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
