The UN-Arab League envoy to Syria , Kofi Annan , has arrived in Moscow amid reports of 24 new civilian deaths in Syria . 
Mr Annan will try to persuade Russia to take a firmer stance against the Syrian government . 
Next week , he will travel to China which , like Russia , has generally supported Syria at the UN . 
Ten of the new deaths were reported in Homs , the city at the heart of the revolt against Bashar al-Assad . 
`` The shelling started like it does every morning , for no reason , '' an activist in the city 's Bab Sbaa district told Reuters news agency via Skype . 
`` They are using mortar and tank fire on many neighborhoods of old Homs . '' 
The activist added that most residents in the area had fled to safer districts and many were trying to escape the city altogether . 
Foreign media face severe restrictions on reporting in Syria , and it is hard to verify the claims of either side . 
The Associated Press news agency has seen video apparently showing a huge explosion in Homs . 
The footage , released by an activist group called the Shaam News Network , shows a large ball of fire and plume of black smoke . 
According to the London-based Observatory for Human Rights , a total of 24 civilians died on Saturday as well as 15 soldiers and two rebels . 
One activist , Nureddin al-Abdo , told AFP news agency that government troops backed by 26 tanks had attacked the town of Saraqeb in the north-western province of Idlib . 
All the signs are that the regime intends to continue its drive unless armed rebels simply surrender , the BBC 's Jim Muir reports from Beirut in neighbouring Lebanon . 
That is the message to Kofi Annan as he urges the government to call an immediate halt to the use of heavy arms in populated areas , our correspondent says . 
Whether the route ahead lies with his peace efforts , or with further confrontation , the opposition clearly needs to unify its divided ranks , he adds . 
It has announced moves to unite its fragmented military efforts and also to hold a meeting in Istanbul on Monday , to try to bring the various political groups together behind a shared vision for Syria 's future . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
