LONDON | Tue Mar 15 , 2011 1:48 pm GMT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Leading health charities shunned the launch on Tuesday of a government-led drive to improve public health , accusing ministers of failing to stand up to supermarkets and drinks companies . 
The initiative aims to lower salt content in food and restrict the promotion of alcoholic drinks . 
Leading supermarkets , fast food firms and drinks companies have signed pledges to co-operate in `` Responsibility Deal '' commitments with the Department of Health . 
Health Secretary Andrew Lansley said the pledges were part of the government 's `` bold new approach to public health , '' avoiding new legislation and relying on self-policing by industry . 
`` We know that regulation is costly , can take years and is often only determined at an EU-wide level anyway , '' Lansley said . 
Health groups like the British Heart Foundation and the British Liver Trust have largely stayed away from the program , arguing it is soft on the food and drink industry and lacks the teeth to ensure companies stick to their promises . 
Supermarket ASDA said it would remove all alcohol promotions from the front of its stores from April , while Morrisons said it will provide a minimum of 50 special price offers every week on fresh fruit and vegetables . 
Fast food outlets including McDonald 's , Pizza Hut and KFC pledged to remove harmful trans-fats from their meals and to include calorie labeling , the health department said . 
Drinks firms Diageo and Carlsberg will support alcohol awareness campaigns and develop a new sponsorship code on responsible drinking . 
Other pledges include reducing salt in food and putting clear unit-labelling on 80 percent of alcohol by 2013 . 
Diabetes UK and the British Heart Foundation said they would not join the scheme until there was more robust monitoring of the commitments . 
`` We are disappointed that the Responsibility Deal is not more ambitious in its vision as many of the pledges replicate existing standards , '' said Diabetes UK chief executive Barbara Young . 
Six health organizations fighting alcohol abuse announced on Monday they were boycotting the program . 
Alcohol Concern said the scheme was `` the worst possible deal for everyone '' seeking to curb drinking abuse . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
