LONDON | Tue Mar 15 , 2011 4:54 am GMT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Chief executives of public bodies should be forced to justify their salary and have pay docked if they do n't perform , a government-sponsored report recommended on Tuesday . 
The findings of the `` Fair Pay Review '' are designed to halt a decade-long trend which has seen pay at the top of the public sector grow faster than pay levels at the bottom . 
Prime Minister David Cameron asked Will Hutton , a left-leaning commentator and former head of the Work Foundation , to conduct the review last year . 
Scrutiny of high-earning executives has intensified ever since the government was forced to bail out the banking sector with public funds . 
Most public anger has been directed at bank chief executives , labeled `` fat cats '' in the media , but top-earning public sector chiefs have not been immune . 
In an interim report last December , Hutton set out a case for a maximum pay multiple that would keep the pay of top executives bound to what their staff earned , with a 20:1 ratio the maximum . 
In Tuesday 's final report , Hutton moves away from this idea . 
Instead he proposes that public sector executives place at least 10 percent of their salary at risk in an `` earnback '' scheme , which can only be reclaimed if targets are met . 
If targets are exceeded , the same proportion could be earned as a bonus . 
`` I am recommending that all public service executives are required to place an element of their basic pay at risk , to be earned back each year through good performance , '' Hutton said . 
The report also recommends that public bodies publish , and justify , the multiple of chief executive to workforce median pay -- a step it argues should also be adopted by the private sector . 
`` Organisations delivering public services should publish their pay multiples each year , and disclose and explain executive pay and how it relates to job responsibilities and individual performance , '' Hutton said . 
The government , eager for a framework to curb what Hutton has called an `` arms race '' - like scramble to increase remuneration for high-earners , is likely to welcome the recommendations . 
But Unison , Britain 's largest trade union , said the review did not go far enough . 
`` The focus on top pay is a missed opportunity . 
To really boost fairness in the public sector , and our society as a whole , we need to tackle low wages -- not just income inequality , '' Unison General Secretary Dave Prentis said . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
