NEW YORK | Tue Mar 15 , 2011 11:07 pm GMT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Private equity firm KKR & Co LP -LRB- KKR . 
N -RRB- is increasing the sources of capital it taps as it gears up to raise its next buyout fund , the company said at its first ever investor day on Tuesday . 
KKR , which raised an $ 18 billion global buyout fund in 2006 , is just starting to raise a new North American-focused fund with a target size of $ 8 billion to $ 10 billion . 
Private equity firms raise capital that they typically use to buy companies , turn them around and sell for a higher price , returning the profit to the investors that supplied the capital . 
The credit crisis limited dealflow and made raising capital for new funds hard , as investors were less willing and able to commit capital to new funds . 
The harder fundraising environment has caused funds have to search out new investors . 
Nuttall said that KKR , which has 350 fund investors or `` limited partners , '' is working on adding more . 
Arch-rival Blackstone Group -LRB- BX . 
N -RRB- has more than 1,300 , a source close to the company said . 
`` It is incumbent on us -- and we will do this in the next fundraise that we are in process of doing for North America -- to find other sources of capital that are not invested in us , '' co-founder and co-Chief Executive George Roberts said . 
More money is being attracted to the alternative investment space , increasingly from new investors , co-founder and co-CEO Henry Kravis said . 
KKR said it has more than $ 11 billion of `` dry powder , '' or capital available to invest , and sees potential deals around the world . 
`` We believe that is incredible capital to take advantage of the opportunities we see in private equity around the globe , '' said Alexander Navab , KKR 's co-head of North American private equity . 
Leveraged buyouts -- the debt-fueled deals private equity is known for -- have been increasing in the past year as financing for deals has become easier to find . 
KKR said North America is attractive for private equity , with improved credit markets and `` generally reasonable '' equity valuations . 
The company 's European head said KKR sees opportunities in France and the financial services sector . 
In Asia , KKR cited opportunities in China and said Japan looks attractive from a pure valuation point of view . 
It is seeking large transactions in markets such as Australia , Singapore , Korea , Japan and India . 
KKR 's $ 11 billion includes $ 3.5 billion of uncommitted capital remaining in its 2006 fund , which will probably prove one of the strongest of its vintage , said Michael Michelson , co-head of North American private equity . 
KKR also raised more than $ 1 billion for a China fund in record time for the firm , Navab said . 
However , its European Fund II is valued at 93 percent of cost , which KKR described as `` disappointing -LRB- but -RRB- an improvement on 2009 . '' 
Roberts said KKR probably paid too much for a couple of deals , which was `` probably why Europe II is still not performing '' as it thinks it should . 
In November Dallas Fed President Richard Fisher suggested that a bubble is forming in private equity , with cheap debt fueling high-priced deals in an echo of the torrid days of LBOs before the subprime credit crisis cut off financing in 2007 . 
KKR remains focused on buyouts even though it has expanded over the past few years into areas such as real estate and capital markets . 
`` Private equity is our heritage , our core business , and we 've been able to build a number of businesses around it , '' Scott Nuttall , global head of capital and asset management , said at the event , which was attended by about 100 investors . 
KKR said it was confident its new long-short team would be in the market soon and raise significant capital over time . 
Last October , KKR hired nine members of Goldman Sachs Group Inc 's -LRB- GS . 
N -RRB- proprietary trading team . 
`` Buyout king '' Kravis , who co-founded KKR nearly 35 years ago , said he and co-founder Roberts think about succession issues every day but added that their stepping down , `` I hope is in the distant future . '' 
KKR has a deep bench of potential successors , Kravis said . 
KKR listed on the New York Stock Exchange on July 15 , joining rival Blackstone Group LP -LRB- BX . 
N -RRB- , which made its debut in 2007 . 
Shares of KKR fell 4 percent to close at $ 16.59 on the New York Stock Exchange . 
Other large private equity firms such Carlyle Group CYL . 
UL and Apollo Management APOLO . 
UL are also likely to go public . 
Apollo is expected to set terms soon for an IPO of up to $ 500 million , sources told Reuters late on Monday . 
Private equity firms going public have sometimes been questioned by investors concerned about whether their interests will be aligned . 
Roberts said that forward-thinking investors realize that `` over the next five years the other established private equity firms will be public in one form or another ... this is a trend and is probably in their best interests as well . '' 
-LRB- Editing by John Wallace , Richard Chang and Steve Orlofsky -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
