LONDON | Tue Mar 15 , 2011 3:22 pm GMT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Britain is to overhaul its archaic libel laws to stamp out ` libel tourism ' by wealthy individuals and corporations who flock to British courts to sue for defamation . 
Opponents of the current libel laws say they make it too easy for the rich and powerful to bring cases in Britain -- or to use the threat of expensive action to stifle free speech . 
`` London has become the world 's libel capital . 
Foreign claimants with insignificant connections with this country use our courts to silence critics , when accused of activities such as funding terrorism and dumping toxic waste in Africa , '' Anthony Lester , a barrister who has championed libel reform , wrote in the Times newspaper . 
The first draft of a bill put forward by ministers on Tuesday proposes reforming current laws to allow courts to strike out trivial claims , and making it harder to bring to court overseas claims that have little connection to Britain . 
It also includes a new public interest defense and recommends a single publication rule , so that repeat claims for libel could not be made every time a publication is accessed on the internet . 
`` For too long our outdated libel laws gave made it easy for the powerful and the wealthy to stifle fair criticism , '' Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said in a statement . 
`` We can not continue to tolerate a culture in which scientists , journalists and bloggers are afraid to tackle issues of public importance for fear of being sued . '' 
Scientists and academics in particular argue the current law allows powerful corporations to use the threat of civil action to suppress debate , and some argue that corporations and public bodies should be prevented from suing for libel altogether . 
The draft bill did not recommend this and ministers said they focussed on changing the `` inequality of arms '' that prevents the poor from suing over defamation or from publishing freely without fear of being unable to mount a defense against cases brought by the wealthy . 
The proposed bill did not include provisions over internet publication . 
Minister of State Lord McNally said he expected a three-month consultation , which now follows publication of the first draft , would help to refine laws in this area . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
