We had a contingency plan for Louisiana spill , and it 's working , BP chief tells angry senators But all three oil firms try to blame each other 's errors ; hearing acknowledges regulatory oversight failed US national guard helicopters drop sandbags near Grand Isle , Louisiana , in an effort to contain oil from the Deepwater Horizon spill . 
Photograph : Ted Jackson\/AP BP insisted last night that its contingency plan had worked , despite coming under fire in Congress for minimizing the risks of offshore drilling and trying to shirk blame for the oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico . 
With an estimated 4m gallons of oil polluting the gulf from the ruptured well , Lamar McKay , the chief executive of BP America , said the company had adequately anticipated the potential scale of any spill and that its clean-up operation had gone according to plan . 
`` We had a very specific plan , '' he told the Senate . 
`` It has actually worked . '' 
But he acknowledged the spill could grow to nearly 19m US gallons by the time a relief well the only sure method of stopping the leak is drilled . 
BP 's defense came at the end of a testy day of hearings before two committees which saw the three oil titans connected to the disaster repeatedly accused of trying to slough off their financial and legal obligations . 
Executives of BP America , which owned the well , Transocean , which owned the sunken Deepwater Horizon rig , and Halliburton , which cemented the wall , were repeatedly taken to task by senators for failing to put in place adquate safety regimes . 
BP was also pressed for specifics on its commitment to honor all `` legitimate claims '' for damages from the spill . 
The senators ' anger grew as all three admitted they could offer no guarantees against another calamity in the Gulf . 
`` There is just nothing there underneath your statements , '' said Barbara Boxer , the chair of the Senate environment and public works committee . 
`` If you look at what 's happening it is very very disturbing . '' 
But other senators acknowledged a failure of regulatory oversight . 
`` We dropped the ball here , '' said Max Baucus , a Democrat from Montana . 
The day got underway with BP America 's chief executive , Lamar McKay , pointing to Transocean , the operator of the rig , and pinning a failed blowout preventer , a 450 tonne set of valves now lying on the ocean floor . 
`` We have a blowout preventer that did n't work , '' McKay said . 
Transocean 's Steven Newman fired straight back . 
`` Offshore oil and gas production projects begin and end with the operator , in this case BP , '' he said . 
Its health , safety and environment officer , Tim Probert , started off by warning against a premature rush to judgment then took his turn at assigning blame . 
Like Newman , he told the hearing that Halliburton had carried out its work according to BP 's specifications . 
Yesterday 's hearings on Capitol Hill and in Kenner , Louisiana mark the first official efforts to unravel the causes of spill , and prevent future disasters . 
BP and the others were put on notice the spill could well change the future of offshore drilling . 
`` If you ca n't convince people that you can operate safely , not only will BP not be out there , but Transocean wo n't be out there to drill the rigs , and Halliburton wo n't be out there cementing , '' said Lisa Murkowski , a Republican from Alaska who supports drilling . 
The first changes were set in motion yesterday , with the Obama administration proposing reform in the policing of offshore drilling following repeated charges that regulators were too cosy with oil companies . 
A proposed overhaul of the mineral management service would put a firewall between officials approving projects and those responsible for making operations meet safety and environmental standards . 
The move comes amid repeated charges from senators yesterday that the mineral management service was `` too cozy '' . 
The hearing was told the BP and other companies routinely won exemptions from environmental review of offshore projects , a waiver process McKay described as `` just the industry standard '' . 
Meanwhile , the long-awaited energy and climate bill due for release today was also tweaked in response to heightened concerns about drilling . 
The bill will still expand offshore drilling , but environmental groups said they were assured that states would be able to veto projects within 75 miles of their shores . 
As the hearings played out on Capitol Hill , the Louisiana national guard deployed troops in Blackhawk helicopters to drop sandbags along the shoreline . 
Much evidence at the two hearings yesterday was technical , about various protective devices that should if functioning properly prevent catastrophe . 
One key detail could be the cement casing of the well . 
Halliburton noted the well had been left without a cap or blowout preventer for five months before the explosion . 
BP also faced tough questions about whether it was too complacent about the risks of deepwater drilling , given more than a dozen accidents in the last five years involving failed blow out preventers . 
BP was also pressed repeatedly to spell out its commitment to pay all `` legitimate '' claims of compensation for the spill . 
Senators also accused the company of cutting corners in its disaster planning by failing to have a containment dome and stocks of dispersants were not on standby . 
`` What I see here is a company flailing around trying to deal with a worst-case scenario , '' Robert Menendez , a New Jersey senator , told BP . 
The three companies were also forced to admit under questioning that they were conducting no research into how to deal with deep water spills . 
BP , in particular , was singled out over fatal accidents in Texas , as well as safety violations in Alaska . 
A version appeared on p18 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 09.26 BST on Wednesday 12 May 2010 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off moorehn : Huh ! 
RT @BrianSozzi : Within food , white bread had one of the strongest price increases in December . 
