Gulf oil spill hearing - as it happened US senators sought answers from the Deepwater Horizon rig 's owners and operators in the wake of the Gulf oil spill disaster The Deepwater Horizon oil rig : millions of gallons of oil pour into the Gulf Preamble : Welcome to the hitherto obscure US Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources , which today is holding hearings on the Deepwater Horizon Gulf oil spill with questions aimed at executives from BP , Halliburton -LRB- remember them ? -RRB- 
and Transocean , the companies that respectively ran , installed and owned the Deepwater rig that exploded on 20 April 20 , killing 11 people and caused oil to spill in great quantities into the Gulf of Mexico . 
The committee 's witnesses are Steven Newman , head of Transocean , Lamar McKay , president and Chairman of BP America , and Tim Probert , who is the lucky holder of the title of chief health , safety and environmental officer for Halliburton . 
You can read their prepared testimony here and what we can say so far is that the three companies are adopting what one observer has called `` the Shaggy defense '' - in the words of Senator Robert Menendez , Democrat of New Jersey : `` BP says Transocean , Transocean says Halliburton I can see the liability chase . '' 
From the written testimony from the three witnesses , you can see why Menendez might think that . 
Here 's BP 's Lamar McKay -LRB- pdf -RRB- : BP is one of the lease holders and the operator of this exploration well . 
As operator , BP hired Transocean to conduct the well drilling operations . 
Transocean owned the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig and its equipment , including the blowout preventer ... Only seven of the 126 onboard the Deepwater Horizon were BP employees ... Blowout preventers are used on every oil and gas well drilled in the world today . 
They are carefully and deliberately designed with multiple levels of redundancy and are regularly tested . 
If they do n't pass the test , they are not used . 
The systems are intended to fail-closed and be fail-safe ; sadly and for reasons we do not yet understand , in this case , they were not . 
Transocean 's blowout preventer failed to operate . 
The committee has been off for a recess , to do some actual voting on the financial regulation bill , and now they are up and running ... read on . 
12.00 pm : If you are following these hearings on Twitter , then there 's some excellent live tweeting going on from Kate Sheppard @kate_sheppard and my excellent colleague Suzanne Goldenberg @suzyji , at the hearings itself . 
If you want to make your life more exciting then watch the whole thing live via the web on C-Span here . 
12.11 pm : More on the blame game , this time the drill owner Transocean blaming Halliburton and BP for something going wrong in the cement plug that was supposed to seal the well . 
Here 's Transocean 's Steven Newman : The cementing process is dictated by the operator 's well plan , and the testing of the cement on the Deepwater Horizon was performed by the cement contractor -LRB- Haliburton in this instance -RRB- as specified and directed by BP ... -LRB- T -RRB- he one thing we know with certainty is that on the evening of April 20 , there was a sudden , catastrophic failure of the cement , the casing , or both . 
Therein lies the root cause of this occurrence ; without a disastrous failure of one of those elements , the explosion could not have occurred . 
In other words : nothing to do with us , mate . 
12.20 pm : The senators are starting to get unhappy about the blame-game sharing going on here . 
Lisa Murkowski from Alaska , a state that knows all about oil wants to stop the Reservoir Dogs style face-off : I would suggest to all three of you that we are all in this together because this incident will have an impact on the energy policy of our country . 
If you ca n't convince people that you can operate safely , not only will BP not be out there , but Transocean wo n't be out there to drill the rigs and Halliburton wo n't be out there cementing . 
In other words , get your act together or you 'll spoil it for the rest of us ? 
Murkowski of course is from the `` drill , baby , drill '' wing of the Republican party . 
-LRB- Which implies there 's a non-drilling wing of the Republican party , which there is n't , but some parts are more pro-drilling than others . -RRB- 
12.45 pm : Well if you ever wanted to know anything about deep-sea drilling , you 'll love this hearing . 
Also , if you like hearing phrases like `` operating procedures '' and `` manipulating the pipe through the BOP '' . 
Sometimes some words of English break through . 
Senator Mary Landrieu asks : `` Will BP pay ? '' 
That is , over and above the $ 75m cap that legislation allows for . 
BP 's McKay : `` We 've been very clear . 
We are going to pay all legitimate claims , all legitimate claims . '' 
Landrieu : `` Define ` legitimate ' for us ? '' 
Excuse me while I go and short BP shares . 
1pm : Senator Ron Wyden is a bit of hero to many Democrats , and you can see why at this hearing . 
Here he 's grilling BP which he appears to identify as the villain of this piece over their far-from-spotless safety record in recent years . 
After Wyden lists some unsafe BP events of recent years , he charges : `` There is a pattern of safety problems at BP . 
Why has BP not been able to change its corporate culture ? '' 
BP 's McKay responds : `` I 'll acknowledge we 've got issues and we 've got to change some areas of the company ... It gets down to the agenda and the culture of the company . '' 
Wyden snorts : `` It sure does ! 
The culture is that this company has had one accident after another . '' 
Senator Menendez mentions that the room in which the hearing is being held is the same one used for hearings on the sinking of the Titanic : We were told that the Titanic was so technologically advanced that it could n't sink , and we were told that this well was so technologically advanced that it could n't spill . 
Unfortunately both of these technological marvels ended in tragedy . 
In that case , BP will soon be blaming an iceberg . 
1.05 pm : It should be mentioned that Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama is very interested in mud . 
There are technical reasons why this is important . 
Meanwhile , Kate Sheppard has a good round-up of the intra-mural finger-pointing between the three companies on Mother Jones 's website . 
1.19 pm : Maria Cantwell , Democratic senator from Washington state , goes back to the question of BP 's paying compensation , listing a series of areas where BP might have to cough up . 
But would BP compensate state and local governments , for example , for lost tax revenue ? 
`` Question mark , '' responds McKay , who is taking most of the heat here . 
-LRB- Have the senators really forgotten about Halliburton 's toxic PR image , hmm ? -RRB- 
1.30 pm : So that brings this part of the hearings to a close - the three execs will now shoot over to the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works , which might be more exciting since it is n't stuffed with pro-oil state senators -LRB- he said glibly -RRB- . 
As the hearings wound up , some protesters -LRB- there are a few in the audience -RRB- started an imaginative variation on the old Vietnam War chant : Hey hey , Lamar McKay , who many fish did you kill today ? 
Call me old fashioned but it does n't quite have the power of `` LBJ , how many kids did you kill today ? '' 
Right , we 're in recess until 2.30 pm ET . 
2.30 pm : Here we go again : welcome to part two of the grilling of three oil execs relating to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . 
Compared to the excitement in the UK with the change of government , this committee meeting might not seem quite as dramatic , but this session promises to be more bare-knuckle than this morning 's round . 
This one is the environment and public works committee , which contains rather more feisty senators , and chaired by the far tougher Barbara Boxer , who says today that the spill `` could be one of the greatest environmental disasters we 've ever seen '' . 
Once again the unholy trinity of Halliburton , BP and Transocean are giving testimony , the same three as this morning . 
2.45 pm : The committee 's senators are making their opening statements , and all ready there 's a much tougher tone to their remarks . 
Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey has a nice line : `` What this spill shows us is that offshore drilling can not be conducted safely ... Drilling is a 19th century solution to a 21st century problem . '' 
2.55 pmpm : And then again there 's a different view from senator David Vitter of Louisiana , a Republican who knows all about being covered in filth . 
-LRB- That 's a reference to the DC Madam prostitute scandal , when Vitter was found to involved . -RRB- 
Anyway , Vitter thinks that the matter is so serious that these hearings should n't even be held . 
`` I think that having hearings while the disaster is ongoing is a mistake , '' says Vitter , because the hearing is `` pulling some amount of resources and focus away from that ongoing disaster '' . 
Now you might think that 's a pathetic line of argument . 
But think about it for a minute . 
Then you can be really sure it 's a pathetic line of argument . 
Senator Sheldon Whitehouse , a Democrat of Rhode Island , takes a different line : `` We were told that ` drill , baby , drill ' was the solution to all our problems . 
Go tell that to the tourist industry in Florida . '' 
3.09 pm : Senator Richard Shelby deserves to win a prize . 
A prize for chutzpah . 
In fact , he 's done even better than Vitter in the chutzpah stakes . 
In his remarks , he wants to know what was going on at Department of the Interior 's Minerals Management Service . 
`` I 'm just asking , '' he says . 
Yes , it was obviously their fault . 
-LRB- He has a point about how badly run the MMS was ... under the Bush administration . 
But he 's also making a wider point about the ineffectiveness of government , I think . -RRB- 
3.19 pm : Senator Bill Nelson of Florida is getting stuck in , warning of the Deepwater spill : `` one of my worst nightmares might be coming true '' . 
Nelson 's now sketching out a nightmarish scenario , in which the oil spill hits an ocean stream in the Gulf , goes around the tip of Florida , up the US east coast and ends up ... on the coast of Scotland ! 
If only Britain had a government it could do something about this . 
Nelson : `` Is it worth the trade off to our economy in Florida , not only to our beaches but our fisheries and our oysters , is it worth the trade off ... for 10 % of the undiscovered oil in the Gulf of Mexico ? 
The answer is clearly : no. '' Nelson 's also lighting into the MMS : `` A sorry record , a record of incestuous relationships , of sex parties , pot parties . 
MMS needs to be cleaned up . '' 
Everything needs to be cleaned up . 
`` Madam chairman , those are my heartfelt remarks , '' concludes Bill . 
`` They certainly are , '' replies Boxer . 
3.32 pm : Now it 's the chance for the witnesses , starting with BP America 's Lamar McKay . 
`` I grew up in Mississippi ... I know what people are going through , '' he says . 
Faintly , in the breakground , you can hear the Windows XP start-up tune . 
3.38 pm : So now that Britain has a government again it needs to get cracking on that contingency plan for when the Gulf oil slick hits Scotland , as Ben Nelson 's nightmare predicts . 
3.55 pm : Tim Probert of Halliburton now speaking - and we 're back to the blame-game shifting of the morning session . 
Shorter version of Probert 's defense : We ca n't possibly make any opinions on what might have happened at Deepwater Horizon rig until all the facts are known . 
Except that if the blow-out preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- had worked none of this would have happened . 
But that 's not what the Transocean people say in their evidence : The attention now being given to the BOPs in this case is somewhat ironic because at the time of the explosion , the drilling process was complete . 
The well had been sealed with casing and cement , and within a few days , the BOPs would have been removed . 
At this point , the well barriers the cementing and the casing were responsible for controlling any pressure from the reservoir . 
Remember : Transocean drilled the well , Halliburton did the cement plug . 
Now things are getting interesting : Barbara Boxer : `` Mr Probert , I was taken by your testimony , it seems to be that your blaming the well owner here . '' 
Probert : `` I certainly did n't mean to suggest that , I was just explaining the role of the parties . '' 
For legal reasons , you will have to speculate on your own interpretation of which of these lying bastards is lying . 
Oh god now its Senator Inhofe . 
He wants to know just how terrific a job they are doing in cleaning up the oil with those nice chemical dispersants . 
Now he 's banging on about how the MMS inspected the Deepwater Horizon 26 times . 
But otherwise he seems to be speaking in some rustic argot . 
4.10 pm : Senator Lautenberg asks each of the three execs : who was responsible for the explosion and spill ? 
4.14 pm : Sounds like this hearing is n't going to last long because of all the votes the senators have to make on the financial regulations act . 
Anyway ... here 's David Vitter and the thing he 's interested is stopping this terrorist oil from touching the beaches of Louisiana . 
So he 's going to ask some micro-questions aimed at making sure his state gets more oil boom coverage . 
Of course all politics is local but this is parochialism gone mad . 
This way , no one asks the nice oil people any awkward questions ... like , why did your rig explode ? 
4.30 pm : Right , so the committee 's gone into recess for voting and its unclear when it will come back to life , so let 's leave it there . 
No fireworks , certainly nothing on the scale of the Goldman Sachs hearings a couple of weeks ago , perhaps because the spill is still on-going and enough evidence has n't been assembled to really probe the companies involved . 
Ben Cardin of Maryland had a good shot at it , asking BP about known safety issues involving blowout preventers that have failed . '' 
`` Obviously in hindsight we did not anticipate something of this impact , '' says McKay . 
So , replies Cardin , then how can you be sure in the future ? 
My colleague Suzanne Goldenberg sums up the hearings earlier today , and the blame-all-round policy taken by the oil companies : As the Energy and Natural Resources committee hearing got underway , Senate staffers joked it could be subtitled Scenes from an Execution , with a grilling due from the senators . 
But some of the worst damage may well have been done by executives themselves , as the three companies all tried to shift the responsibility . 
And no Ann Coulter , this is not demographics . 
Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
