Syria 's Foreign Minister Walid Muallem : `` We have withdrawn some military units '' Fresh clashes have broken out in Syria despite the passing of a UN-backed deadline for a complete withdrawal of government troops and weapons . 
Activists reported shelling in Homs and areas of northern Aleppo province , and unrest in the capital , Damascus . 
Rights groups said 11 people had been killed on Tuesday . 
Syria 's Foreign Minister Walid Muallem , in Russia for talks , said Damascus had taken steps to adhere to the plan by withdrawing some troops . 
He blamed `` armed gangs '' for the continuing violence . 
Under the peace plan - negotiated by the UN and Arab League 's special envoy on the Syrian crisis , Kofi Annan - Syrian troops were to have completed their withdrawal from population centres and stopped the use of heavy weaponry by Tuesday , ahead of a full ceasefire coming into place on Thursday . 
Damascus had agreed to the deadline , but on Sunday demanded written guarantees first that its opponents would give up arms , along with a promise from foreign states not to fund them . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut Mr Muallem 's suggestion that a ceasefire should coincide with the arrival of international peace monitors is getting things completely out of the sequence envisaged by Kofi Annan . 
That called for the government to take the first step in pulling back its forces , and the opposition would follow suit in applying a ceasefire by Thursday morning . 
The observers would then come in to monitor an existing peace , not be part of the stabilisation process in terms of going into a combat situation and trying to calm it themselves . 
It indicates to me there is no clear way forward coming out of the meetings , unless there are things that have been decided behind the scenes . 
Everybody recognizes the Annan peace plan went as far as anybody could go in providing a balanced , peaceful political solution . 
If this does n't work its very hard to see how any other plan could . 
Speaking after talks with his Russian counterpart , Mr Muallem said army units had been withdrawn from some areas , a number of detainees released and agreement reached on getting humanitarian aid to those in need . 
But he said that `` despite all these positive measures we noticed on a daily basis the escalation of opposition by the armed terrorist gangs '' . 
Mr Muallem told the BBC Syria would only stop killing civilians `` when these groups stop killing '' . 
He said a ceasefire could only come into force once a team of international observers had arrived , but also accused Turkey of supplying militant groups with weapons and allowing them to cross its borders , AFP reports . 
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said the Syrian government `` could have been more active and decisive '' in implementing the plan , but that Mr Muallem had assured him Damascus was committed to it . 
Success rested on those countries with influence over the opposition groups putting pressure on them to abide by a ceasefire as well , he said . 
10 April : Government must withdraw troops and heavy weapons such as tanks from towns , cities and villages Following 48 hours : Ceasefire to be implemented on the ground with the onus on the opposition to follow the government 's lead 06:00 local time on 12 April : All forms of violence must be stopped on all sides Next step : All parties to hold talks on a political solution Russia is one of Syria 's closest allies and as a permanent member of the UN Security Council has vetoed resolutions condemning Damascus . 
France 's foreign ministry described Mr Muallem 's comments as `` a fresh expression of this blatant and unacceptable lie '' that Damascus was committed to the Annan plan and urged the international community to react against the `` feeling of impunity '' . 
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said six civilians were killed by fresh shelling in Homs on Tuesday and another was shot dead in the city . 
It said another four people were killed in Kfar Zeita in central Hama province , while military activity was also reported in Aleppo province . 
It may be too early to draw a definitive line under Kofi Annan 's peace plan for Syria , but it is not looking in terribly good health '' Mr Annan was visiting some of the Turkish camps on Tuesday . 
The visit comes a day after several people in one camp were injured by shots fired across the border from inside Syria . 
Two people were also shot dead as they approached the border from the Syrian side . 
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan , on a trip to China , said the incidents were a `` clear violation '' of its borders and that his country would `` take the necessary measures '' in response . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully Turkey now hosts some 24,000 Syrians , including hundreds of army defectors , and has seen a sharp rise in the number of refugees coming over the border in the past week . 
Separately , Lebanon has condemned the killing of a Lebanese cameraman , Ali Shaaban , who was shot on Lebanon 's northern border with Syria . 
The UN says more than 9,000 people have been killed in the uprising against Mr Assad 's rule which began more than a year ago . 
In February , the Syrian government put the death toll at 3,838 - 2,493 civilians and 1,345 security forces personnel . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
