The new containment capping stack is pictured in this image captured from a BP live video feed from the Gulf of Mexico , July 20 , 2010 . 
HOUSTON\/WASHINGTON | Tue Jul 20 , 2010 7:38 pm EDT HOUSTON\/WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - British energy giant BP Plc said on Tuesday it reached a $ 7 billion deal with Apache Corp , a large part of its planned sale of $ 10 billion in assets to pay for the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
BP said Apache would pay a $ 5 billion cash deposit on July 30 as part of the deal for exploration and production facilities in North America and Egypt . 
The company said the deal , worth a total of $ 7 billion , would include assets in New Mexico , natural gas in western Canada and concessions in Egypt . 
BP 's share price ended 1.54 percent lower in New York on Tuesday at $ 35.20 . 
Earlier in the day , it announced it would sell $ 1.7 billion worth of assets in Vietnam and Pakistan . 
The continuing disaster in the Gulf remains high on the American and British political agendas and dominated a visit to Washington by British Prime Minister David Cameron . 
Cameron praised BP for the steps it has taken to plug the leak and to pay for damages suffered by people in the Gulf . 
U.S. officials on Tuesday gave BP 's latest effort -- a cap that has stopped the gusher -- another 24 hours for pressure tests on the seal . 
The Gulf 's vital tourism and fishing industries have been devastated by the millions of gallons of oil that have hit coastal beaches and marshes , threatening an ecological catastrophe on a grand scale . 
The spill also has hurt President Barack Obama 's approval ratings and complicated traditionally close ties with Britain . 
Rig operator Ensco Plc filed a lawsuit on Tuesday challenging the Obama administration 's new deepwater oil drilling moratorium , saying it was mostly the same as the first ban that a U.S. court already put on hold . 
Ensco , in a complaint filed with the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana , said the Interior Department `` did not analyze the situation anew and with an open mind when deciding to impose the second moratorium . '' 
The BP asset sales were announced exactly three months after an explosion on an offshore rig killed 11 workers and caused the crude to flow into the Gulf of Mexico . 
BP has committed to raise $ 10 billion in the coming year to pay for damage claims , the cleanup and legal costs related to the leaking well . 
BP , which said on Monday it had spent about $ 3.95 billion so far on the oil spill , agreed under intense pressure from U.S. authorities last month to set up an independently administered $ 20 billion escrow fund for damage claims . 
The Obama administration has stressed that the amount is not a cap on the company 's liabilities . 
During a visit with Obama , Cameron said he understood U.S. anger at BP because of the oil spill . 
He also said it was important to both the U.S. and British economies that the company stay strong and stable . 
TEST TO CONTINUE ; `` STATIC KILL '' ? 
The U.S. government on Tuesday approved another 24-hour extension of a pressure test of the well . 
The broken well was capped last week -- at least temporarily -- after spilling up to 60,000 barrels a day of crude for three months . 
The well test , which has been extended in 24-hour increments by the U.S. government , will continue until Wednesday afternoon and then be re-evaluated for a possible further extension . 
Scientists are now weighing another option -- a `` static kill '' to help smother and plug the leak . 
The top U.S. oil spill official said BP could have a plan to proceed with the static kill option within 24 hours . 
This would involve pumping heavy drilling mud and possibly cement into the well , much like BP 's failed `` top kill '' in May . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The crack in the ocean bottom that is leaking oil is fresh or the whole area would be tan from oil . 
These Brits are used to controlling the press ! 
Not so in this country . 
If the oil is unrelated to this site then is it possible to have even more leaks in different places throughout the Gulf making it impossible to control ? 
When will we learn that greed is idolatry and it 's time to repent now before God allows us to destroy the world -LRB- i.e. the wrath of God -RRB- allowing man to slip deeper and deeper into the consequences of his own sins ? 
You just KILLED 11 hard working people now you whant to play with this well ... ... . . 
if not i hope someone breaks a screew and goes nuts on you -LRB- money verses cents -RRB- BP GET A CLUE ... ... ... ... . . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
