HONG KONG | Wed Apr 15 , 2009 5:56 am EDT HONG KONG -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Scientists in Hong Kong and the United States have identified a synthetic compound which appears to be able to stop the replication of influenza viruses , including the H5N1 bird flu virus . 
The search for such new `` inhibitors '' has grown more urgent in recent years as drugs , like oseltamivir , have become largely ineffective against certain flu strains , like the H1N1 seasonal flu virus . 
Experts now question how well and how long the drug would stand up against the H5N1 , should it unleash a pandemic . 
Researchers in Hong Kong and the Unites States screened some 230,000 compounds that were catalogued with the U.S. National Cancer Institute , and found 20 that could potentially restrict the proliferation of the H5N1 . 
The experts told a news conference on Wednesday one of the compounds , compound 1 or NSC89853 , showed promise . 
`` We have found a compound that is different from oseltamivir but which acts in the same way , '' said Leo Poon , a microbiologist at the University of Hong Kong . 
`` An analogy would be like we have a door with a keyhole , but the hole has changed , and the key , in this case oseltamivir , ca n't lock the door anymore , '' he told the news conference . 
`` But we have discovered another keyhole and another key which can lock the door . '' 
Their finding was published in the latest issue of the Journal of Medicinal Chemistry . 
In their experiment , the researchers infected separate batches of cultured human cells with seasonal flu virus and H5N1 and found that compound 1 prevented the replication of both types of viruses effectively . 
`` Given the problems with drug resistance , this compound can be used to develop a new drug , '' said Allan Lau , professor of pediatrics and adolescent medicine at the University of Hong Kong . 
But he cautioned it would take as much as eight years for such a drug to be available on the market . 
Many advanced countries stock up on oseltamivir and zanamivir , two varieties of the same class of drugs that stops the H5N1 virus from multiplying . 
But the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in March that 98 percent of all flu samples from the H1N1 strain were resistant to oseltamivir , which is manufactured by Roche AG and marketed under the brand Tamiflu . 
Viruses and bacteria are sturdy organisms that fight hard to survive and adapt swiftly to drugs that are used to kill them , quickly becoming resistant to them . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tan Ee Lyn ; Editing by Sugita Katyal -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
