LONDON\/VENICE , Louisiana | Fri Jun 11 , 2010 6:27 pm EDT LONDON\/VENICE , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Britain stuck up for beleaguered BP Plc on Friday against American criticism over the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , while the company ramped up efforts to siphon more crude from its gushing well . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron and his finance minister George Osborne stressed the London-based company was economically important to both Britain and the United States . 
The British government 's backing helped boost BP shares , which have been battered this week as the Obama administration ratcheted up criticism of the company over the 53-day-old spill , the worst environmental disaster in U.S. history . 
Millions of gallons of oil have poured into the Gulf since an April 20 explosion on an offshore rig killed 11 workers and ruptured BP 's deep-sea well . 
U.S. scientists on Thursday doubled their estimate of the amount of oil flowing from the well . 
BP has been capturing oil from the leaking well since installing a containment system , or cap , last week . 
It is moving a second ship to the spill site to enable it to increase the amount of oil it is siphoning from the well `` toward the end of June , '' the Obama administration 's point man for the disaster , Admiral Thad Allen , said . 
Under U.S. government direction , BP also plans to nearly double its oil-collecting capacity by mid-July . 
The upgraded oil collection system could potentially siphon up to 50,000 barrels a day , Allen said . 
The well will not be sealed until August , when two relief wells now being drilled are due to be completed . 
In the meantime , an unknown amount of oil still gushes forth . 
Energy Secretary Steven Chu told Reuters that BP 's latest effort to capture the leaking oil had not made the spill dramatically worse , dispelling fears of government scientists that it could increase the flow of crude by up to 20 percent . 
`` The estimates of 20 percent or more are incorrect , '' Chu said . 
Obama administration officials have threatened to increase BP 's liabilities for the spill , which is causing an ecological and economic disaster along the U.S. Gulf Coast . 
U.S. lawmakers are also pressuring the company to suspend its dividend to ensure it has enough cash to pay for cleaning up the mess . 
House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi said on Friday BP should be subjected to unlimited liability costs and should pay all damage claims before issuing the dividend . 
BP is considering putting money for the dividend in an escrow account until the full scale of the company 's liabilities can be determined , the Times of London reported , quoting people familiar with the situation . 
It said BP board members were discussing a plan to defer the second quarter dividend , due to be announced on July 27 . 
A BP spokesman told Reuters the company was considering all options but no decision had been made . 
Meanwhile , oil drilling firm Transocean Ltd. resolved its spat with the Obama administration over its bid to limit its liability in the sinking of its rig , which triggered the spill , according to court papers filed on Friday . 
British Prime Minister Cameron spoke to BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg and expressed frustration about the damage caused by the spill , a spokesman for Cameron said . 
`` He -LRB- the prime minister -RRB- said that it is in everyone 's interests that BP continues to be a financially strong and stable company , '' the spokesman said . 
Osborne , Britain 's chancellor of the exchequer , said after speaking to BP CEO Tony Hayward , `` The prime minister is also clear that we need constructive solutions and that we remember the economic value BP brings to people in Britain and America . '' 
Forty percent of BP 's shareholders are in the United States , with the same percentage based in Britain . 
Business leaders , politicians and newspapers have pressed Cameron to defend BP against the Obama administration , whose criticism of the British company has been portrayed in British media as Britain-bashing . 
Cameron , who took office in May , is due to discuss the Gulf of Mexico crisis with Obama in a telephone call at 11 a.m. EDT on Saturday . 
The call will be a tricky test for the two leaders . 
Both are under pressure to appear tough to voters at home . 
Obama , criticized by some in the United States over his handling of the crisis , has been seeking to direct public anger and frustration over the spill toward BP . 
For his part , Cameron must show Britons that he is not caving in to pressure from his country 's most powerful ally . 
A spokeswoman for Cameron said the prime minister 's telephone call with Obama would be `` statesmanlike and workmanlike . '' 
A White House official played down the BP focus , saying it would be just one of a number of issues raised . 
Shares in BP , which have lost tens of billions of dollars in value since the crisis began on April 20 , closed up 7.2 percent in London trading , rebounding from Thursday 's 13-year low and extending a rally that began in New York on Thursday . 
BP 's American depositary shares finished up 3.63 percent in New York on Friday . 
`` Possibly people have taken heart from the fact that the political rhetoric is not just one side of the Atlantic , '' said Barclays Capital analyst Lucy Haskins . 
Investors appeared unfazed by the news from U.S. scientists that the well 's flow rate may be as high 40,000 barrels -LRB- 1.68 million gallons\/6 .36 million liters -RRB- per day . 
The new estimates could have huge financial implications because under the U.S. Clean Water Act , BP and others could face fines up to $ 4,300 for every barrel leaked . 
With more than 2 million barrels of oil already in the ocean , that could mean fines of $ 8.6 billion at least . 
BP expects the total bill for the clean-up of the spill , which has affected 120 miles of U.S. coastline and closed down rich fishing grounds , will be $ 3 - $ 6 billion , an analyst briefed by BP said in a research note on Friday . 
The slick has already fouled wildlife refuges in Louisiana and barrier islands in Mississippi and Alabama . 
Tar balls have also washed up on Florida 's famous white beaches . 
One third of the Gulf 's federal waters remain closed for fishing . 
`` BP and all involved have downplayed this from day one . 
Everyone knew it was more than they reported and now basically it 's been proven , '' said Kindra Arnesen , a restaurant owner in Venice , Louisiana , whose husband makes his living fishing . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
China might take over the BP fields ? 
China is the most polluting nation on the planet , with no food , drug , or environmental laws to speak of . 
Half the stuff that is imported from there has poisonous compounds . 
That 's all we need -- from the frying pan into the fire . 
BP is the new Altria . 
The lumbering cash flow rich giant kept alive just enough to feed the massive legal settlements This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
