TRIPOLI | Sun Apr 10 , 2011 7:33 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Muammar Gaddafi has accepted a roadmap for ending the civil war in Libya , South African President Jacob Zuma said after leading a delegation of African leaders at talks in Tripoli . 
Zuma , who with four other African heads of state met Gaddafi for several hours at the Libyan leader 's Bab al-Aziziyah compound , also called on NATO to stop air strikes on Libyan government targets to `` give ceasefire a chance . '' 
No one at the talks gave details of the roadmap for peace in this oil-producing nation . 
Rebels have said they will accept nothing less than an end to Gaddafi 's four decades in power , but Libyan officials say he will not quit . 
`` The brother leader delegation has accepted the roadmap as presented by us . 
We have to give ceasefire a chance , '' Zuma said , adding that the African delegation would now travel to the eastern city of Benghazi for talks with anti-Gaddafi rebels . 
NATO stepped up attacks on Gaddafi 's armor on Sunday to weaken the bitter siege of Misrata in the west and disrupt a dangerous advance by Gaddafi 's troops in the east . 
The alliance said it destroyed 11 tanks on the outskirts of the eastern rebel town of Ajdabiyah , which looked in danger of being overrun on Sunday , and 14 near Misrata , a lone insurgent bastion in the west that has been under siege for six weeks . 
There was no sign of any let-up in the fighting and despite the African leaders ' peace roadmap hopes of a negotiated settlement looked slim . 
A rebel spokesman rejected a deal with Gaddafi to end the conflict , bloodiest in a series of pro-democracy revolts across the Arab world that have ousted the autocratic leaders of Tunisia and Egypt . 
`` There is no other solution than the military solution , because this dictator 's language is annihilation , and people who speak this language only understand this language , '' spokesman Ahmad Bani told al Jazeera television . 
NATO said it had increased the tempo of its air operations over the weekend , after rebels accused it of responding too slowly to government attacks . 
The insurgents hailed the more muscular approach . 
The NATO strikes outside Ajdabiyah on Sunday helped break the biggest assault by Gaddafi 's forces on the eastern front for at least a week . 
The town is the gateway to the rebel stronghold of Benghazi 150 km -LRB- 90 miles -RRB- north up the Mediterranean coast . 
A Reuters reporter saw six burning hulks surrounded by 15 charred and dismembered bodies in two sites 300 metres -LRB- 1,000 feet -RRB- apart on Ajdabiyah 's western approaches which rebels said were hit by air strikes . 
`` NATO has to do this to help us every single day . 
That is the only way we are going to win this war , '' said 25-year-old rebel Tarek Obeidy , standing over the bodies . 
The government attack , which began on Saturday , included a fierce artillery and rocket bombardment , while some of Gaddafi 's forces , including snipers , penetrated Ajdabiyah . 
Rebels cowered in alleys for several hours under the bombardment . 
The corpses of four rebels were found dumped on a roadside . 
`` Their throats were slit . 
They were all shot a few times in the chest as well . 
I just could not stop crying when I saw them , '' said rebel Muhammad Saad . 
`` This is becoming tougher and tougher . '' 
But by afternoon rebels looked back in control of Ajdabiyah , commanding key intersections , and the artillery and small arms fire had died down . 
Ajdabiyah had been the launch point for insurgents during a week-long fight for the oil port of Brega 70 km -LRB- 45 miles -RRB- further west , and its fall would be a serious loss . 
Gaddafi , making his first appearance in front of the foreign media in weeks , joined the visiting African leaders at his Bab al-Aziziyah compound . 
He then climbed into a sports utility vehicle and was driven about 50 metres -LRB- yards -RRB- where he waved through the sunroof and made the `` V '' for victory sign to a crowd of cheering supporters . 
It was Gaddafi 's second appearance in two days after he received an ecstatic welcome at a Tripoli school on Saturday . 
The appearances , and Gaddafi 's upbeat demeanor , confirmed the impression among analysts that his circle has emerged from a period of paralysis and is hunkering down for a long campaign , another sign that mediation will be difficult . 
Analysts predict a drawn-out , low-level conflict possibly leading to partition between east and west in the sprawling North African Arab state , a major oil and natural gas producer . 
NATO 's commander of Libyan operations said the alliance , which took over air strikes against Gaddafi from three Western powers on March 31 , had destroyed `` a significant percentage '' of Gaddafi 's armor and ammunition stockpiles east of Tripoli . 
Canadian Lieutenant General Charles Bouchard said after Sunday 's air attacks : `` The situation in Ajdabiyah , and Misrata in particular , is desperate for those Libyans who are being brutally shelled by the -LRB- Gaddafi -RRB- regime . '' . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Killing people , whoever they are and for whatever reason , is a crime . 
If a tank or armored vehicle on the road is presumed to be attacking Libyan civilians , it 's absurd the pro-regime ones have to be decimated and pro-rebellion ones stay , contrary to NATO 's pledge of neutrality stance . 
It seems the West is impatient with an impasse that lasts so long and eager to jump in to achieve a mission at the touch of a button , or there will no more cheap oil to finance the economic recovery around the globe . 
Why is the West so desperate for the resources of Libya ? 
Is our economic situation that dire ? 
And yet , our dear leader and the Dems still insist on spending on `` academic fluff '' as usual . 
We need real financial planning for the US and the media , lest they go down with the people , needs to investigate the real economic situation , not the situation provided by the WH and the Fed , who are shaking in their boots hoping for a miracle to change the situation . 
Hope and change ... . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
