Saudi Arabia , UAE , Qatar and Kuwait urge Lebanon exodus The al-Meqdad clan said they had acted to force the release of a man held in Damascus Four Arab states have urged their citizens to leave Lebanon amid signs that the conflict in Syria is spilling over into its western neighbor . 
Saudi Arabia , the United Arab Emirates -LRB- UAE -RRB- , Qatar and Kuwait urged immediate action after a string of kidnappings of Sunni Muslims by a powerful Shia clan . 
They were retaliating for the abduction of a clan member by rebels in Damascus . 
Meanwhile , a summit of Islamic countries meeting in Mecca has suspended Syria 's membership . 
The Organisation of Islamic Co-operation 's secretary-general , Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu , said the body had no room for a regime that kills its own people . 
Correspondents say the move further isolates President Bashar al-Assad after the Arab League suspended Syria last November . 
Lebanese citizens were further caught up in the Syrian crisis on Wednesday when warplanes struck the town of Azaz north of Aleppo , reportedly killing 30 people . 
Among those reported wounded in the attack close to Syria 's border with Turkey were seven Lebanese hostages held by the rebels since May . 
Four more hostages were said to be missing after the building they were in was hit . 
After unconfirmed TV reports that the four had died , rioters were said to have burned tyres on the main road to Beirut airport and an Air France flight switched routes to Jordan `` for security reasons '' . 
The al-Meqdad clan said it had abducted more than 20 people it claimed were connected to Syrian rebels . 
A video broadcast by a pro-Syrian TV channel showed what it said were two of the men , apparently including a Free Syrian Army captain . 
Although most of the men abducted were Syrians , a Turkish businessman and a Saudi national were also reported to be among those seized . 
Syrian rebels say the man they seized in Damascus was fighting for the Syrian government on behalf of Lebanon 's Shia Hezbollah movement . 
A video of Hassan Salim al-Meqdad was released by his captors on Tuesday in which the captive , surrounded by three masked gunmen , says he was one of 1,500 Hezbollah fighters who arrived in Syria in early August . 
The statement was dismissed by his family - the al-Meqdad clan - as a lie . 
The BBC 's Kevin Connolly in Beirut says the clan , who are thought to be heavily involved in smuggling , have been described as a family with a military wing . 
The Lebanese president warned that spreading chaos would not help the hostages Saudi Arabia , Qatar and Turkey are all Sunni Muslim countries that support the Syrian rebels fighting the government of Bashar al-Assad . 
As the al-Meqdads threatened to carry out further abductions , the official Saudi news agency Spa quoted a foreign ministry official as saying Saudi citizens should avoid `` traveling to Lebanon for their own safety '' . 
A UAE foreign ministry official said it issued its alert after the embassy `` received information about UAE nationals being targeted and because of the difficult and sensitive circumstances in Lebanon '' , state news agency Wam reported . 
Lebanon is a popular tourist destination for Saudis and citizens of other Gulf states . 
The abductions were condemned by Lebanese Prime Minister Nagib Mikati and President Michel Suleiman . 
`` Spreading chaos in the country will not bring about the liberation of hostages . 
On the contrary , chaos could cause -LRB- the hostages -RRB- harm and threatens the sovereignty of the state , '' the president said . 
Like Syria 's other neighbors - Turkey , Iraq and Jordan - Lebanon has absorbed thousands of refugees fleeing from the conflict . 
But unlike the other countries , Lebanon risks being plunged into sectarian strife , possibly even a return to civil war , by the strains inflicted on its own delicate internal situation by the Syrian crisis , correspondents say . 
Last week , former information minister Michel Samaha was arrested and accused along with two Syrian military figures of plotting to destabilise Lebanon and incite sectarian fighting . 
Tripoli - Lebanon 's second city - has recently witnessed street gun battles between supporters and opponents of President Assad . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
