Of the 108 people killed on 25 May , 49 were children Syrian troops and militia were behind the Houla massacre of 108 people in May , UN investigators have concluded . 
The massacre was considered one of the worst attacks on civilians since the start of the uprising in March 2011 . 
Meanwhile , at least 30 people were killed when warplanes attacked the town of Azaz near Aleppo , activists say . 
As tensions from the crisis spill over into neighbouring Lebanon , Saudi Arabia has ordered its citizens to leave because of the risk of abduction . 
Residents of Taldou village in the Houla region say that after an anti-government protest on 25 May , the army began an 18-hour bombardment Some accounts say rebel fighters attacked the military position from where shellfire was coming Pro-government shabiha militia then reportedly entered Taldou , killing people in their homes UN observers say at least 108 people died , including 49 children and 34 women . 
No more than 20 appeared to have been killed by shellfire A government investigation blames armed groups seeking to trigger foreign military intervention In Azaz , rescuers tried to pull survivors out of the rubble of collapsed houses and casualties were rushed to a nearby field hospital . 
Many people were wounded and the number of dead was expected to rise . 
Among those killed in the raid on Azaz were four Lebanese Shia Muslims taken hostage by rebel forces in May , according to unconfirmed reports . 
A Lebanese Shia clan said on Wednesday it had kidnapped 20 Syrians in Lebanon in an attempt to secure the release of man kidnapped by rebels in Damascus on Monday . 
The report appointed by the UN Human Rights Council says war crimes have been carried out by both opposition groups and government forces . 
It alleges that systematic violations have been authorised at the highest levels of the Syrian government . 
Murder , torture and sexual violence are given as examples of violations by Syrian forces in the 102-page report , which looks at events between February 2012 and late July . 
The report says ever more brutal tactics have been used . 
`` Active hostilities raged between government forces -LRB- and the shabiha -RRB- and anti-government armed groups , '' it says . 
It finds opposition forces guilty of war crimes but not of the same gravity or on the same frequency or scale as those blamed on government forces . 
UN inquiry chairman Paulo Sergio Pinheiro spoke about the findings In particular , government troops and pro-government shabiha militia are found responsible for the killings at Taldou in the Houla area on 25 May , in which 108 people including 49 children died . 
Although the Damascus government did not allow the team into Syria , the investigators spoke to almost 700 people , including civilians and former soldiers who have fled to neighbouring UN blames Syria for Houla deaths countries . 
The report 's publication came hours after an explosion in central Damascus near a hotel where UN observers have been staying . 
At least three people were hurt when a bomb attached to a diesel tanker blew up , state media reported . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
