Illustrating a news story with photographs can be much more challenging than simply deploying a talented photographer on site . 
Sometimes initially identifying where and how the best pictures will be made is a daunting task , let alone getting a photographer there , especially when the subject is spread over thousands of square miles of sea and ground zero is miles offshore and a mile below the surface . 
No news event in recent memory has been more challenging to cover than the Gulf Coast oil spill due to the nature and dynamics of the story . 
When it was first determined that the BP well was gushing oil , our coverage efforts for the next several months were focused on oil seen on the surface , oil reaching the hundreds of miles of shoreline , impact on local fishermen and residents and wildlife and clean up efforts . 
While several talented Reuters photographers documented these aspects of the story , my co-workers and I on the Washington picture desk , with help from our colleagues in Singapore , went 5,000 feet below the surface to illustrate the actual leak and containment , all from the comfort of our desk chair . 
By capturing still images from live video feeds of the seabed operations provided by BP . 
Pressured by Congress , on May 21 , a month after the Deepwater Horizon oil rig caught on fire ; BP began showing on their website live video feeds of oil gushing from a riser on the seabed floor . 
During the following 4 months while efforts to contain and kill the well were underway , live video feeds could be viewed from up to 16 remotely operated vehicles -LRB- ROVs -RRB- , tethered to and managed by up to 8 surface boats . 
The ROVs carried out all the tasks necessary for containment , giving the viewer of the live feed a front row seat to perhaps one of the largest engineering undertakings ever performed at such depths . 
As the story as a whole involved so many angles , some of the key turning points to illustrate centered on the progress seen only from the video feeds , from the first view of the leak at the source , to the capping of the well and the first time no oil could be seen gushing from the mechanism . 
Covering the Deepwater Horizon oil disaster as a still photographer for Reuters has brought unique challenges . 
Although the volume of oil leaking into the Gulf of Mexico is huge , relatively small patches of oil have landed along coastal Louisiana . 
It 's like a monster who hides most of the time and lashes out quickly , withholding its full strength . 
But it has been important to show that oil is in fact having an ecological impact here , and to find areas with visible proof . 
On Thursday May 20 , I accompanied a Reuters TV crew , correspondent Mathew Bigg and Maura Wood of the National Wildlife Federation on a boat , looking for heavy concentrations of oil in an area at the very southern tip of Louisiana . 
We headed for an area which had just begun being inundated with oil from the Deepwater Horizon leak . 
After hours of searching , a broken propeller , and an unexpected lunch aboard a work barge , we had found the spot . 
As Wood prepared to take a sample of the water to check its toxicity , I suited up in chest waders and slowly got into the murky water , one camera and lens stuffed into my waiters . 
Maneuvering in the soft lagoon floor was tricky ; I sank down as I tried to walk and was concerned I might loose my balance and get myself and camera wet . 
So I held onto the drifting boat long enough to get into position , cautiously letting go so I could have both hands free to shoot . 
Wood leaned over to get samples and I was able to shoot it from from the perspective of the oily water . 
It was shortly after midnight on March 24 , 1989 that the Exxon Valdez hit Bligh Reef in Prince Edward Sound and began leaking millions of gallons of North Slope crude oil . 
I was sound asleep in Toronto , Canada when that happened . 
Reuters was still taking a feed of pictures from UPI -LRB- United Press International -RRB- from the United States . 
But I remember hearing the news that morning and packing my gear -LRB- which at that time was film , powder chemicals , portable darkroom , 16S color transmitter and of course . . 
some cold weather clothing -RRB- . 
I sat in Toronto as the politics of the news business played out in Washington between Reuters and UPI . 
Finally , it was decided that we would both cover the story . 
So , David Ake , a UPI staffer from Denver , and I made our way there . 
I remember landing in Anchorage , Alaska , and hauling my gear into a rental car at midnight , then driving six hours to Valdez in the dead of night . 
About 4 hours into the drive I was held up by a few hundred caribou , who decided to cross the two lane highway , they were just mingling so I still have vivid memories of being in the middle of nowhere honking my horn to help speed up the process . 
I rolled into Valdez at first light and it didn t take long to realize that most of the town s people did not want the media there . 
The few media that had found rooms at the only hotel in town were all having to checkout as rumor had it that Exxon had bought the hotel . 
With help from our desk in Washington and the chamber of commerce in Valdez I found a place to stay at the home of the local taxidermist . 
Since joining Reuters in Singapore in 2001 , Corinne has worked as a picture editor on the Asia desk and as an Editor-in-Charge on the global desk . 
In her current role , Corinne is a member of the online desk in Toronto and is responsible for maintaining the visual elements of www.reuters.com . 
You can follow Reuters tweets on @reuterspictures 
