Pictures from a mile deep : Ground Zero of the BP oil leak Illustrating a news story with photographs can be much more challenging than simply deploying a talented photographer on site . 
Sometimes initially identifying where and how the best pictures will be made is a daunting task , let alone getting a photographer there , especially when the subject is spread over thousands of square miles of sea and ground zero is miles offshore and a mile below the surface . 
No news event in recent memory has been more challenging to cover than the Gulf Coast oil spill due to the nature and dynamics of the story . 
When it was first determined that the BP well was gushing oil , our coverage efforts for the next several months were focused on oil seen on the surface , oil reaching the hundreds of miles of shoreline , impact on local fishermen and residents and wildlife and clean up efforts . 
While several talented Reuters photographers documented these aspects of the story , my co-workers and I on the Washington picture desk , with help from our colleagues in Singapore , went 5,000 feet below the surface to illustrate the actual leak and containment , all from the comfort of our desk chair . 
By capturing still images from live video feeds of the seabed operations provided by BP . 
Pressured by Congress , on May 21 , a month after the Deepwater Horizon oil rig caught on fire ; BP began showing on their website live video feeds of oil gushing from a riser on the seabed floor . 
During the following 4 months while efforts to contain and kill the well were underway , live video feeds could be viewed from up to 16 remotely operated vehicles -LRB- ROVs -RRB- , tethered to and managed by up to 8 surface boats . 
The ROVs carried out all the tasks necessary for containment , giving the viewer of the live feed a front row seat to perhaps one of the largest engineering undertakings ever performed at such depths . 
As the story as a whole involved so many angles , some of the key turning points to illustrate centered on the progress seen only from the video feeds , from the first view of the leak at the source , to the capping of the well and the first time no oil could be seen gushing from the mechanism . 
The biggest hurdle faced in capturing images from the multiple video feeds was the ability of the computer used for the task . 
When opening the BP live video site all of the feeds automatically opened at once , causing some computers to crash . 
Our iMac was able to handle the multiple video feeds with a few minor hiccups . 
The video feeds opened in individual QuickTime windows , which recorded the feed over several hours and enabled us to review each video for key images without having to constantly monitor the live feeds . 
Once a key image was identified , it was captured , converted to jpeg and distributed to our clients worldwide . 
While reviewing several hours of video from the ROVs in just a few minutes on a daily basis , I became intrigued with the tasks performed by the ROVs and their operators : from sawing off the broken pipe in the first days to installing the capping stack on top of the broken BOP , performing the top kill and the eventually successful static kill , monitoring pressure gauges during certain operations , seeing oil leak , seeing no oil leak , maneuvering of multiple tools and components , all while under extreme pressures and darkness of the formidable depths . 
The video feeds displayed the exact depth in feet among other things , which changed respectively as the ROV moved about or surfaced for maintenance . 
Other ROVs could be viewed from the eyes of one as they worked and preformed intricate tasks . 
The precision with which the submersible robots worked on such a grand scale endeavor was both impressive and exciting to watch . 
The innovations undertaken in the operations of the ROVs by the containment team resulted in advanced capabilities for ROVs for spill containment , but unfortunately not without a huge cost in lives , livelihoods and to businesses . 
Illustrating the story from video a mile deep as it unfolded and eventually came to an end gave us another angle to fully document the story , and has advanced our ability to seek new and innovative ways to provide news pictures to the world . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
