Fire boat response crews battle the blazing remnants of the off shore oil rig Deepwater Horizon , off Louisiana , in this April 21 , 2010 , handout file photo . 
With a final shot of cement , BP Plc permanently '' killed '' the runaway Macondo well in the Gulf of Mexico that had unleashed the worst oil spill in U.S. history , the top U.S. spill official said on September 19 , 2010 . 
The well flowed unchecked for 87 days after an April 20 explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon rig killed 11 workers and unleashed a torrent of oil that marred the coasts of four Gulf Coast states and spurred a moratorium on all new U.S. offshore drilling . 
LONDON | Mon Sep 20 , 2010 4:16 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP said payouts to people affected by its Gulf of Mexico oil spill had dramatically increased since it surrendered authority for dispensing funds to an independent administrator . 
BP said the Gulf Coast Claims Facility -LRB- GCCF -RRB- , the $ 20 billion fund it set up to compensate fishermen , hoteliers and retailers whose business was hit by the spill , had paid out 19,000 claims totaling over $ 240 million . 
The total cost of the spill response has hit $ 9.5 billion , Europe 's second-largest oil company by market value said in a statement late on Sunday . 
The GCCF is run by lawyer Kenneth Feinberg , formerly the Obama Administration 's executive pay Czar . 
BP said on September 3 that the fund had paid out $ 38.5 million since it began operating on August 23 . 
This represented a rate of around $ 3.5 million per day , broadly in line with the rate at which BP had previously been disbursing funds . 
Since September 3 , the amount of money being paid out has risen to an average of over $ 12.5 million . 
Just over a week ago , Bob Dudley , who will take over as BP 's Chief Executive on October 1 , told analysts that he expected the $ 20 billion fund to more than cover the total valid claims for compensation . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Bergin ; Editing by Will Waterman -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Since you have n't been pinching and gypping everyone , the costs have gone up ? 
240 mil , thats like 1 % of the 20 bil , talk about chincy . 
No wonder this accident happened . 
Skimp on safety and look what you get . 
Maybe you guys should learn the other side of the coin . 
that 's a fact . 
!!! B.P. has not paid out barely 1 % of claims and they are complaining all ready . 
Did B.P. think for 1 second that any of that $ 20 billion was not going to be claimed . 
There are people out there that have had there lives ruined for years . 
You will be paying out for years to `` make people whole '' as B.P. said . 
Just forget about any of that $ 20 billion and move on . 
You executives might sleep better or not have to spend so much on P.S.T.D. therapy over the trauma of actually having to pay for 1 of your own catastrophies . 
The U.S.A. ai n't some 3rd world nation you can toss some pennies at and slip away in the dark . 
You gotta pay to play here . 
The question is this about the rate of payout , or compensation to people and businesses who have been damaged by BP ? 
If it 's the latter , then it is simple restitution for people harmed by BP 's actions . 
And that should n't be impacted by rate of payout , or total funding . 
That 's both fair , and it 's the law . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
