The Baba Amr district has borne the brunt of the government 's crackdown on opposition in Homs The restive western Syrian city of Homs has been one of the areas hardest hit by the state 's bloody crackdown on protests against President Bashar al-Assad . 
Homs - for many the capital of the Syrian Revolution - was one of the first cities to join the uprisings against the government , and in April 2011 saw its brutality first-hand when crowds protesting in its Clock Tower Square were fired on , reportedly leaving at least 50 dead and others wounded . 
Protests against the government have continued there , despite equally unrelenting attacks by security forces . 
Witnesses quoted by the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said hundreds of armored vehicles arrived in the city in early December . 
Reports in the Saudi-funded newspaper Al-Sharq al-Awsat said at the time the Assad government threatened to storm the city if army defectors were not handed over . '' 
-LRB- Homs -RRB- is one place where the people just do n't give up , it has become so symbolic , '' says Rime Allaf , a Syria expert and associate fellow at the think tank Chatham House . 
`` That night back in April was a turning point in the Homs saga . 
People came with tents and sandwiches , prepared to face tear gas , and they were cut down with bullets . '' 
The incident in Clock Tower Square may have provided a rallying point for those in Homs protesting for democracy in Syria , but a number of other factors sustained the protests throughout the summer and autumn . 
Firstly , significant numbers of soldiers defecting from the Syrian army made Homs a base . 
Defectors , drawn to what was then effectively a liberated city , enabled protests to take place . 
Armed and able to shoot back , they provided security and a perimeter for demonstrations . 
Protesters in Homs have been successful at displaying a sense of civilisation which belies the regime 's narrative of a thuggish underclass '' End Quote Peter Harling International Crisis Group The geography of Syria 's third-largest city , a sprawling center of agriculture and industry that is home to about 1.5 million people , is also said to have been problematic for the Syrian security forces . 
`` It is such an extended city , with extensive suburbs , villages and surrounding areas taking part -LRB- in protests -RRB- that it has been hard for the Syrian army to subdue all of that territory , as well as everywhere else , '' says Rime Allaf . 
The character of the city 's inhabitants and the area 's strong local identity has also been cited as a explanation for Homs 's resilience . 
Peter Harling , the Iraq , Syria and Lebanon Project Director at International Crisis Group , says : `` People from Homs are renowned for their sense of humor and this has come out so strongly in the crisis - even in the teeth of this massive onslaught by the regime . 
`` Many Syrians have been shocked by what they describe as the savagery of the regime and protesters in Homs have been successful at displaying a sense of civilisation which belies the regime 's narrative of a thuggish underclass . 
`` Unlike its surrounding countryside , Homs has by and large resisted sectarian dynamics , maintained a measure of social cohesion , challenged the regime through its strong local identity and provided a source of inspiration to many regime critics . 
Funerals of those killed in opposition protests have often turned into demonstrations themselves `` That is why Homs has been the capital that Damascus has not . '' 
The protests in Syria first centred on southern Deraa , an agricultural hub once considered a government stronghold . 
They later spread to Latakia in the north , birthplace of former President Hafez al-Assad , and the Mediterranean coastal town of Baniyas , which has a strong conservative Sunni Muslim constituency . 
It was then that the protests moved west to Homs , and to west-central Hama , the site of a brutally suppressed uprising by the Muslim Brotherhood in 1982 . 
But it is the bombardment by the Syrian government on rebel parts of Homs that has captured the headlines in recent months . 
While the international community wrangled over how to deal with the situation in Syria in early February , reports from inside the city described days of relentless shelling of rockets and mortars . 
The BBC 's Paul Wood , undercover in the city at the time , described how civilians were having to bury their dead during the night because it was too dangerous during the day . 
Syrian state television denied any bombardment , saying residents were setting fire to piles of rubbish on the roofs of their homes to trick the world into thinking that there was an attack . 
The government said its troops were fighting `` armed terrorist '' gangs who were killing civilians in Homs . 
The rebel Free Syrian Army have found themselves outgunned by government forces But correspondents in the city said the rebel soldiers of the Free Syria Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- were armed only with guns , no match for the artillery they faced . 
Snipers and tanks were reported on the streets as the bombardment centred on the district of Baba Amr . 
On 21 February , Sunday Times journalist Marie Colvin spoke to the BBC of `` shelling with impunity , with merciless disregard for civilians '' . 
A day later , she and French photographer Remi Ochlik were killed in an attack on their makeshift media center . 
The Syrian government launched its ground offensive into the district at the end of February , and on 1 March the FSA announced a `` tactical withdrawal '' from Baba Amr , saying they did not have enough weapons to defend the civilians . 
The Red Cross was allowed into Homs to deliver humanitarian aid and help the wounded , but was refused entry into Baba Amr . 
The UN 's humanitarian chief Valerie Amos was allowed to visit Homs on 7 March and spent an hour in Baba Amr . 
She said the city had been `` completely devastated '' . 
Reports of mass shootings , mainly of members of the same family , continue . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
