Syria crisis : US and UN urge Security Council unity Hillary Clinton said no country should hesitate to condemn the violence in Syria Hillary Clinton said that Syria 's `` horrific campaign of violence '' had `` shocked the conscience of the world '' . 
Russia and China have blocked resolutions condemning Syrian President Bashar al-Assad . 
In Syria , activists report that at least 47 people were killed in an attack by government militia in Homs . 
Women and children are among those reported to have been tortured and killed on Sunday night in the neighborhood of Karm el-Zeytoun . 
The Syrian government acknowledged the deaths , but blamed `` armed terrorists '' . 
Ms Clinton told the UN Security Council meeting in New York : `` We believe that now is the time for all nations - even those who have previously blocked our efforts - to stand behind the humanitarian and political approach spelled out by the Arab League . '' 
In a clear reference to China and Russia , she appealed to the international community to `` say with one voice - without hesitation or caveat - that the killing of innocent Syrians must stop and a political transition must begin '' . 
Her words echoed those of British Foreign Secretary William Hague , and of Mr Ban who said the Syrian government had `` failed to fulfil its responsibility to protect its own people and instead has subjected its citizens in several cities to military assault and disproportionate use of force '' . 
He said the Council must `` unite strongly '' behind UN and Arab League peace envoy Kofi Annan 's efforts `` to help Syria pull back from the brink of a deeper catastrophe '' . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague : ` The UN has failed on Syria ' Russia 's Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said the situation in Syria remained a `` grave concern '' but warned that change in the Arab world `` must not be achieved by misleading the international community or manipulating the Security Council '' . 
After the meeting , he said the Russian government was in regular contact with Syrian authorities and dismissed suggestions that Russia 's opposition to any resolution was single-handedly preventing a solution to the crisis . 
`` The founding fathers of the UN decided that unless the permanent members agreed on something , decisions could not be sustainable . 
Let 's try to be respectful of each other and each other 's positions , '' he said . 
But UK Foreign Minister William Hague struck a more positive note . 
`` I think it is encouraging that the foreign minister of Russia and the Arab League had a discussion and the need for a political process has been recognized by Foreign Minister Lavrov , something we and many Arab ministers have called for all along , '' he said . 
The attack in the embattled city of Homs happened hours after Mr Annan ended his two-day mission to Damascus . 
Homs has been under assault for weeks as government forces have tried to root out rebel fighters . 
Parts of the city are devastated . 
Hundreds of families fled the Karm el-Zeytoun area of Homs on Monday after reports of the attack in their neighborhood overnight , the British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said . 
One activist in Homs , Hadi Abdallah , told AFP the bodies of 26 children and 21 women were found , some with their throats slit and others bearing stab wounds . 
Both the opposition Syrian Revolution General Commission -LRB- SRGC -RRB- and the Local Co-ordination Committees -LRB- LCC -RRB- , an activist network in Syria , put the toll at 45 . 
The SRGC said that some of the victims had been burned alive with heating fuel poured over them and others had their necks and limbs broken . 
Mulham al-Jundi , an opposition activist and member of the SNC , said Karm el-Zeytoun was experiencing a military bombardment similar to the one seen in Baba Amr district in recent weeks . 
The BBC 's Jon Donnison : ` The Syrian government has acknowledged these deaths ' Reports are difficult to verify because of tight restrictions on independent media operating in Syria . 
Footage posted on YouTube , said to show the bodies of men , women and children killed in the attack , made for grim viewing , said the BBC 's Jon Donnison in neighbouring Lebanon . 
In one video , at least 11 bodies can be seen , including at least four young children covered in blood , he adds . 
Syrian state television accused `` armed terrorist gangs '' of carrying out the killings , saying the bodies had been filmed in an effort to discredit the government . 
Both the LCC and the Observatory blame the pro-government Shabiha militia for the attack . 
The group has been blamed for many of the atrocities carried out since the uprising began nearly a year ago . 
Kofi Annan left Syria on Sunday after two days of talks with President Assad , saying he was `` optimistic '' about the possibility of a ceasefire , humanitarian access to affected areas and future political dialogue . 
He said he had presented Mr Assad with `` concrete proposals '' to bring an end to the bloodshed , but gave no hint that a deal was imminent . 
Reports say Mr Annan is due to meet representatives of the opposition Syrian National Council in the Turkish city of Istanbul on Tuesday . 
Are you in Syria ? 
Do you have friends or family in the region ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
