The Ukrainian president , Viktor Yushchenko , speaks at today 's Nato summit in Brussels . 
Photograph : Getty Images The Ukrainian president , Viktor Yushchenko , confirmed today at a Nato summit attended by George Bush that the former Soviet country wants to become a member of the transatlantic organization . 
The announcement is likely to heighten Moscow 's concern that Ukraine 's new western-leaning president will try to take the country out of Russia 's sphere of influence . 
Mr Yushchenko confirmed his intention at a news conference following a Nato summit at the organizations headquarters in Brussels to which Ukraine was invited . 
During the meeting he had appealed to alliance leaders to back his moves for deeper relations between Nato and his country . 
`` The changes in Ukraine open the way to elevate relations with the alliance , '' he said . 
Before the summit , Mr Yushchenko met the US president , who is on the second day of a three-nation visit to Europe which has been interpreted as an attempt to mend fences following the rift caused by the US-led invasion of Iraq . 
`` Ukraine should be welcomed by the Europe Atlantic family , '' Mr Bush said yesterday . 
But Mr Yuschenko also sought to reassure Russia about his Nato ambitions . 
Ukraine was bitterly divided by last year 's presidential election crisis involving Mr Yushchenko and the pro-Kremlin candidate and then prime minister Viktor Yanukovich . 
`` Russia is our strategic partner , '' he said today . 
`` Ukrainian policy toward Nato will not , by any means , be directed against Russia or any other country . '' 
The alliance members also discussed the broader future of Nato following reports that the French president , Jacques Chirac , had backed a controversial recent call by the German chancellor , Gerhard Schrder , to question whether Nato was still the ideal primary forum for transatlantic dialogue . 
Mr Bush has rebuffed the idea of revamping Nato and said earlier today that the organization was `` a vital relationship to the United States and Europe '' . 
However , according to notes released by Mr Chirac 's aides , the French president told the summit : `` We must also , as the German chancellor has underlined , continue to take account of the changes that have occurred on the European continent ... Europe and the United States are real partners . 
So we need to dialogue and listen to each other more . '' 
During the summit , Mr Bush won a long-sought Nato commitment for more training aid to build up Iraqi security . 
Analysts said the contribution was modest but Mr Bush said `` every contribution helps '' . 
The US military has estimated that 136,000 Iraqi military , police and national guardsmen have been trained and equipped , which is fewer than half the ultimate goal of a force of about 270,000 , a goal seen as pivotal in freeing up coalition forces to leave . 
Day two of Bush 's visit to Europe Earlier Mr Bush had breakfast with the prime minister , Tony Blair , who paid tribute to Mr Bush 's leadership in the Middle East , saying there was a real prospect of peace in the region . 
Both leaders emphasised the importance of transatlantic ties . 
Mr Blair said there was a chance for a stable , prosperous and democratic Iraq and a `` real solid basis now for going forward in a unified way '' . 
At the beginning of his trip yesterday , Mr Bush made a speech in Brussels in which he appealed to Europe over the Middle East , climate change and the common values of the two continents . 
He declared that the US stood `` proudly '' in the tradition of the Magna Carta and the Declaration of the Rights of Man . 
Today , Mr Blair praised the president 's speech , describing it as setting out a `` very clear way forward for us now , whatever the differences in the international community there have been over the last couple of years '' . 
Last night , Mr Bush dined with Mr Chirac , who opposed the war in Iraq . 
Mr Chirac said US-French relations had been excellent for 200 years and the Iraq war had not changed that After traveling to Germany tomorrow , Mr Bush will visit Slovakia to meet the Russian president , Vladimir Putin , on Thursday . 
Mr Bush had some critical words for the Russian leader yesterday , suggesting that he was backsliding on democracy . 
`` I 've got a good relationship with Vladimir . 
I intend to keep it that way , '' Mr Bush said . 
`` But , as well , I intend to remind him that if his interests lie west , that -LRB- the United States and its allies -RRB- share values , and those values are important . '' 
Russia 's foreign minister , Sergei Lavrov , who is currently in Brussels , ignored Mr Bush 's criticisms . 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
