The financial crisis has gone global . 
Stock indexes have fallen and credit markets are seizing up around the world . 
In recent days , as most Americans focused on the political drama of the rescue package , a number of European banks have failed or been taken over . 
Several in Russia and Eastern Europe are teetering on the verge of insolvency . 
Many Latin American countries are newly vulnerable because foreign banks are big players there . 
Few nations can escape the financial contagion . 
Globalization of the crisis requires a globalized response . 
While the consequences of financial crises are clearly international , the regulation of finance remains almost wholly national . 
And national efforts , including the U.S. rescue plan and European governments ' remedies for their nations ' bank problems , will continue to be the first responses . 
Yet an internationally coordinated strategy , ranging far beyond the heroic efforts of the world 's leading central banks , is essential now that the U.S. rescue plan is in place . 
When finance ministers convene in Washington this week for the annual International Monetary Fund meeting , they should adopt several initial components of such a strategy . 
Not doing so would be almost as serious as if Congress had adjourned without passing the rescue legislation . 
First , heading off a precipitous decline in world economic activity requires a global stimulus program . 
Different governments can use different policy tools . 
China has room for fiscal expansion , while Europe could ease monetary policy . 
The United States can combine the two . 
A coordinated effort should boost confidence and would deter individual countries from attempting to escape the downturn via trade controls and other beggar-thy-neighbor policies . 
Second , coordination of the parallel national efforts to recapitalize tottering banking systems would pack a powerful psychological punch . 
The United States , European Union and some others are moving rapidly to shore up their financial institutions . 
But countries need both to do more and to avoid gaps in their rescue programs by agreeing on how to handle cross-border loans and financial institutions that operate across jurisdictions . 
Widespread international participation in the recapitalization effort , including by the highly liquid sovereign wealth funds , could be of substantial help . 
Third , as the United States and some Europeans are already doing , many countries will need to expand coverage of their deposit insurance programs to discourage bank runs . 
Parallel or uniform policy steps through which unlimited insurance is provided for at least a temporary period , as Germany and Ireland have done for their banks and the Treasury has for U.S. money market funds , will be mutually reinforcing and help prevent panic . 
Beyond the short term , countries will need to develop a cooperative framework to prevent and resolve such crises , most urgently within Europe . 
There is inherent tension as finance becomes global but its regulation remains national . 
The current crisis originated in the United States but was importantly affected by massive savings surpluses in some countries and the resulting surfeit of liquidity , which drove down interest rates and encouraged irresponsible lending here . 
Those international imbalances were in turn partly caused by misaligned exchange rates . 
Global oversight of both financial regulation and currencies can no longer be neglected . 
Our policy responses must reflect the interdependent vulnerability of the world economy . 
Although the Europeans rebuffed a recent U.S. initiative for a cooperative strategy and are having trouble getting their region-wide act together , it is too late to assign blame over responsibility for the crisis , within or among countries . 
The traditional Group of Seven industrial countries have mounted coordinated economic programs of this type in the past , with considerable success ; now they must be joined by the chief emerging markets , particularly China . 
The G-7 finance ministers should fully include the five or six main emerging markets in their upcoming meeting and seek to forge a global strategy . 
This week 's IMF conclave offers a unique opportunity to add a critical international dimension to the crisis response . 
C. Fred Bergsten , director of the Peterson Institute for International Economics , was assistant Treasury secretary for international affairs from 1977 to 1981 . 
Arvind Subramanian is a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute . 
