The stock market 's prolonged tumble has wiped out about $ 2 trillion in Americans ' retirement savings in the past 15 months , a blow that could force workers to stay on the job longer than planned , rein in spending and possibly further stall an economy reliant on consumer dollars , Congress 's top budget analyst said yesterday . 
For many Americans , pensions and 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans are their only form of savings . 
The dwindling of these assets -- about a 20 percent decline overall -- is another setback just as many people are grappling with higher gas and food prices , more credit card debt , declining home values and less access to loans . 
`` Unlike Wall Street executives , American families do n't have a golden parachute to fall back on , '' said Rep. George Miller -LRB- D-Calif . -RRB- 
, chairman of the House Committee on Education and Labor . 
`` It 's clear that Americans ' retirement security may be one of the greatest casualties of this financial crisis . '' 
Even traditional pension plans , which are formally known as defined-benefit plans and are widely considered more stable , have been hit hard by the stock market 's volatility , losing 15 percent of their assets over the past year , Peter R. Orszag , director of the Congressional Budget Office , told the House panel . 
Despite the losses , companies will still be obligated to pay out the same pensions promised to employees but will have to recoup the extra costs in other ways , Orszag said . 
`` When pension assets decline in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans , the burden is on the workers , '' he said . 
`` When pension plan assets decline in defined-benefit plans , the burden is on the firm to make up the difference . 
The firm will have to pass those costs on to their workers , to their shareholders or to consumers . '' 
Defined-benefit plans are company-sponsored programs that provide retirement payouts based on an employee 's salary and tenure . 
The company shoulders the bulk of the investment decisions and risk . 
Defined-contribution plans , such as 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , turn those tasks over to the worker and are subject to the whims of the stock market . 
Increasingly , employers have switched workers into defined-contribution plans . 
The federal government has also pushed 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans heavily , approving a law late last year that makes it easier for employers to automatically enroll their employees in them and other similar retirement plans . 
Defined-contribution plans tend to be more heavily weighted in stocks , either through individual holdings or mutual funds . 
As a result , said Orszag , `` the value of assets in defined-contribution plans may have declined by slightly more than that of assets in defined-benefit plans . '' 
Through September , the percentage loss for the year in average account balances among 401 -LRB- k -RRB- participants was between 7.2 and 11.2 percent , according to the Employee Benefit Research Institute 's analysis of more than 2 million plans . 
Employees between the ages of 56 and 65 who had the fewest years on the job were the least affected , while those 36 to 45 years old with the longest tenures suffered the steepest declines , said Jack L. VanDerhei , research director for the D.C.-based institute . 
Younger workers tend to have more stocks in their portfolios while older employees move toward safer investments such as bonds , VanDerhei said . 
The findings exacerbate a complaint among many workers and academics about 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and similar plans that are heavily tied to the stock market . 
Are they really the best retirement vehicles for workers ? 
`` The loss of retirement security is a reversal of fortune and the result of very specific flawed governmental policies that have been biased toward 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans , rather than the result of technological change or the logical consequences of global economic trends , '' Teresa Ghilarducci , a professor of Economic Policy Analysis at the New School for Social Research , testified before the committee . 
