Libyans from many countries have returned to fight with rebel forces Bashir , a software developer in Canada , was motivated by news reports to return Fittest are trained to be special forces , other are trained in urban warfare Benghazi , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Twenty-eight-year-old Bashir says he used to have an idyllic life : A well-paid job as a software developer , good friends and comfortable surroundings in Canada . 
`` I 'm a guy who smokes , listens to rock and roll , and enjoys my life , '' he says . 
Now he 's sleeping in a tent , eating rationed food and learning to shoot a rocket-propelled grenade -LRB- RPG -RRB- , among other weapons , in the rebel stronghold of Benghazi in Libya . 
Bashir is originally from the capitol Tripoli . 
His family members still live there . 
He is one of several men in a newly formed fighting unit made up of others who decided to return to their homeland to fight against Moammar Gadhafi 's regime . 
Gadhafi makes first appearance in weeks The drastic decision to leave his comfortable life in Canada was prompted by the bloody images he was seeing on the news every night . 
`` I tried to stay there and live with it , just to send money or collect donations and go and protest and stuff . 
But I realized that that 's not enough . 
And I could not sleep ; I could not work . '' 
Bashir has no trouble working now and he says he has a lot to learn . 
For one thing he 's never held a gun before . 
He is one of more than 85 men , many from abroad , who now live together , train together and pray together on a walled piece of property loaned to them by a rebel supporter . 
The man they agreed to make Commander , Mahedi , has come in from Ireland . 
Some of the others say they arrived from France , Greece , Poland , Italy , and Spain . 
None have previous military experience so they are being trained by older men in Benghazi who do . 
Mahedi says his fighters are broken up into groups : The fittest are training to be special forces , the others are learning urban warfare . 
In the compound the men are tested on things such as taking a Kalashnikov apart and putting it back together . 
They head out to the beaches of Benghazi for mortar target practice . 
The mortar rounds reach long distances so they shoot them out to sea trying to get a hold on how to hit a far off target . 
Every now and then they have to stop as a small fishing boat slowly cuts through the green-blue water . 
Then they pick up their Belgium FN rifles and begin target practice on the canisters that used to hold the mortar rounds . 
They are propped up on the sand facing the water . 
Only one of them manages to hit his target . 
It turns out it is easy to pick up a gun , but not so easy to hit your mark . 
Most of the men wear masks giving them a menacing appearance , especially as they tote their guns across the backs and chests . 
The men say they wear masks because they do not want to be identified for fear they will be recognized , making their families a target . 
They want to make clear they have no political or religious agenda beyond their mission to defend their families and further the revolution by helping to oust Gadhafi . 
`` We are just civilians . 
And we are just here to get them out and that 's it . 
I am going to throw my guns -LRB- away afterward -RRB- , '' Bashir said . 
Bashir 's family does n't even know what he is up to . 
They know he is in Libya but they do n't know why . 
He 's afraid to tell them because he suspects their phones may be bugged . 
So he trains in secret with the others , waiting for the chance to complete his mission . 
