A new wave of political bloggers is challenging Britain 's old media pundits . 
But who are they , and which ones matter ? 
Oliver Burkeman reports Political bloggers -LRB- back row , from left -RRB- Perry de Havilland , Adriana Cronin , Oliver Kamm , Mick Fealty and Norman Geras , and -LRB- front row -RRB- Justin McKeating and Tim Ireland . 
Photograph : Graeme Robertson . 
In the days after September 11 2001 , a Londoner in his 30s who prefers to be known only as David T made two grim discoveries . 
The first , and most upsetting , was that a close friend from school had died in the collapse of the World Trade Centre towers . 
The second discovery - in a way the more disorienting of the two - was what had happened to another former friend . 
In the years since the two had known each other well , he had become a spokesman for a prominent Islamic fundamentalist organization , and now , in statements to the media , he was openly applauding the attacks . 
David T 's experience was hardly typical , of course . 
`` It was the kind of moment where you think : OK , hang on - how do I even begin to make sense of that ? '' 
David says today , over bottles of beer in a north London bar . 
`` And that 's what I 've been doing for the last three years , really . '' 
Harry 's Place , the `` blog '' to which he is now a prolific contributor , has become one focus of Britain 's culture of political blogging - regularly updated online journals of opinion and debate - which has burgeoned in the years since 9\/11 . 
Samizdata , by some measures the nation 's most successful independent blog , claims around 15,000 different visitors a day ; Harry 's Place gets perhaps 9,000 . 
The phenomenon may not yet have reached the wild heights of the US , where bloggers have claimed credit for several real-world political upsets , including the resignations of the news anchor Dan Rather and the Senate Republican leader Trent Lott . 
But what has emerged here is a fully fledged alternative wing of the opinion industry , challenging the primacy of newspaper commentators . 
All political viewpoints thrive within it , but one has become notably prevalent : the stance generally identified as `` pro-war left '' , of which Harry 's Place is an example . 
It is a line of argument that seems not to have diminished , in stridency or popularity , as the Iraq debacle has worsened . 
Exerting influence as a member of this new commentariat is not just a matter of how many readers one attracts ; it 's a question of which ones . 
`` The freakiest thing is when you hear -LRB- a prominent commentator or politician -RRB- quote back a line or a phrase that you 've written , or something from a text you 've brought to light , '' notes Mick Fealty , who runs the non-partisan blog Slugger O'Toole , covering Northern Irish politics . 
`` Just last weekend , I read a whole sentence , in an editorial in one of the Irish Sundays , that I 'd used the Friday before . '' 
Samizdata , arguably the grandfather of British political blogs , is operated from a large and dimly lit flat in a pristine mansion block in south-west London . 
There are a few computers at the back of the main room , but the dominant feature is a leather-lined drinks bar - installed , according to Samizdata 's founder , Perry de Havilland , by a double agent , who knew the flat 's former owner and who paid for it with money from both MI5 and the KGB . 
-LRB- The flat is also now the headquarters of the Big Blog Company , a consultancy run by some of the Samizdata bloggers , which advises businesses on how to exploit the phenomenon . -RRB- 
A vintage pistol lying on a side-table gives a hint of the Samizdata attitude ; a more modern gun appears in a photograph on the blog 's front page , on top of a copy of The Open Society and Its Enemies , Karl Popper 's anti-totalitarian polemic . 
`` The Samizdata people are a bunch of sinister and heavily armed globalist Illuminati , who seek to infect the entire world with the values of personal liberty and -LRB- private -RRB- property , '' the site says . 
It was originally named Libertarian Samizdata , but too many of those involved became unhappy with the label : characteristically for libertarians , it seems , they were uncomfortable subscribing to a group ideology . 
`` We are ... a varied group made up of social individualists , libertarians , extropians , futurists , ` Porcupines ' , Karl Popper fetishists , recovering neo-conservatives , crazed Ayn Rand worshippers ... cypherpunks , minarchists , kritarchists and wild-eyed anarcho-capitalists from Britain , North America , Australia and Europe , '' the site now explains , unhelpfully . 
As I arrive , De Havilland is laughing , nearly hysterically , at a blog by Oliver Kamm , a London hedge-fund manager and member of the `` pro-war left '' who now also writes a column for the Times . 
`` Just marvellous , '' says De Havilland . 
`` I was thinking of making it Samizdata quote of the day . 
It 's something to the effect that , well , there 's no point in denying that our involvement in Iraq has inflamed -LRB- Islamist totalitarian -RRB- opinion . 
Why should we deny it ? 
It 's something we should be proud of ! '' 
September 11 caused many ideological fissures , of course . 
But it 's a fair bet that the split in British libertarianism - hardly a prominent movement in the first place - is probably one of the least well known . 
Some libertarians opposed any military response to the attacks , on the grounds that armies are tools of governments , and government is largely a bad thing . 
Others supported the war in Afghanistan , and later the war in Iraq , as attempts to spread or safeguard liberty . 
`` It was between those who said it was just another big-government thing , '' says De Havilland , `` and those who said , ` Excuse me , guys , but these nutjobs are trying to fucking kill us ! ' '' 
Samizdata published its first entry on November 2 2001 . 
`` I look forward to hearing from all those out there in ` establishment punditland ' who sneered at the effect of the US bombing , '' De Havilland wrote in an early posting as he watched the Taliban fall . 
`` Establishment punditland '' was Samizdata 's target from the start . 
In the US , the birthplace of blog culture , it was easy to see how almost any viewpoints expressed online were going to count as a breath of fresh air . 
All they needed to do to distinguish themselves was to diverge from the New York Times 's establishment liberalism and from the ranting of rightwing talk radio . 
Britain 's press , by contrast , has long been more politically diverse and unashamedly partisan , which may explain the blogs ' lesser impact here . 
De Havilland 's collaborator Adriana Cronin , who developed her vociferous views as a reaction to growing up in communist Czechoslovakia , laughs off suggestions that blogs might literally replace the mainstream media , but there is no disguising her passion . 
`` If we had a slogan , it would be , ` We ca n't change the way news is written , but we can change the way people read the news . ' 
So what we 're saying is - '' `` We 're not competing with newspapers , '' De Havilland interrupts . 
-LRB- This is a habit of his , though it may also be a beneficial quality in a blogger : he is n't willing to wait before sounding off . -RRB- 
`` But I tell you who we are in competition with , 100 % direct competition , and that 's your op-ed writers . 
We do n't have a reporter in Kandahar , and you might , it 's true - although in time we might have a blogger in Kandahar . 
But for the moment , sure : if your guy in Kandahar says X blew up Y , then X blew up Y. But when your editorial guy says , ` This is what it means , ' that 's when we say , ` Excuse me ! 
You 're completely wrong ! ' '' 
According to Wikipedia , the communally edited online encyclopedia , the term `` weblog '' was probably coined by the pioneering computer programmer John Barger . 
As early as December 1997 , Barger began posting brief daily updates to his website , Robot Wisdom , with particular reference to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict - thereby initiating one particular argument that still dominates weblogs today . 
It was these brief , frequent , personal and opinionated updates that came to define the form . 
`` Blog '' , the shortened version of the word - which also serves as a verb , meaning `` to run a blog '' or `` to add news postings to your blog '' - probably came from one early practitioner , Peter Merholz , who meant it as a joke . 
`` For what it 's worth , I 've decided to pronounce the word ` weblog ' as ` wee-blog ' . 
Or ` blog ' for short , '' he wrote on his site in 1999 . 
`` I did n't think much of it , '' he explained later . 
`` I was just being silly , shifting the syllabic break one letter to the left . 
I started using the word in my posts , and some folks , when emailing me , would use it too . 
I enjoyed its crudeness , its dissonance . '' 
There was something about the concept that lent itself to strident opinions on current affairs , and quickly , a few figures - the gay conservative British expatriate Andrew Sullivan , for example , and Josh Marshall , of the liberal Talking Points Memo - rose to prominence . 
Broadcasting your opinions is not the only way to blog about politics ; several major UK sites , such as Guido Fawkes and PoliticalBetting , focus either on rumour-mongering or cooler analysis . 
But the appeal of the form to those with something to get off their chests was clear . 
Posts could be made instantly , within minutes of news events taking place , and could be two or three lines long . 
There was no need to wait until one had enough material , and time , to assemble a newspaper column - although , for most of the bloggers I spoke to for this article , maintaining their sites seemed to absorb many hours . 
-LRB- The time had to be found where it could ; Oliver Kamm originally blogged in the middle of the night , when he found himself sitting up with his new children , and needed something to do . -RRB- 
There were other advantages . 
The old barriers to access - the need to get a job at a newspaper , or a slot on television - did n't exist . 
You did n't even need to put a name to your views . 
-LRB- David T and `` Harry '' , of Harry 's Place , insist on preserving their anonymity because they do not want to aggravate their employers . -RRB- 
Bloggers could link to other bloggers ' postings , to demonstrate their agreement or provide examples of views they despised . 
Later , many sites added the facility for readers to leave comments , often spawning debates that continued long after the bloggers themselves had moved on to other topics . 
-LRB- Amid the flourishing of all this online diversity , certain uniformities emerged . 
Opinionated political blogging frequently resembles a pub rant , and , as such , remains an overwhelmingly male pastime in the UK : Cronin , at Samizdata , and her much-read fellow libertarian Natalie Solent , are rare exceptions . -RRB- 
`` Mainstream media is operating in what I call a channel world , '' says Cronin , whose faith in the transformative power of blogs can sometimes resemble religious zeal . 
`` You 've got certain pipelines that are owned by somebody , and you 've got the content , which is packaged and delivered to the final eyeball . 
Blogs , though , are part of a network world . '' 
The power of blogs , according to this theory , lies not so much in the persuasive force of any one specific rhetorician , but in the opportunities for connections to be made . 
Hundreds of people can quickly `` swarm '' around a particular issue , adapting it to their own purposes . 
Harry 's Place was an important recruiter of canvassers on behalf of Oona King , and against George Galloway , at the last election , while the anti-war site Bloggerheads was instrumental in Backing Blair , a satirical campaign designed to reduce Labor 's 2005 majority via tactical voting . 
Online , power is the power of crowds ; celebrity becomes dissipated . 
`` On the internet , '' Cronin likes to say , `` everyone is famous for 15 people . '' 
As you step into Norman Geras 's home , in Manchester 's leafy suburbs , the words `` cutting-edge cyberphenomenon '' do n't immediately spring to mind ; in fact , they never really do , despite his being one of the country 's most influential political bloggers . 
The retired Manchester university professor of government lives with his wife , a children 's author , in a neatly furnished home , one room of which is densely shelved with books about cricket . 
`` There must be 2,500 of them , '' says Geras , who speaks quietly , with a southern African accent . 
`` Actually , who am I kidding ? 
I 'm quite particular about these things , and I 've counted them : I know there are 2,500 . '' 
Another bookshelf , by the front door , is filled with nothing but copies of the New Left Review ; Geras is a lifelong marxist who still describes himself as such . 
But he has also been a key online voice of the `` pro-war left '' - a position born , as for David T , of trying to resolve a serious case of psychological conflict in the months after 9\/11 . 
His site , Normblog , arose from a feeling of alienation `` from people I perceived as being in my neck of the woods '' , he says - academic colleagues , friends , and -LRB- a point made frequently by bloggers of Geras 's political persuasion -RRB- writers of articles in the comment pages of the liberal press , including this newspaper . 
`` The next day -LRB- after 9\/11 -RRB- , or the day after , I open the newspaper and see - within hours - people talking about ` blowback ' , ` comeuppance ' . 
They did n't even have the sense of horror , of shock , to wait . 
I was just appalled . 
I thought , ` That 's it . ' '' 
He has blogged every day since July 2003 , with only about seven exceptions , including two Christmases and a spell when he was traveling and could n't get to a computer . 
In fact , there were plentiful expressions of horror - but it is true that many columnists did not leave the matter there . 
`` It 's not that they do n't say , in a couple of lines at the beginning , that they 're outraged , '' Geras says . 
`` It 's a matter of balance and judgment . 
You can only judge on the overall balance of what 's said . '' 
However justified their sense that their views were being squeezed from mainstream liberal debate , the hawkish left began to flourish online . 
Its members diagnosed what they saw as an unholy alliance between the extremist fringe of Islam and elements of the `` hard left '' . 
A key function of sites such as Normblog became the forensic examination of the work of commentators who claimed to be explaining the reasons for the attacks , but who found themselves accused of trying to justify them . 
Other blogs set out to demolish offending articles by quoting them and then attacking them line by line - a practice that became known as `` fisking '' , a derogatory reference to the Independent writer Robert Fisk , a regular victim of the approach . 
`` Why is it , '' says Geras , `` that the people in our culture are genuine agents , who take criticism for what they do , whereas the terrorists , who come from wherever else , are always somehow effects of somebody else 's actions ? '' 
As the talk in Washington and London turned from Afghanistan to Iraq , many natural leftwingers who could not resolve mixed feelings about the coming war found themselves visiting Normblog . 
`` It was like a secret handshake - ` Do you read Norm ? ' '' 
is how one journalist puts it . 
How all these feelings metamorphosed into support for the war is harder to discern : it sometimes seemed as if the leftwing hawks , out of distaste for some aspects of the anti-war lobby , were propelled by magnetic repulsion to a default position of support for the war that did n't always ring true . 
Geras , for his part , supported it on the logic of humanitarian intervention . 
But does n't the catastrophic state of Baghdad prove that , in this instance at least , they made an error ? 
`` Even if I come to a point where I have to say it was a mistake - and I hope it does n't come to that , but it could happen , say if the whole thing degenerates into a terrible civil war , and even what we 've seen so far is overshadowed - that would be a different thing from saying that the reasons for supporting the war when it happened were wrong , '' Geras says . 
`` I genuinely thought intervention was unlikely to make things worse . 
A lot of antiwar critics say , ` You 're an idiot . 
It was obvious that it would . ' '' 
So - has it ? 
`` As of now , I would n't say that . 
As of now , there 's still a chance for a democratic future for Iraq . '' 
The July 7 bombings newly energised the `` pro-war left '' , leading to accusations - notably from Madeleine Bunting in this paper - that these `` muscular liberals '' are retreading the `` clash of civilisations '' thesis , giving voice to a kind of liberal fundamentalism as zealous as the religious fundamentalism it sets itself against . 
`` You can hear the creak of the drawbridge being pulled up , '' Bunting wrote . 
`` They believe they are surrounded by enemies - Muslims , and their dastardly non-Muslim apologists - and must defend to the last man the checklist of universal Enlightenment values that sustain their mission . 
Their most ferocious firepower is directed at former allies whom they regard as yet to see the light . '' 
Not everyone who becomes a political blogger means their blog to start out that way , but the urge frequently proves irresistible . 
`` It took less than a year , '' says Tim Ireland , who works in marketing and runs Bloggerheads , founded in 2002 . 
-LRB- He has designed blogs for the Labor MP Tom Watson and the Tory Boris Johnson . -RRB- 
By 2003 , Ireland was engaged in a half-serious campaign to force the prime minister to deliver on a promise to set up a publicly accessible email address . 
In brief , it involved an email address that looked similar to what Blair 's might be , which soon started receiving email intended for the PM . 
He also used the address to email MPs . 
Ten responded to his missive , which , among other things , invited suggestions for names for Blair 's new baby . 
`` I can say with complete confidence that I am the only reason Blair 's email facility was -LRB- eventually -RRB- developed , '' he says . 
The build-up to the Iraq war , though , added a steelier and angrier edge to Ireland 's campaigning . 
Partly because of the internet , he says , he was exposed to a far wider range of media sources than he might have been had he read a single newspaper , and he concluded that `` I had the facts on my side . 
Blair had to be held accountable , to be shown that to manipulate and exploit the ` war on terror ' for political gain was the wrong thing to do , morally and pragmatically ... eventually I just said , ` Fuck work . ' '' 
He made sure he looked after his existing clients , `` but the reason I 've been in politics more than marketing , really , is because there are people dying , and that outrages me . '' 
He channelled his outrage into Backing Blair , which used its ironically pro-Blair stance - its slogan was `` No Alternative '' - to urge tactical anti-Labour voting . 
Half a million people visited the site , he says , where they found themselves being urged to vote Tory if necessary . 
Was n't that an irresponsible thing to advocate , from a leftwing point of view ? 
`` No way were the Tories going to win , '' Ireland says . 
`` I would have bet my left testicle on it . '' 
Similar anti-Blair sentiments , meanwhile , were being wittily expressed by Justin McKeating of the Hove-based site Chicken Yoghurt . 
McKeating spent the run-up to the 2005 general election closely following , and blogging about , the campaign in his constituency , reporting on encounters with candidates and canvassers . 
It was a version of the `` citizen journalism '' increasingly prevalent in the US that only threw into relief how little of the same seemed to be going on among the British blogs . 
There are , of course , a thousand other shades of political viewpoint throughout the `` blogo-sphere '' - a word every blogger I spoke to in person grimaced when using , though nobody seemed to have an alternative . 
Conservatives can get their fix at two prominent blogs , Conservative Commentary and Blithering Bunny , while the UK Evangelical Blog , run by Adrian Warnock , also figures high in the charts . 
How much does it all really matter , though ? 
Britain 's bloggers are divided not just by ideology , it turns out , but by their perception of their own importance : while Samizdata proclaims that blogs are the future , for example , Oliver Kamm insists they are an essentially parasitic medium , that can only exist insofar as it feasts on the output of traditional media . 
But on the subject of motivation , the near-physical urge all the bloggers I spoke to felt - to join the debate , to make waves - seems to have been surprisingly uniform . 
`` I got sick of breaking televisions by throwing things at them , '' is how De Havilland puts it . 
`` If we lived in a world where actual facts could be discussed rationally , I 'd happily disappear back into my cage and sell tat for a living , '' says Tim Ireland . 
But the drive that he feels , he says , `` will not allow me to shut down until Blair is held accountable '' . 
`` Harry '' , of the eponymous Place , recently announced he would be giving up blogging , for work and family reasons , but David T says he does n't believe him . 
`` He says he 's given up , but he 'll be back , because blogs are like crack and you ca n't quite ever give it up , '' says David . 
Or not like crack , but pornography : `` The internet grew , as so many industries did , because of people 's desire furtively to find pornography , '' he points out . 
`` I sometimes think blogging is the political equivalent to that . '' 
He spends only a brief time writing his own blog entries , he says - but hours reading through readers ' comments . 
`` That sort of thing can ruin your marriage . 
You 're never cured - you 're only in remission . 
