A second British soldier could face charges over the death of an Iraqi civilian as senior army commanders brace themselves for damaging new revelations about army behavior in Iraq . 
A formal military hearing on Friday will consider evidence against Lance Corporal Barry Singleton , 23 , following an investigation into claims that he fired his gun 12 times at a driver who tried to speed through a checkpoint . 
A decision on whether to press charges , which could include murder , against Singleton could coincide with an announcement to Parliament by the government 's most senior lawyer , Lord Goldsmith , that as many as 11 soldiers will be charged in connection with the death of another Iraqi civilian . 
Goldsmith 's statement could include charges levelled against a British commanding officer over the death of a 26-year-old Iraqi civilian , a move that would prove highly embarrassing to the Army . 
Lieutenant Colonel Jorge Mendonca , 41 , CO of the Queen 's Lancashire Regiment , is among the servicemen investigated over the death of Baha Mousa , a hotel receptionist in Basra . 
Singleton was on duty in Basra with the King 's Own Scottish Borderers in August 2003 when the shooting at the checkpoint occurred three months before the regiment 's tour of duty ended . 
This week 's preliminary hearing of military lawyers will evaluate the strength of the evidence surrounding the case and what , if any , charges will be brought against Singleton . 
It is understood that even if he does not face a murder charge , manslaughter may be an option . 
The news comes as human rights lawyers prepare to apply for a judicial review of events surrounding Camp Breadbasket , the humanitarian food depot near Basra and from where pictures of British troops abusing Iraqis were published during a court martial earlier this year . 
The legal challenge was discussed last week between Phil Shiner , of the Public Interest Lawyers practice , and human rights lawyer Ben Emmerson QC , who represented Katherine Gun , the former GCHQ translator accused of leaking details of an American ` dirty tricks ' operation to spy on the United Nations . 
Shiner wants his allegations that British troops were involved in ` systematic torture ' to be investigated . 
He has already secured a first judicial review into whether an independent inquiry should be held into the death of Mousa , who died in custody in September 2003 . 
The High Court heard that British soldiers used hooded Iraqi civilians as kickboxing targets , forced them to dance ` like Michael Jackson ' and beat one detainee for three days until he died . 
Charges so far brought against British troops include seven paratroopers charged with the murder of an Iraqi civilian ; their trial is scheduled for September . 
Lawyers for the men have claimed that the prosecution ` is full of holes ' and that the soldiers are victims of a ` culture of prosecution and political correctness ' . 
Army officers have so far investigated 167 allegations of abuse in Iraq . 
Saddam Hussein 's morale has collapsed as he has realized the gravity of the charges against him , the head of Iraq 's special tribunal said yesterday . 
The former dictator 's defiance at a court hearing last year has turned to despondency over accusations of mass murder and war crimes , said Raid Juhi , the judge who will try him . 
` He understands the extent of the charges and that he will stand trial before an impartial court , ' he told the London-based Asharq al-Awsat newspaper . 
