Battle to halt BP oil spill is nearing its end , says Barack Obama BP claims it has reached ` significant milestone ' in efforts to permanently seal Deepwater Horizon well Wednesday 4 August 2010 20.43 BST BP says it has completed its ` static kill ' operation to plug the leaking Deepwater Horizon well off the Louisiana coast . 
Photograph : Patrick Semansky\/AP Barack Obama today declared the US 's largest and most politically embarrassing oil spill near an end as BP said it had reached a `` significant milestone '' in its efforts to permanently seal the Deepwater Horizon well . 
`` The long battle is finally close to coming to an end , and we are very pleased with that , '' said the president , who was strongly criticised for what was initially seen as a slow and weak response as millions of barrels of oil poured into the Gulf of Mexico . 
BP said it had completed a process known as static kill , in which heavy mud was pumped in to plug the stricken well , producing a `` textbook '' result . 
The head of the government 's response team , retired coastguard admiral Thad Allen , said the process had almost certainly ensured there would be no further leaks while the drilling of a relief shaft is completed in the next fortnight and the main well finally capped . 
`` We 've pretty much made this well not a threat , '' he said . 
Obama described the static kill operation , and a report by government scientists that about 75 % of the nearly 5m barrels of spilled oil has been dealt with by the clean-up effort or nature , as `` very welcome news '' . 
The White House tried to ensure the administration would gain credit for leading what it called a `` robust '' response to the disaster by saying that the clean-up would not have been as successful if it had not pushed BP `` every step of the way '' . 
The administration 's spokesman , Robert Gibbs , said : `` It is sort of the beginning of the end of the sealing and containment phase of this operation . '' 
He added that no one owed an apology to the outgoing BP chief executive , Tony Hayward , who angered many Americans with what were seen as insensitive comments . 
The White House energy adviser , Carol Browner , today said a report by the National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration suggested there was no major additional environment threat . 
`` The vast majority of the oil has now been contained , it 's been skimmed , Mother Nature has done its part , it 's evaporated , '' she said . 
BP still faces an as yet undetermined number of compensation claims , which Browner said the government was determined to see it meet . 
`` We are going to continue to ensure that BP is held accountable for the damage that they did , for the economic losses and ultimately for the natural resource damages and all of the restoration that will take place in the Gulf communities and in the Gulf at large . '' 
The company also has to settle with the families of 11 workers killed in the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig that set off the spill . 
A version appeared on p1 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 20.51 BST on Wednesday 4 August 2010 Follow the latest business news , comment and analysis on Twitter dominicru : Average Goldman Sachs pay : $ 399,506 . 
