BP oil spill mostly cleaned up , says US White House says 75 % of oil captured , burned off , evaporated or broken down as ` static kill ' operaion shows signs of working Wednesday 4 August 2010 10.55 BST The rig drilling the primary relief well and the vessel , in the background , being used to perform the static kill . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP The US government said today that most of the oil that leaked into the Gulf of Mexico has been cleaned up as BP reported that a '' static kill '' blocking procedure was stopping more crude pouring into the gulf . 
The White House energy adviser , Carol Browner , said a new assessment had found that about 75 % of the oil had been captured , burned off , evaporated or broken down in the Gulf . 
The volume of the remaining oil , however , is still more than four times larger than the amount lost from the Exxon Valdez tanker in 1989 . 
`` It was captured . 
Mother Nature did her part , '' Browner said of the Gulf oil spill . 
She added that about 25 % remained . 
BP said it had reached a significant milestone overnight when mud forced down the Gulf of Mexico well the static kill operation held back the flow of crude . 
Workers stopped pumping mud into the well after about eight hours and were monitoring it to ensure it remained stable , BP said . 
`` It 's a milestone , '' said a spokeswoman , Sheila Williams said . 
`` It 's a step towards the killing of the well . '' 
Site leader Bobby Bolton said the pressure in the well dropped quickly in the first 90 minutes of the procedure , indicating that everything was going to plan . 
Crews must now decide when to use cement as a final cap . 
Federal officials will not declare victory until a successful `` bottom kill '' when mud is pumped into the well bottom two to three miles below the sea floor and then cemented is completed . 
That procedure will not happen for several weeks . 
`` We 've pretty much made this well not a threat , but we need to finish this from the bottom , '' said Thad Allen , the official appointed by Barack Obama to lead the federal response to the disaster . 
The static kill involved slowly pumping the mud from a ship into the top of the ruptured well a mile below . 
A `` top kill '' procedure when mud is forced against the flow of oil had failed in May when the mud could not overcome the pressure of the oil . 
BP will not know for certain whether the static kill has succeeded until engineers can use the relief well . 
That is due to be completed soon . 
The well will be used to execute the bottom kill . 
The task is becoming more urgent because the peak hurricane season is just around the corner , Allen said . 
Tropical storm Colin formed but dissipated far out in the Atlantic yesterday . 
