Oceanographer Simon Boxall explains how the funnel will work A ship carrying a giant metal containment box has arrived at the site where a sunken oil rig has been leaking oil into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Oil giant BP says it hopes the 90-tonne device will help to contain the oil . 
The US is to carry out a controlled burn of some of the leaked oil . 
But the oil reached a beach for the first time on Thursday , officials confirmed . 
The spill was set off by an explosion that destroyed the Deepwater Horizon rig off Louisiana last month . 
Eleven rig workers died in the explosion , and the ensuing oil leak has since been threatening several southern US states . 
Coast Guard Petty Officer Connie Terrell said teams from the operation Unified Command in Robert , Louisiana , had confirmed oil on the beach , at the south end of the Chandeleur Islands , at Freemason Island . 
`` This is the first confirmation that Unified Command has received of oil on a shoreline , '' Ms Terrell said . 
`` It 's largely just sheen , there is no evidence of medium or heavy oil , '' she said . 
Remote-controlled submarines will now be used to lower the containment device over the leak . 
The operation to fix the massive funnel in place is expected to take two days , and a further two days will be required to connect it to a ship above via a drill-pipe . 
If the operation is successful , BP hopes to begin pumping oil to the surface early next week . 
BP has never deployed such a structure at a depth of 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- and difficulties may occur , said BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward . 
Mr Hayward gave no prediction as to when the oil leak would be stopped , or how much the clean-up operation will ultimately cost . 
HOW THE OIL FUNNEL WORKS The funnel is a 40ft tall iron box , weighing 98 tonnes It will be placed over the leak , 5,000 ft down on the seabed BP hopes it will collect 85 % of the leaking oil and pipe it to the surface He denied his company had been slow to react to the disaster , saying BP had mobilised immediately to contain the threat , and adding that it was working with US authorities to contain the spill . 
`` It 's a military operation and we are thinking of it as a battle on three fronts : beneath the sea , in the sea , and on the shore , '' said Mr Hayward . 
He said efforts to protect the southern US coastline were going well , with 100 ships involved in an operation to skim oil from the sea 's surface - including 20 of the world 's largest skimming vessels . 
Thousands of feet of boom were being used as a barrier to contain the slick and a small air force was deploying dispersants , he added . 
Some 4,000 volunteers were being paid $ 10 an hour to help defend the beaches , he said . 
A sheen of oil has already reached the shore in parts of Louisiana , but officials say coagulated crude oil is not expected to reach coastal areas until the end of the week . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- said the oil slick was not expected to move much in the next several days . 
Earlier , BP said it had managed to seal the smallest of the three leaks spilling oil into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Oil is still gushing into the sea at a rate of about 800,000 litres -LRB- 176,000 imperial gallons -RRB- a day , but officials say working with only two leaks makes tackling the spill easier . 
Favourable weather conditions have now allowed crews to begin burning off more of the oil where it is most heavily concentrated , AP said . 
A burn was last tried on 28 April when thousands of litres of oil were successfully removed . 
Concerns for the impact of the burn on wildlife in the area have been dismissed by the body co-ordinating the response to the spill . 
BP has told members of a US congressional committee that up to 9.5 m litres a day could spill if the leaks worsen . 
