Oil spill : US communities watch , uncertain The National Guard have laid two miles of protective boxes along Dauphin Island Along the southern shore of Dauphin Island , troops from the Alabama National Guard splash in the warm shallows of the Gulf of Mexico . 
But this is no holiday trip . 
In fatigues and boots , they use large metal stakes to secure wire mesh boxes to the wet sand . 
Each box is lined with a tough green fabric . 
Looking back down the beach , it almost looked like angular tropical vegetation hugging the shore as far as the eye could see . 
In fact the boxes stretched for two miles . 
It has taken troops three days to place them , and one soldier said they had seven more miles to go . 
In the heat and humidity , it looked like very hard work . 
The fishing industry has ground to a halt in some areas The troops were laying coastal defences . 
Once in place , the boxes will be filled with sand . 
A chemical that causes oil to solidify and makes it possible to scoop out will then be laid on top . 
The US military uses similar boxes in Iraq and Afghanistan as `` blast walls '' - barriers to protect against explosions . 
And Capt Marcus Young , who was leading the work , believes this is a conflict situation too . 
`` We know the enemy is coming and we are just waiting for it , '' he said . 
`` That 's kinda different for us . 
We are used to attacking and not waiting to be attacked ... The oil if it reaches the shore line is going to destroy all the vegetation . '' 
Further along the shore a narrow strip of asphalt divides the Gulf coast beach from the more grassy banks of the Mississippi Sound . 
Wooden houses perch enviably on stilts . 
This is my livelihood - I feed my babies from this It is so low-lying that sea swells often cover the road . 
This fragile strip of paradise is under threat . 
A constant stream of large lorries thunder up and down , dumping large piles of sand onto the Gulf side of the road . 
Diggers then shovel it into mounds at least a metre -LRB- 3ft -RRB- high . 
They are constructing a barrier to absorb as much oil as possible and stop it getting into the sound . 
One homeowner said he and his family had survived Hurricane Katrina but they did not know what damage the oil spill might do . 
It has had some effect already . 
There was only one person on this pristine white beach . 
Tour operators say they have already had cancellations . 
Meanwhile the region 's other big industry - fishing - is in disarray . 
Photographers have hired charterboats to get images out at sea Unloading his catch of mullet from a small open boat , Richard Collier , a second generation fisherman , says : `` Ever tried them smoked ? 
They 're the best . '' 
He fishes in the area between the shore and the oil slick , but does not know how much longer he will be allowed to do so . 
Already fleets used to deeper water - where the spill is - have been banned from fishing in coastal waters and must head further afield . 
Ironically , because of this , Mr Collier gets a higher price for his fish right now . 
`` This is my livelihood . 
I feed my babies from this . 
If -LRB- the oil -RRB- comes and they shut me down , I want to know where my pay cheque is coming from . 
BP owes me a job , '' he says . 
John and Sonia Amick normally fish red snapper 15 miles -LRB- 25km -RRB- offshore , but were preparing to sail 180 miles in search of grouper . 
`` I 'm still uncertain , '' Mrs Amick said . 
`` I trust and believe in God that He will take care of us but we are going to waters we do n't fish normally and I just hope the oil does n't reach there . '' 
On the dock , the son of a wholesaler who buys their catch helped pack and weigh some fish . 
When asked what his concerns were , he looked up with tears in his eyes and said : `` This is my home . '' 
