Dead fish lie in oil from the BP oil spill . 
If the company is found to have been grossly negligent , its insurance will be void . 
Photograph : Sean Gardner\/Reuters BP will this week reveal that it has cleared itself of gross negligence after an internal inquiry into the causes of the Deepwater Horizon explosion . 
The company believes evidence will emerge of the role that other oil companies and contractors on the project had in causing the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
But this is unlikely to satisfy its critics . 
During congressional hearings in the US , politicians have laid the blame for the disaster squarely on BP , accusing it of ignoring standard oil industry safety practices to save money . 
Pressure is also mounting on the company to clarify the position of chief executive Tony Hayward at its half-year results meeting on Tuesday . 
There is growing speculation that , alongside the figures , BP could announce Hayward 's departure , although he could stay on until a relief well is in place in the gulf . 
A board meeting is scheduled for tomorrow , but a BP spokesman refused to comment on whether the succession issue was on the agenda or whether there would be an announcement about Hayward at Tuesday 's results . 
The company will publish the full findings of the inquiry into the causes of the gulf oil spill when it is completed next month . 
BP accepts that it will have to shoulder some blame for the accident . 
But it is understood that the company has found no evidence of gross negligence and does not expect any to come to light in the future . 
It will robustly defend itself against such claims . 
If investigators rule that BP is guilty of gross negligence , the firm would face a far heftier bill : under the US 's Clean Water Act , BP currently faces fines of $ 1,100 -LRB- # 715 -RRB- for each barrel of oil spilt , but a such a ruling could see the figure rise to $ 4,300 . 
If BP were the sole party to be found grossly negligent , it would also be liable for the entire clean-up and compensation bill . 
BP owns 65 % of the Macondo well on which the Deepwater Horizon was operating , with 25 % held by Texas-based Anadarko and the remainder by the Japanese company Mitsui . 
Anadarko has so far refused to pay any costs , while Mitsui has not made its position clear . 
BP will continue to pay for the clean-up which now totals $ 4bn and bill its partners for their share . 
A US oil lawyer said most indemnity agreements and insurance would protect BP against claims even it was found guilty of ordinary negligence , but would be void in a case of gross negligence . 
Such a finding would have `` far-reaching consequences '' for BP and its partners ' and contractors ' liabilities , he said . 
BP will also give the City guidance on the likely costs from the disaster this week . 
Analysts at Barclays Capital believe the provisions could exceed $ 25bn . 
Stripping out the costs relating to the disaster , BNP Paribas forecasts BP 's net income for the second quarter at just under $ 5bn , up by 68 % compared with the previous year the biggest rise of all its European oil industry peers . 
Hayward will also indicate which assets are core , and which peripheral , for the company in the future . 
BP is looking to sell more assets to shore up its balance sheet . 
It will continue to focus on its three core areas : deepwater oil and gas , `` unconventional gas '' -LRB- for example , from shale or coalbeds -RRB- and using new technologies to squeeze more oil and gas from major mature fields . 
Next month BP is expected to finish handing over responsibility for compensation claims to Kenneth Feinberg , who has been appointed by the White House to administer a $ 20bn fund paid for by the company . 
BP does not expect to have to pay out the full $ 20bn . 
Damages arising from other legal action , and from the completion of formal investigations into the accident , are likely to be more costly . 
