Efforts to plug BP oil leak resume after storm passes Engineers race to finish work on relief wells before next storm hits as Gulf 's peak hurricane season approaches Sunday 25 July 2010 16.05 BST Churning waters caused by the storm may help spread out surface slick and break up tar balls , leaving some beaches cleaner . 
Photograph : Alex Ogle\/AFP\/Getty Images Ships were getting back in place today at the Gulf of Mexico site of BP 's leaky oil well as crews raced to resume work on plugging the gusher before another big storm stops work again . 
Now that tropical storm Bonnie has fizzled out on Louisiana 's coast , engineers are hoping clear weather lasts long enough for them to finish their work on relief wells . 
But as peak hurricane season approaches , the potential for another storm-related delay is high . 
`` We 're going to be playing a cat-and-mouse game for the remainder of the hurricane season , '' retired coast guard admiral Thad Allen , the federal government 's spill response chief , said as another disturbance already was brewing in the Caribbean , although forecasters said it was n't likely to strengthen into a tropical storm . 
Meanwhile , BP is planning to announce that its chief executive Tony Hayward is negotiating the terms of his departure ahead of the company 's half-year results announcement on Tuesday . 
A formal announcement is expected in the next 24 hours . 
Hayward , who angered Americans by minimizing the spill 's environmental impact and expressing his exasperation by saying `` I 'd like my life back , '' has been under heavy criticism over his gaffe-prone leadership during the spill . 
Back on the Gulf , a rig drilling the relief tunnel that will pump in mud and cement to seal the well returned to the spill site after evacuating the area . 
Crews corked the relief tunnel on Wednesday and the temporary halt pushed back efforts to solidly seal the well by at least a week , Allen said . 
Completion now looks possible by mid-August , but Allen said he would n't hesitate to order another evacuation based on forecasts similar to the ones for Bonnie . 
`` We have no choice but to start well ahead of time if we think the storm track is going to bring gale force winds , which are 39mph or above , anywhere close to well site , '' Allen said . 
In the past 10 years , an average of five named storms have hit the Gulf each hurricane season . 
This year , two have struck already Bonnie and Hurricane Alex at the end of June , which delayed cleanup of BP 's massive oil spill for a week even though it did n't get closer than 500 miles from the well . 
`` Usually you do n't see the first hurricane statistically until 10 August , '' said Dennis Feltgen , a spokesman for the National Hurricane Centre in Miami . 
`` The 2010 hurricane season is running just ahead of a typical pace . '' 
Hurricane season in the region ends on 30 November . 
Even though the evacuation turned out to be short-lived , it revealed one important fact : BP and the federal government are increasingly sure that the temporary plug that has mostly contained the oil for eight days will hold . 
They did n't loosen the cap even when they thought they 'd lose sight of it during the evacuation , although in the end , at least some of the real-time cameras trained on the ruptured well apparently kept rolling . 
Ironically , Bonnie may even have a positive effect . 
Churning waters could actually help dissipate oil in the water , spreading out the surface slick and breaking up tar balls , said Jane Lubchenco , leader of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 
Beaches may look cleaner in some areas as the storm surge pulls oil away , though other areas could see more oil washed ashore . 
`` I think the bottom line is , it 's better than it might have been , '' Lubchenco said . 
At the site of the relief well , workers who spent Thursday and Friday pulling nearly a mile of segmented steel pipe out of the water and stacking the sections on deck will now have to reverse the process . 
It is not likely the BP will be able to resume drilling until tomorrow . 
By Wednesday , workers should finish installing steel casing to fortify the relief shaft , Allen said , and by Friday , crews plan to start blasting in heavy mud and cement through the mechanical cap , the first phase of a two-step process to seal the well for good . 
BP will then finish drilling the relief tunnel which could take up to a week to pump in more mud and cement from nearly two miles under the sea floor . 
Meanwhile , people in the oil-affected hamlet of Grand Isle , Louisiana , spent a gray Saturday at the beach , listening to music . 
The Island Aid concert , which included LeAnn Rimes and Three Dog Night , raised money for civic projects on the island . 
For the afternoon at least , things were almost back to normal . 
Young women in bathing suits rode around on golf carts while young men in pickup trucks tooted their horns and shouted . 
`` This is the way Grand Isle is supposed to be but has n't been this year , '' said Anne Leblanc of Metairie , Louisiana , who said her family has been visiting the island for years . 
`` This is the first we came this year . 
With the oil spill there has n't been a reason to come , no swimming , no fishing . '' 
A version appeared in the Guardian on Follow all the top stories of the day on Twitter with the Guardian 's world news team achrisafis : RT News : One of the #Algeria hostages is Irish . 
