L -RRB- -LRB- BP . 
N -RRB- was set on Friday to install a bigger cap that could contain almost all the oil leaking from its blown-out Gulf of Mexico well , a top U.S. official said . 
The Obama administration has been pressing the British energy giant to install the new cap , which could capture up to 80,000 barrels -LRB- 3,360,000 gallons\/12 ,700,00 litres -RRB- of oil a day , versus the 25,000 barrels currently being contained . 
The U.S. government has estimated the well is leaking a maximum of 60,000 barrels a day , although independent estimates have been as high as 100,000 barrels a day . 
Retired retired Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen , who is overseeing the response to the spill , told a news conference that the well could be contained -- but not plugged -- by Sunday or Monday , when the cap was installed on top of it . 
`` When we have the cap on , and it 's sealed and we know that we 've got a seal , yes '' -LRB- it will be contained -RRB- , Allen said . 
BP has been under enormous pressure to halt the oil , which has polluted coastlines on all five U.S. Gulf states , threatened multi-billion dollar fishing and tourism industries and killed birds , sea turtles and dolphins . 
It is the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
The company 's costs for the spill likely will be tied to the amount of oil that ultimately flows out of the well . 
He said later BP had responded to a government request to lay out a timeline for installing the new cap . 
`` We 're reviewing it right now , '' Allen told Reuters . 
`` If there are no problems with it , we 'll probably authorize them to move ahead later on this evening . '' 
`` It looks like it 's achievable at this point if we remain on schedule , '' Allen said . 
`` If we approve the timeline , we would start tomorrow to remove the current cap and to start the sequence of events . '' 
The spill has complicated the U.S. relationship with Britain , while subjecting Obama to fierce criticism that his handling of the disaster has been too slow . 
The administration reiterated on Friday that it would announce a new deepwater oil drilling moratorium , a pledge that came after a U.S. appeals court refused to reinstate a six-month ban on drilling below 500 feet -LRB- 152.5 metres -RRB- . 
`` In the next several days we 'll be making an announcement about keeping the moratorium in place , '' Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said during a visit to California . 
`` It will be a new moratorium , '' he said . 
The government imposed the ban in response to the BP spill , but a federal judge last month blocked the move . 
In refusing to stay that decision on Thursday , the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said the government failed to show how it would be irreparably harmed if it were not granted . 
The administration said it did not consider the ruling a major setback because the Interior Department had the power to apply to stop any deepwater drilling project in the Gulf . 
`` Our view on the moratorium is that it was right when it was issued and it 's right today , '' Salazar said . 
Companies and other critics of the administration 's ban have warned that it is too broad and could push oil drillers to abandon U.S. waters , spurring job losses at a time of economic hardship , particularly in Gulf states . 
U.S.-based Diamond Offshore Drilling -LRB- DO . 
N -RRB- said on Friday it was moving its Ocean Endeavor rig to Egypt from the Gulf of Mexico , becoming the first U.S. company to do so because of uncertainty surrounding the ban . 
The court ruling pushed shares of Transocean Ltd -LRB- RIGN . 
VX -RRB- , the owner of the rig that exploded on April 20 , triggering the spill , up more than 5 percent on the Zurich stock exchange on Friday . 
They had lost almost half their value since April . 
BP , which has seen its share price plummet by about half during the crisis , closed fractionally higher , after rallying to gain about 25 percent from a low over the past two weeks . 
Investors have been cheered by reports that BP is seeking new investors and speculation that the worst of the spill might be over . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
This is `` Day 81 ? 
of the BP oil spill . 
Coastal communities have been , and continue to be , devastated . 
The Obama administration should do more than merely continue to blame BP for its lack of preparation and response efforts . 
Pursuant to OPA Section 4201 , and given that the BP oil spill is a discharge posing substantial threat to public health or welfare , President Obama should have federalized the collection of the oil that is in the sea and the restoration of the coastal areas impacted by the oil . 
Both of these activities could be done without having to federalize the operational priority of stopping the flow of oil from the well . 
This lack of leadership on the part of the Obama administration is unacceptable . 
The blowout of April 20 , 2010 aboard the Deepwater Horizon was clearly preventable . 
The fact that the BP oil spill has been allowed to reach coastal areas is inexcusable . 
For a clear understanding of the issues involved , visit : I feel like riding a bike past the White House and shouting `` Ha Ha ! '' 
Obama is killing thousands of jobs instead of enforcing the regulations which would have prevented this if they had been enforced . 
Instead Obama wants to stop drilling in a place were we can regulate , and switch production to Africa and South America were we cant . 
Then transport that oil in ships here . 
Yet another Brilliant battle lost . 
This president is at best misguided . 
He does n't lead , he does n't take action , he is not accountable for anything and will be a one termer . 
In the words of the democrats vs GHW Bush ... '' Its the economy stupid '' -LRB- Fix it -RRB- This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
