Simon Cowell signs stars for Haiti charity single Simon Cowell is in talks with other artists to sing on the track Rod Stewart , Leona Lewis , JLS and Michael Buble have all agreed to take part in the Haiti charity single , which has been organised by Simon Cowell . 
The artists will record a cover of REM 's ballad Everybody Hurts . 
The Sun newspaper , which has teamed up with Cowell , said Robbie Williams , Coldplay , Take That and Sir Paul McCartney have also been approached . 
Meanwhile , Madonna and Beyonce will take part in a global telethon to raise cash for the earthquake-hit country . 
Performances for the Hope for Haiti event will be screened on every major TV network in the US and streamed on websites around the world . 
In the UK , it will be shown live on MTV from 0100 GMT on Saturday , 23rd January , and repeated at 0900 GMT the same day . 
Clooney on raising money for Haiti Other acts taking part in the telethon include U2 's Bono and The Edge , Jay-Z and Rihanna , who will all be performing together in London . 
Wyclef Jean , who is a Haitian-American , Bruce Springsteen , Jennifer Hudson , Mary J Blige , Shakira and Sting will perform in New York . 
Hollywood actor George Clooney has organised the event . 
Speaking to MTV , he said : `` It 's a big world out there , and we all have a lot of responsibility to look out for people who ca n't look out for themselves . 
`` So what we can do is first and foremost , raise money . 
If I thought we could all pick up shovels and go in there and help without being in the way , I think a lot of people would do that . '' 
The proceeds from the single , which is being organised by Cowell , will be split between the Disasters Emergency Committee -LRB- DEC -RRB- and the Sun 's Helping Haiti campaign . 
The government has already agreed to waive VAT on the record and REM , who own the rights to the song , have also waived royalties on the charity track . 
`` We are all working hard to make this single a success and to raise lots of money for Helping Haiti , '' Cowell said . 
`` We have a short time to do this and the people in Haiti need as much help as we can possibly give them as soon as possible . 
`` I 'd like to make this record with as many different types of singer as we can and I hope everyone in the industry comes together to get involved . 
The response has been fantastic . '' 
Will Young , X Factor winner Joe McElderry and hip-hop trio N-Dubz are also said to have expressed an interest in singing . 
Prime Minister Gordon Brown , who apparently requested Cowell organise the charity track , said he thought the single would make a big difference . 
The UK 's Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by telephoning 0370 60 60 900 `` The agony and anguish for the people that we are seeing on our television screens is something that British people want to respond to . 
`` Simon Cowell can make a huge amount of money to help the people of Haiti . '' 
Artists have also agreed to take part in a special eBay auction , which has been set up by Glastonbury organiser Emily Eavis . 
Coldplay , Damon Albarn , the Arctic Monkeys , the Chemical Brothers , The Kooks , The Pet Shop Boys , Klaxons and Pearl Jam have all donated various pieces of rock memorabilia for the sale . 
They include a specially recorded piece of music by Albarn and Coldplay singer Chris Martin 's signed Viva La Vida tour jacket . 
The auction kicked off at 0900 GMT on Friday and will run for 10 days . 
Chris Martin added : `` I visited Haiti with Oxfam a few years ago . 
It 's a country of extreme poverty and brutal living conditions . 
Most people in Port-au-Prince live in tin shacks . 
`` The earthquake that has struck Haiti will have turned the city into an unimaginable hell . '' 
An estimated 1.5 million people were left homeless by the 7.0-magnitude quake , which is believed to killed as many as 200,000 . 
At least 75,000 bodies have so far been buried in mass graves , the government has said . 
Many more remain uncollected in the streets . 
