New media vital in breaking Haiti earthquake story New and emerging media played a key role in breaking news to the outside world of the Haiti earthquake . 
Citizens turned to a range of networking tools in a bid to share the news and personal stories from microblogging on Twitter and video-sharing on YouTube to the internet telephone application Skype , and the social media site Facebook . 
For over 24 hours after the quake , countless reports and images came not only from big , established news organizations but from ordinary people on the spot . 
New platforms feed traditional media Phone lines and the power supply are down regularly in Haiti Traditional news media , such as national TV channels and newspapers , accepted the mass of material as vital in delivering the story in its early stages in the context of a severely damaged communications and transport infrastructure , chronic power failure , and extensive damage to key buildings in the capital . 
Leading US news outlets such as CNN , the New York Times and the Los Angeles Times were busy aggregating , sorting and presenting citizen-generated content from an early stage to paint a picture of the start of a humanitarian catastrophe . 
However , aid agencies , charities and others pointed out that while news was being broken and getting out of the country via new and emerging media , such platforms were often unable to provide practical assistance to victims . 
As major news organizations published quotes from officials on what had happened , eyewitness accounts were being posted to Twitter News of the earthquake was broken by the US Geological Survey Department which said that a temblor measuring 7.3 on the Richter scale had hit Haiti at 16:53 local time . 
The report was picked up a few minutes later as an urgent item by international news agencies with the usual rider of no further details being `` immediately available '' . 
Australia 's Sydney Morning Herald reported : `` As phone lines went down and darkness fell over Haiti , the full impact of today 's massive earthquake was difficult to know . 
But as with many recent natural disasters and emergencies , the extent of the chaos in the impoverished Caribbean island emerged quickly online ... As major news organizations published quotes from officials on what had happened , eyewitness accounts were being posted to Twitter . '' 
Haitian Fredo Dupoux posted one of the first recorded tweets at 17:00 local time . 
`` Oh shiet -LRB- sic -RRB- heavy earthquake right now ! 
In Haiti '' , along with tweeter FutureHaiti who said `` Earthquake 7 Richter scale just happening #Haiti . '' 
hope all are ok Richard Morse - @RAMHaiti tweets from his hotel Foreign journalistic resources were thin on the ground when the quake struck in Haiti , often described as the poorest country in the Western hemisphere . 
The only full-time correspondent was a reporter for the US Associated Press news agency . 
The rest were local stringers and staff . 
Richard Morse , a musician who runs the Oloffson Hotel , an iconic building made famous as the Trianon in Graham Greene 's novel The Comedians , reported on 12 January that his hotel was still standing . 
`` We 're ok at the oloffson . 
hope all are ok . 
a lot of big buildings in PAP are down '' . 
Haitian radio and TV host Carel Pedre was among the more prominent voices tweeting in the early hours following the quake . 
He tweeted at 19:00 . 
`` If U need to To get in Touch with friends and family in Haiti . 
Send me a Private Message with names and phone numbers . 
I 'll get Back to U ! '' 
Troy Livesay , a US missionary , blogger and tweeter who lives in Haiti , posted some of the most moving tweets in a constantly updating flow of information . 
At 1209 a.m. on 13 January he tweeted `` Church groups are singing throughout the city all through the night in prayer . 
It is a beautiful sound in the middle of a horrible tragedy . '' 
The Twitter community in fact provided much of the early information on the crisis in the existence of what the Columbia Journalism Review called `` the Haitian news vacuum '' . 
The Los Angeles Times quickly created a list of Twitter users believed to be tweeting from Haiti and the New York Times blog The Lede began regularly updating a post with news about the quake . 
The Lede 's editor said that `` Any readers who are in Haiti or in touch with people there are encouraged to use the comment thread below to share first-hand accounts with us '' . 
We immediately moved someone supervising social media and our iReports to the Haiti desk Nick Wrenn , CNN International Digital Services Footage from YouTube , the hugely popular video-sharing site owned by Google , was used extensively by TV channels across the world in the immediate aftermath of the quake , in the absence of material from the main TV news agencies APTN and Reuters TV , and from individual broadcasters . 
A YouTube video at around 22:00 local time on 12 January from the American Red Cross appeared to be the first upload of news of the disaster . 
Night fell shortly after the quake struck , plunging Port-au-Prince into darkness , but after daybreak on 13 January hundreds of videos were being uploaded , some presenting harrowing pictures of dead and injured victims and others showing the extent of the devastation wreaked by the disaster . 
Broadcasters from around the world used this citizen-generated material in bulletins and rolling news programs , dramatically underlining the coming of age of new and emerging media as powerful news tools . 
The broadcaster with the most material on the quake from such sources appeared to be CNN . 
Video reports from citizen journalists come into the CNN iReport desk where they are vetted for verifiability by editorial staff . 
Around two years ago , the iReport section of CNN 's website , where people can upload video material and contact details , became a usable source for CNN when vetting procedures were put into place . 
Nick Wrenn , of CNN International Digital Services said `` We immediately moved someone supervising social media and our iReports to the Haiti desk '' . 
On 13 January , CNN 's iReport had 1.4 m page views , a 240 % increase over the last high recorded last year . 
Along with other tweeters , Carel Pedre was also sending digital citizen photos of the destruction caused by the quake . 
Many of the images were graphic and disturbing , and appeared in mainstream newspapers and on TV channels shortly afterwards . 
People in Haiti uploaded images to the Yahoo-owned Flickr photo-sharing site , for example employees of a US-based NGO in Haiti ; a missionary in Archaie , Haiti ; and an internet company operator in Haiti . 
However , difficulties exist and care must be taken in identifying user-generated content , as many users also upload agency images to their photo-streams . 
Ansel Herz , an independent journalist on Skype By 13 January , the day after the quake , international news media were still struggling to enter Port-au-Prince . 
But Skype , a software application that allows users to make voice calls over the internet , had by then been used to great effect to get urgent news out of Haiti . 
Via Skype , the BBC spoke to Ansel Herz , an independent journalist who had been in Petionville . 
He told the BBC that an aftershock was happening as he spoke , and that `` many multi-storey buildings had fallen '' . 
There was `` devastation everywhere , '' he said . 
`` People are coming together and helping others survive , '' he said , adding that `` not a lot in the way of help was coming from the authorities and the peacekeepers '' . 
He told how he witnessed rescue efforts with pickaxes at the partially collapsed cathedral building , and how for people who were already poor `` it was difficult to describe the problems facing them '' . 
Every minute , people have been posting more than 1,500 status updates on Facebook that contained the word ` Haiti ' Randi Zuckerberg , who manages non-profit initiatives for Facebook , on 14 January described in a post on the Facebook corporate blog how the Haiti quake had emphasised the internet 's critical role in `` connecting the world 's population in times of tragedy '' . 
The social media site quickly launched a `` Global Relief on Facebook '' page where the more than 350 million people who use the service can `` educate themselves and find out how to help not only in Haiti but wherever disaster and misfortune may strike '' . 
Zuckerberg added that moments after the quake struck , people around the world immediately sought to help with relief efforts and express their solidarity with the victims . 
`` Every minute , people have been posting more than 1,500 status updates on Facebook that contained the word ` Haiti ' . '' 
`` People have contributed thousands of dollars through the Causes application on Facebook , and groups including the American Red Cross , Oxfam America and Partners in Health have mobilised supporters through their Facebook pages and raised hundreds of thousands of dollars in the last 24 hours alone , '' he said in the post . 
Along with its social networking functions , it is known that Facebook is also widely used as a primary news source by younger users . 
Videos were uploaded and shared and celebrities tweeted and spread the word While mainstream news organizations are now using social networking sites for news and information , technology and social media are being utilised more frequently in coping with the aftermath of natural disasters . 
Friends and relatives of victims searched for information using media tools like Twitter , Facebook , Skype , Flickr and YouTube for information and assistance . 
Texting , Facebook and Twitter campaigns kicked in to support the relief effort in the first hours of the crisis . 
The social networking sites played a key role in mass mobilisation and raising millions of dollars . 
Writing on the suite101 . 
com website , Jace Shoemaker-Galloway noted `` thousands of tweets , retweets and TwitPics were shared and viewed as the disaster unfolded . 
Videos were uploaded and shared and celebrities tweeted and spread the word '' . 
By 15 January , Haitian musician Wyclef Jean had raised over US$ 1m for quake victims through his Yele Haiti foundation . 
However , reports inevitably came in of cyber scammers preying on popular generosity and compassion with bogus appeals aimed at enriching only themselves . 
Text messaging campaigns facilitate the relief effort by enabling people to contribute financially in a simple way . 
For example , Text HAITI to 90999 is a mobile phone fundraising initiative supported by the US State Department . 
People can make a donation to the Red Cross by sending a simple text message Millions of dollars have now reached the Red Cross , breaking records for a mobile giving campaign . 
the world owes a measure of debt to new media platforms - which will undoubtedly continue to play an important role in Haiti in the days and months to come Curtis Barnard , Columbia Journalism Review blog Noting how mainstream media were relying on social networks to fill the gaps , US blog Gawker in the early stages of the crisis acknowledged the value of `` crowd sourcing '' in covering `` chaotic breaking news like this '' . 
But it added : `` the true extent of the damage will not likely be known until news organizations get reporters on the ground - and off Facebook '' . 
And the dangers of using instant unchecked information were illustrated by footage that appeared of an earlier earthquake in Japan that purported to be from Haiti but obviously was not . 
But Curtis Barnard , writing in the Columbia Journalism Review blog , said that nevertheless `` the world owes a measure of debt to new media platforms - which will undoubtedly continue to play an important role in Haiti in the days and months to come - for their assistance in facilitating the early response to this disaster '' . 
BBC Monitoring research 18 Jan 2010 
