Show distribution of displaced people in Port-au-Prince The sheer scale of Haiti 's quake disaster presented rescuers with a seemingly overwhelming task . 
Below are some of the main ongoing logistical challenges . 
Rescue teams from 17 countries , including France , are on the ground Port-au-Prince 's small international airport has struggled to cope with the number of aid flights arriving in response to the earthquake . 
Within days , the Haitian government formally put the airport 's operation in US hands and Washington has established a temporary air traffic management system for flights . 
The airport has only one runway and standing room for 18 aircraft at a time , so planes arriving with aid have been delayed while those on the ground are unloaded . 
However , the UN says some 150 aircraft are landing every day . 
The US and Canadian military recently contributed equipment to speed up the unloading process but lack of transport and fuel has made it difficult to move goods to other locations . 
The main airport in neighbouring Dominican Republic quickly became congested as it supported an alternative route for aid . 
But US Southern Command says aid flights have started landing at airfields in Jacmel , southern Haiti , and San Isidro and Barahona airports in the Dominican Republic . 
The port has suffered severe damage The main port in Port-au-Prince was closed after severe damage to the docks and the one major crane at the facility . 
Some initial aid shipments were diverted to Cap Haitien port . 
On 16 January , the first ship finally docked at Port-au-Prince , carrying a cargo of bananas and coal , and the port is now considered functional . 
US engineers and dive teams are restoring piers , cranes , and buildings , as well as clearing debris at the port . 
The UN says the port should be able to receive 350 containers a day as of 25 January , an increase from the present daily capacity of 250 containers . 
The port at Jacmel in the south of Haiti is operational for small ships . 
Saint Marc and Gonaives ports are reported to be open but their capacity is not yet clear , the UN says . 
The US aircraft carrier USS Carl Vinson has arrived off Haiti carrying 19 helicopters . 
It will serve as a `` floating airport '' for relief operations . 
The US has also sent three amphibious assault ships and several Coast Guard cutters . 
Some roads are impassable - either as a direct result of earthquake damage , or because they are blocked by rubble or smashed vehicles . 
Some aid agencies have been unable to get to their warehouses . 
Roads to the neighbouring Dominican Republic , though damaged , are open and the best option for the majority of incoming cargo . 
The UN peacekeeping mission -LRB- Minustah -RRB- , which has around 3,000 troops and police in and around Port-au-Prince , is working to clear some of the major roads . 
Road access between Port-au-Prince and Leogane - two of the worst affected areas - is reported to be good . 
But key routes that are open are becoming congested with the movement of people and supplies . 
The UN says the security situation is stable with a few reports of scuffles , looting and gunshots . 
Some rescue crews said they were forced to stop work at nightfall because of security concerns . 
Responsibility for maintaining law and order in the capital now rests with the UN mission 's international troops and police . 
Haiti has no army and its police force has all but collapsed in the aftermath of the earthquake . 
UN troops are providing military escort for UN agencies delivering aid and international NGOs have been advised to travel with escorts . 
The US , which has sent thousands of troops to help the relief effort , is providing additional capacity at the request of the UN . 
Between 500,000 and 700,000 people are believed to have been left homeless as a result of the earthquake , according to the UN 's latest estimates . 
More than 500 makeshift camps have been identified by the Haitian government , which has requested large tents to set up reception centres for the homeless . 
Agencies have assessed 350 sites , which currently accommodate around 472,000 people . 
However , only six of these sites have access to water sources . 
The Haitian government has identified six sites for camps outside of the city , such as land near Croix des Bouquets , and has suggested that these camps should be for 20,000 people each . 
Even before the earthquake only half of Haitians had access to clean water . 
Now most of the remaining water supply been cut off . 
Agencies have been working to provide water and sanitation to as many people as possible . 
On 20 January , 755,000 litres of water were provided to 151,000 people as well as 7,000 bottles of water to hospitals , orphan centres and a police station . 
The ICRC is providing clean water for more than 12,000 homeless people living in three camps . 
The UN is particularly concerned about the situation in Cite Soleil , one of the capital 's poorest neighborhoods , where there is an acute shortage of water . 
Some bottled water is being brought from the Dominican Republic but far more supplies or purification kits are needed . 
The USS Carl Vinson , docked off Haiti , is fitted with water-purifying equipment that can make 400,000 US gallons -LRB- 1.5 m litres -RRB- of drinking water a day . 
Other countries have sent mobile water purification units , which can convert contaminated water from wells and streams into drinking water . 
The UN has set up a `` Food Aid Cluster '' to meet the needs of two million hungry people . 
The World Food Programme -LRB- WFP -RRB- has four fully operational distribution sites - in Champs de Mars , Petionville Club and two sites in Delmas and the number of sites is expected to increase . 
WFP has provided around three million meals to more than 200,000 people since the start of the emergency response - each person getting a five-day ration . 
Most were distributed in the Port-au-Prince area , but also in Jacmel , Leogane , Jeremie , Bainet and Gonaives . 
The UN says the aim is to distribute 10 million meals over the next week , reaching 100,000 people a day . 
One thousand metric tons of ready-to-eat meals will arrive in Port-au-Prince on 27 January . 
Seven US military helicopters are being used to support aid distributions in areas around the capital . 
The leading US general in Haiti has said it is a `` reasonable assumption '' that up to 200,000 people could have died in last Tuesday 's earthquake . 
Lt Gen Ken Keen said the disaster was of `` epic proportions '' , but it was `` too early to know '' the full human cost . 
The disposal of dead bodies has been a key priority for the relief effort . 
The bodies of thousands of victims have been piling up in the streets and outside hospitals . 
Many more remain trapped beneath rubble . 
More than 80,000 dead people are reported to have been buried , many of them in mass graves . 
The presidential palace , the parliament and many government buildings have collapsed , hampering an already weak central government . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon says the agency is co-ordinating relief work with Haitian President Rene Preval , and that government agencies , including the police services , are now regrouping . 
Mr Preval has increased the number of working groups and is designating official group leaders who will liaise with the UN . 
An information hub has also been set up at Judicial Police headquarters in Port-au-Prince . 
The UN mission has set up an operations center at the airport to co-ordinate the work of around 26 international search and rescue teams . 
It says no more urban rescue teams are appropriate at this stage . 
Several relief agencies ' offices , including the UN 's , are damaged and their staff dead or missing . 
Co-ordination efforts are also being hampered by frequent power cuts and communications outages . 
The US naval ship Comfort is a fully-equipped `` floating hospital '' UN health specialists say at least eight hospitals or health centres in the capital collapsed or suffered severe damage . 
Most public and private hospitals still standing were stretched to the limit in the immediate aftermath , with not enough staff to handle the hundreds of wounded waiting at their gates , the Red Cross said . 
Many of the injuries have been appalling . 
International surgeons have been carrying out an average of about 50 amputations a day . 
Field hospitals have been set up by teams from Russia , Israel , Colombia , Jordan and Brazil - including some with resources to perform neurological , orthopaedic , maxial-facial and general surgery . 
Helicopters have also been ferrying the wounded to hospitals in nearby countries . 
The US hospital ship , USNS Comfort , with 500 medical personnel and 250 beds onboard , arrived in Port-au-Prince harbor on 20 January and has treated more than 230 people . 
