Rajan Datar | 10:57 UK time , Friday , 22 January 2010 The UN has described it as the worst disaster it has ever been involved in . 
With an estimated 200,000 dead , a million and half displaced and an entire infrastructure flattened , it 's not hard to see why the earthquake in Haiti earns that tragic description . 
But what has it been like for broadcasters like the BBC World Service attempting to provide a `` lifeline '' service for those in Haiti ? 
This is a situation where the normal principles of journalism are challenged because the role of broadcasters becomes more than just one of simply observing and documenting . 
This has certainly been the experience of the BBC Caribbean unit which is providing extra programming for audiences in Haiti , in different languages . 
This week the unit 's head , Debbie Ransome , tells Over To You how it has reacted to the events of the past ten days or so and how it has balanced the role of news gathering with a desire to ease the suffering . 
It has often been the case that a BBC reporter has reached a devastated area before the aid agencies - so what then is the first responsibility of that individual ? 
Listen if you can to this fascinating insight from Debbie on this week 's program . 
And still on Haiti , listener Francis Noel from Trinidad and Tobago contacted us to query the tone of some of the news reporting - in particular , references in the coverage to `` looting '' and `` lawlessness '' in the aftermath of the earthquake . 
He is not alone - the head of the UN mission in Haiti , Edmond Mulet has been critical of the concentration on relatively few looting incidents , and described coverage of these as `` exaggerated '' . 
It all reminds me of the comment from rapper and producer , Kanye West about the reporting of Hurricane Katrina , more than four years ago . 
`` I hate the way they portray us in the media , '' he said . 
`` If you see a black family , it says they 're looting . 
See a white family and they are looking for food . '' 
We are planning to discuss the BBC 's coverage of Haiti with a senior newsroom executive on a future program , so if you have any thoughts or comments , make sure you let us have them . 
And also in this week 's program , Over To You 's producer , Cathy Packe , goes to the British Museum and takes a look behind the scenes of the making of a major new World Service series entitled `` A History of the World in 100 Objects . '' 
She told me how JD Hill , one of the senior curators involved in the programs , gave her a piece of rock to hold . 
It turned out to be a stone chopping tool , and was nearly two million years old - and as she inspected it more closely she could make out its multi-functional , albeit basic , design . 
And in the first program in the series , presenter Neil McGregor uses a replica of it to carve his roast chicken ! 
Beat that Apple - I bet none of your fancy iPhone applications can do that ! 
Rajan Datar is the Presenter , Over To You Over To You is your chance to have your say about the BBC World Service and its programs . 
It airs at 10:40 and 23:40 every Saturday , and at 02:40 on Sunday -LRB- GMT -RRB- . 
Send the team your feedback by email -LRB- overtoyou@bbc.co.uk -RRB- , telephone -LRB- 44144960900 0 -RRB- , SMS -LRB- 447786 202006 -RRB- or by leaving comments on this blog . 
No comments to display yet . 
Welcome to the Over to You blog - the place where you can ask BBC World Service editors and program makers how and why we make the decisions that we do . 
We need your comments - so please join in . 
For the latest updates across BBC blogs , Subscribe to Over To You You can stay up to date with Over To You via these feeds . 
These are some of the popular topics this blog covers . 
