AMMAN | Wed Sep 14 , 2011 10:21 am EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - From his window on the corniche of Syria 's Mediterranean port city of Tartous , an international shipper bemoans the change since a popular uprising six months ago engulfed the country and dealt a heavy blow to its economy . 
`` At night , ship lights made Tartous extend into a city on the sea ; now it 's like a small village . 
The port 's sealine was full of vessels -- now the berths are nearly empty , '' said the shipper , who opened an agency in Tartous to cash in on a boom in traffic after the Iraq war wound down . 
Street protests demanding the removal of Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad , many of them bloodily suppressed , have shrunk traffic at the country 's ports and damaged its hopes of capitalizing on its position as a Middle East crossroads to grab a bigger share of transit business . 
The exact extent to Syria 's economy is being hurt by the unrest and resulting international sanctions is not clear ; official data is scarce . 
But many analysts expect gross domestic product to decline this year , perhaps by several percent or more . 
At the start of this year , the International Monetary Fund predicted it would grow 3 percent . 
Shippers and businessmen say exports have dropped as foreign customers have cut orders , while Syrian importers have delayed orders because of the uncertainty . 
Meanwhile , companies which used Syria as a conduit to conduct trade with other countries in the region are seeking different routes . 
Syria 's principal port of Latakia , where the military deployed three months ago , has been hit hard along with Tartous . 
`` Even the Mediterranean cruise liners that came to Latakia and Tartous , and had hundreds of Italian and Spanish tourists , have not come this year , '' said the international shipper , who did not want to be named because of the sensitivity of the issue . 
Shipping sources say traffic in general cargoes , dry and liquid bulk cargoes , and containers at Latakia and Tartous has been slipping since the uprising broke out in March . 
They estimate volumes shrank an average 35 to 40 percent from a year earlier in the first eight months of 2011 . 
`` Importers and exporters are being very cautious , and that has led to imports of raw materials falling sharply as production slows down in many industries due to the troubles , '' a Syrian transportation official , who requested anonymity , told Reuters from Damascus . 
Shipping agents and industry experts said container volumes , the vast majority of which are handled by Latakia , dropped in June alone by 36 percent from a year earlier to 33,527 twenty-foot equivalent units -LRB- TEU -RRB- . 
Official Latakia port figures for the April-June period show a drop of 16 percent from a year earlier , but industry sources said this data was misleading because it included many containers with empty space . 
In Tartous , which handles most of Syria 's bulk cargoes , or nearly 9 million tonnes of annual traffic in normal times , shipping sources said some European operators were avoiding the port after the European Union announced sanctions on Syrian oil exports at the start of September . 
They said they were also seeing less business from Iraqi and other Arab traders who were deterred by the increasing checkpoints and roadblocks in many parts of Syria . 
`` We had 25 to 30 vessels daily arriving . 
This has dropped to between 10 to five daily , '' said a major shipping agent based in Tartous , referring to vessels between 8,000 and 35,000 tonnes . 
So far , major regular shipping lines such as Danish firm Maersk , French-based CMA CGM , Geneva-based MSC , and Germany 's Hamburg Sud have largely maintained normal vessel calls to Syrian ports despite lower cargo volumes , industry sources said . 
Shipping agents say the companies are reluctant to pull out of a transit market that has served the whole region and still has great long-term potential because of its location . 
`` No major regular shipping lines are quitting at the moment . 
Once they withdraw from any service , it 's very hard to restore , '' said Talal Halawani , a shipper whose Amman-based Liberty Shipping is an agent of a leading Italian line . 
`` Although they are suffering because cargo is not like before , they are still operating normally despite all the constraints . 
It 's a wait-and-see attitude . '' 
But other regional companies with no regular services have less ability to sustain losses , and they have omitted port calls or canceled visits to Syrian ports altogether . 
`` Liners that made container ship calls four times a month are now calling three times a month . 
Some regional liners , including one or two Turkish liners , have even dropped port calls altogether , '' said a second Syrian transportation official . 
Some shippers are seeking to offset the drop in their Syrian trade by offering more competitive rates for container slots in nearby Beirut , Mersin and Alexandria ports , which are in the same Europe-Mediterranean service . 
The turmoil has prompted many lines to suspend plans , some drawn up only a few months ago , to add more container slots or introduce bigger vessels on Syrian port calls in anticipation of demand related to the reconstruction of Iraq . 
Over the past five years , Syrian ports were able to boost their transit trade with Iraq , Jordan and the Arabian peninsula as Syria 's red tape and state controls , a legacy of five decades of Soviet-style economic management , were reduced . 
Latakia and Tartous were also revitalised by the award of contracts to manage their container terminals to foreign investors in partnership with local investors linked to the Assad family . 
The foreign investors -- CMA CGM in Latakia , and the Philippines ' International Container Terminal Services in Tartous -- upgraded the facilities and helped to nearly double the ports ' container traffic last year to 620,000 TEU from around 365,000 TEU in 2004 . 
Nearly 40 percent of Latakia 's total incoming cargo volume has been Iraq-bound , shippers and Syrian transportation officials say , while for Tartous the figure has been as high as 70 percent . 
Syrian ports ' flexibility and lower costs gave them a competitive advantage in Iraq-related business against Turkish and Lebanese ports and Jordan 's Aqaba . 
Lower land transport costs were also a plus , along with the ability to bypass Suez Canal fees paid by importers using Jordanian and Saudi ports on the Red Sea . 
Now , Iraqi , Jordanian and Saudi Arabian importers , who have used Syrian ports in recent years for bulk cargoes of wood , marble , steel and grains from the Black Sea area and North and Central Europe , are looking for alternatives . 
`` We are getting increasing inquiries from local and Iraqi traders who want to bring their goods to Jordan by sea from Turkey or other markets . 
This business traditionally would go to Syrian ports . 
Even goods that would normally go by land via Syria are now being shipped , '' said Captain Wahid Abu Ajamieh , general manager of CMA CGM Jordan . 
`` This is an indication that something odd is happening . '' 
