TOKYO , Sept 14 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Japan 's top golfer Ryo Ishikawa has been fined $ 26,000 for pulling out of two tournaments in August and September , the JGTO Tour said on Wednesday . 
The 19-year-old withdrew from the Kansai Open and last week 's Toshin tournament , which he missed for the second year running , citing a sore shoulder . 
But Japan 's JGTO Tour took a dim view of Ishikawa 's decision to pull out again and slapped him with the first such fines for three years on the men 's tour as punishment . 
`` Rules are rules , '' the tour 's executive director Andy Yamanaka told Reuters . 
`` They are put in place to protect the tournaments . 
They are not rules only for Ryo . '' 
Yamanaka insisted the Japanese tour would not make any special concessions to Ishikawa 's enormous celebrity in Japan , where his grinning face looks down from giant billboards and appears frequently on TV commercials . 
`` Yes he 's a superstar but he is also one of 200 -LRB- JGTO -RRB- members and everyone plays under one set of rules . 
You should not change rules for one person . '' 
JGTO chairman Tadashi Koizumi said the organization would `` get tough '' next year to tighten the rules and prevent players suddenly pulling out of tournaments . 
`` We want the players to support the Japanese tournaments , '' said Yamanaka . 
`` They ca n't just pay money and take time off , so we want to amend the rulebook . 
`` Even if Ishikawa goes off and plays on the American PGA Tour he will still have to abide by our rules . '' 
Ishikawa apologised and produced a doctor 's note . 
`` My left shoulder felt like it was about to dislocate , '' Japan 's brightest hope for a future men 's major champion told the Nikkan Sports . 
`` The doctor told me if I played on , it would develop into chronic inflammation so I made the tough decision to withdraw . 
`` Last year I was playing in Europe so had to pull out . 
It 's bad timing . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Ossian Shine and Alan Baldwin . 
To query or comment on this story email sportsfeedback@thomsonreuters.com -RRB- Double-click on the newslinks : for more golf stories An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
