LONDON | Wed Sep 14 , 2011 4:21 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Somali pirate attacks are expected to surge in coming weeks after a monsoon abates , but defense cuts will undermine international efforts to fight them , a senior European Union navy official said on Wednesday . 
Pirate attacks on oil tankers and other ships are costing the world economy billions of dollars a year and navies have struggled to combat the menace , especially in the vast expanses of the Indian Ocean . 
`` The general trend for navies around the world is for them to have gone through a strategic defense review or something similar and emerged with either no more or in many situations less ships , '' said Captain Keith Blount , chief of staff with EUNAVFOR , the bloc 's counter-piracy naval mission off Somalia . 
`` Balancing priorities is very difficult for governments and counter-piracy I am afraid has to fight for its place in that list of priorities , '' he told Reuters in an interview . 
Naval patrols , including vessels from the European Union , the United States , South Korea , Iran and other nations have curbed the number of attacks in the Gulf of Aden , though not in the Indian Ocean . 
Attacks have also slowed in the past two months due to poor weather conditions . 
`` I think we are going to see a surge in piracy because we always have done at this time when the southwest monsoon abates and the seas become flatter , '' Blount said . 
`` Typically the pirates have a really good go in the autumn and winter , '' he said on the sidelines of a shipping conference . 
Blount said there were `` conflicting priorities with other real military activity '' in the Middle East , North Africa and other arenas . 
`` It is the challenge of industry and the military involved in counter-piracy to lobby governments to try and see piracy as a higher priority than it is , '' he told the conference . 
In recent days a French woman seized by pirates was freed after a Spanish navy patrol boat fought a fierce gun battle off the Somali coast . 
Blount said the military wanted to be able to operate closer to the coasts of Yemen and Eritrea . 
He said navies were currently only allowed to tackle piracy on the high seas , outside territorial waters , according to the terms of a U.N. convention . 
`` There is diplomatic activity to try and allow us have a little bit more freedom to operate in those areas , '' he said . 
`` Because we believe the same people are involved , we would like dearly to be able to get in there and get stuck in . '' 
The shipping industry , some of whose members already employ private guards , says better armed and increasingly violent seaborne gangs pose a growing threat to vital sea lanes . 
Blount said the military was `` completely agnostic '' on private armed guards , and nations , flag states and the industry had to be clear on whether they backed using contractors . 
`` I think a ship with private security onboard will be taken successfully by pirates -- it is a matter of time , '' he said . 
The industry last week urged the United Nations to create an armed military force to be deployed on vessels to tackle Somali piracy . 
`` The current military response -- with only a handful of navy ships available to provide protection on any given day -- has just been a sticking plaster on a gaping wound , '' said International Chamber of Shipping chairman Spyros Polemis . 
`` Governments have so far failed to protect shipping , and the smooth flow of world trade , from being literally held to ransom by Somali criminals , '' he said on Wednesday . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
