By Lina Sinjab BBC News , Damascus Thousands are still taking to the streets on a daily basis to call for freedom Nadine and George , whose names have been changed , are working on secret plans for civil disobedience against Bashar al-Assad . 
They are part of a peaceful movement for change that has been lobbying against the Syrian president for a year . 
They have so far dyed the water red in public fountains across Damascus , which they say represents the blood lost during the uprising . 
They have also set up speakers in central squares to broadcast revolutionary songs , distributed flyers to encourage people to protest against the government , and shone lasers from top of Mount Qassioun , which overlooks the capital , calling for `` freedom '' . 
But as the uprising enters its second year and the number of dead women and children increases , Nadine and George are having second thoughts . 
When I see this , how can I preach people not to take up arms - they have a right to defend themselves '' End Quote George Opposition activist `` We were going to throw eggs on pictures of the president tonight , but what would that help with all this blood ? '' 
Nadine asks , looking at the latest pictures on the television of children massacred in Homs . 
`` When I see this , how can I preach people not to take up arms - they have a right to defend themselves , '' George adds . 
They both look desperate - many activists in Syria are beginning to feel that the peaceful movement for change has reached an impasse . 
Thousands of protesters are still taking to the streets on a daily basis to call for freedom , but the more violent the crackdown by security forces becomes the more opposition supporters are advocating armed resistance . 
There are hardly any tourists in Syria . 
At first sight , foreign visitors to Damascus would not feel much is different from last March . 
There have , however , been dramatic changes . 
Images of the crackdown on dissent in Syria have caused outrage worldwide during the past year The capital 's streets are busy during the day , with people going to work and carrying out errands . 
But the evenings are far quieter than usual and you can feel the tension everywhere . 
Although there are daily protests in various districts and suburbs of Damascus , the regime is still very much in control . 
Public pictures of President Assad are more widespread than they were a year ago , as a result of a series of `` We love you '' campaigns run by his supporters . 
Pictures of the violence and torture perpetrated by his government 's forces are meanwhile circulated over coffee inside people 's sitting rooms or around dinner tables . 
The debate is always heated ; a political solution is needed . 
This is the line that many here in Syria agree on , but how to proceed ? 
Sitting at his desk , smoking a cigarette and mobile phone constantly ringing , Louai Hussein is the head of a new movement , Building the Syrian State . 
Louai Hussein holds the government responsible for what is happening in Syria He says the only way forward is a political solution and dialogue with the government on a peaceful transition of power . 
`` But the violence must stop first , '' Mr Hussein says . 
Although he holds the government responsible for what is happening in Syria , Mr Hussein fears arming the revolution will create more chaos . 
The special envoy of the United Nations and Arab League , Kofi Annan , visited Damascus over the weekend and presented President Assad a peace initiative . 
Mr Assad says a political solution will never succeed while `` terrorists groups '' are operating in the country , but Mr Hussein believes the former UN secretary general can find a solution . 
`` Mediation is the only way out . 
All parties should be involved in a political solution . '' 
Taking up arms will be a dead end for the revolutionaries '' End Quote Bassam Youssef Secretary General , Together for Syria The rest of the opposition is split over whether to take up arms . 
Many protesters - particularly in towns and cities which have borne the brunt of the crackdown on dissent - want the international community to support the Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- , a rebel group led by army defectors who they say is protecting them . 
But others believe that might only make things worse . 
`` They are armed because they are desperate and have lost hope of a political solution , not only because they are facing daily violence , '' Mr Hussein says . 
`` But if you provide them with some hope , they may give up on the military solution . '' 
Bassam Youssef , another opposition figure , believes arming the opposition will only lead to a civil war . 
Several states have advocated arming the opposition in Syria so people can defend themselves `` Taking up arms will be a dead end for the revolutionaries , '' he says . 
`` It is the path the regime has pushed for , because it will distance the protesters from the civil nature of the revolution . '' 
Mr Youssef is the secretary general of the Together for Syria movement , which was established in June and aims to achieve the end of President Assad 's rule through a transitional phase and the formation of a national unity government . 
`` The regime kept blaming the problem on armed groups , until the myth turned into reality , '' he adds . 
`` Now there are armed people within the opposition . 
They had to because they needed to defend themselves . '' 
Mr Youssef still believes that politicians and intellectuals should make efforts to convince people not to arm themselves , and that the only way out is to follow the non-violent path to revolution . 
Many in Syria , even the government 's supporters , believe there must now be a concerted effort to find a political solution . 
The question remains , how far President Assad 's government - the most powerful side in this conflict - is willing to commit to one . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
