Syria crisis : Kofi Annan seeks to set up monitoring team Thousands have fled an army offensive against the rebels in northern Syria The UN and Arab League envoy on Syria , Kofi Annan , says he is sending a team to Damascus to discuss setting up a new international monitoring mission . 
After briefing the Security Council about his peace efforts , Mr Annan renewed calls for an end to fighting and for unimpeded humanitarian aid . 
Syria said it was ready to co-operate with Mr Annan , but also reaffirmed its determination to combat `` terrorists '' . 
Meanwhile the Turkish government has urged its nationals to leave Syria . 
The foreign ministry in Ankara said developments in Syria have led to `` serious security risks '' . 
Mr Annan , who held talks with President Bashir al-Assad in Damascus last week , briefed the Security Council in New York via a video link from Geneva on Friday . 
In a news conference later , he said : `` I will be sending teams in this weekend to pursue the discussions on the proposals we left on the table . '' 
Kofi Annan : `` I will be sending a team in this weekend to pursue the discussions '' He also restated the main aims of his peace initiative - an immediate ceasefire by both sides , access for humanitarian aid , and the beginning of political dialogue . 
BBC Middle East editor Jeremy Bowen says it is an ambitious plan that at the moment looks more likely to fail than to succeed . 
Mr Annan said he had urged the Security Council to speak with `` one voice '' . 
The international community remains divided on Syria , with Russia and China both blocking UN Security Council resolutions on Syria and aid groups from 27 countries urging them to condemn the government 's use of violence . 
But the two permanent members have backed Mr Annan 's peace mission . 
Jonathan Head BBC News , Turkey-Syria border With refugees streaming across the border at a rate of up to 1,000 a day , Turkey is being forced to rethink its policy towards Syria . 
Public anger over the reports of terrible atrocities by President Assad 's forces , and over the detention and alleged torture of two Turkish journalists , are also putting pressure on the government . 
That may be why Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his ministers are for the first time talking openly about establishing a buffer zone , to protect civilians , inside Syria . 
It would involve Turkish troops crossing the border to protect the buffer zone , and inevitably bring them into conflict with the Syrian army . 
That is a very big step for Turkey to take , and it is unlikely to happen unless the flow of refugees becomes a tide of many tens of thousands , and Turkey gets a green light , if not from the UN - at least from its Western allies and the Arab League . 
Mr Annan was speaking a day after the first anniversary of the country 's uprising , which has left more than 8,000 people dead . 
The violence has continued despite a month-long observer mission sent by the Arab League in December and January . 
Its aim was to verify implementation of a now defunct peace initiative . 
Fresh protests were held on Friday in cities across Syria - including Idlib in the north where the government has launched a fierce offensive against the rebel Free Syrian Army . 
Many anti-government demonstrators called for foreign military intervention . 
Clashes between rebel fighters and the army were also reported in several parts of the country . 
President Assad insists his troops are fighting `` armed gangs '' seeking to destabilise Syria . 
The Turkish foreign ministry on Friday issued a statement saying : `` Developments in Syria pose serious security risks for our nationals . '' 
`` Therefore it is strongly recommended that Turkish nationals currently in Syria leave and return home . '' 
The ministry also said consular services in Damascus would end at the end of office hours next Thursday , but the consulate in the second city of Aleppo would remain open . 
Two Turkish journalists are currently missing in Syria , and are reportedly in the hands of the security forces . 
Some reports say they have been wounded and tortured . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
