U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Libya rebels battle for refineries in east and west ZAWIYAH , Libya | Thu Aug 18 , 2011 3:52 am IST ZAWIYAH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebels to the west and east of Libya 's increasingly isolated capital fought forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi on Wednesday for control of oil facilities vital to winning the six-month-old civil war . 
In Zawiyah , 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli , they assaulted a coastal oil refinery to try to drive the last Gaddafi forces out and tighten their noose around the capital . 
A rebel spokesman said a pipeline to Tripoli was cut . 
There was no word on the outcome of their assault after nightfall . 
In Brega , on the eastern front , rebel forces said they had suffered 18 killed and 33 wounded on Tuesday and Wednesday in their battle to dislodge Gaddafi forces from the oil port and refinery , where they have been fighting for many days . 
Fifteen of the rebels were killed on Tuesday and three on Wednesday , said spokesman Mohammad Zawawi . 
Libyan state television showed video of Gaddafi supporters at the Brega terminal on Wednesday chanting the leader 's name . 
After 41 years of supreme power , 69-year-old Gaddafi seems isolated . 
Rebel forces are closing in from the west , south and east , cutting off his Tripoli stronghold on the Mediterranean shore . 
Gaddafi 's whereabouts are not known . 
Aided by NATO 's fighter-bombers , assault helicopters and naval blockade , the rebels have transformed the battle in the last few days after many weeks of stalemate . 
Zawiyah controls the western highway linking Tripoli to Tunisia . 
Gaddafi forces were holding the refinery there and harassing rebels in the city with shelling and sniper fire . 
`` There are some snipers inside the refinery facility . 
We control the gates of the refinery . 
We will be launching an operation to try to take control of it shortly , '' a rebel fighter , Abdulkarim Kashaba , said earlier on Wednesday . 
A rebel spokesman from the opposition-held city of Misrata to the east of Tripoli said rebels had found the buried bodies of civilians they said had been slaughtered by Gaddafi forces . 
`` We discovered a mass grave containing 150 bodies in Tawargha . 
These are the corpses of civilians kidnapped from Misrata by Gaddafi 's loyalists , '' he said . 
Rebels found a video `` showing kidnappers cutting the throats of people '' , he said . 
The spokesman said rebel forces were now outside a place called Hisha about 100 km -LRB- 60 miles -RRB- west of Misrata on the road to Tripoli . 
`` They are now on the coastal road , '' he said . 
Zawiyah 's refinery is one of the few sources of fuel for Gaddafi 's troops and the people of Tripoli . 
A rebel commander said the pipeline linking it to Tripoli was severed on Tuesday . 
Gaddafi 's green flags were still flying from a refinery building and an electrical pylon in Zawiyah . 
The rest of the city now flies the red , black and green flag of the rebels . 
Streets were largely deserted apart from clusters of fighters . 
Medical workers said three people were killed and 35 wounded on Tuesday , mostly civilians . 
If the pipeline to Tripoli is indeed cut , `` that would imply dire consequences for the population in Tripoli in terms of fuel supplies needed for the city to keep operating '' , said Fernando Calado of the International Organisation for Migration . 
Calado said there had been a sharp increase in the past week in the number of foreign nationals asking to be evacuated . 
He estimated that more than 300,000 foreigners remain in Tripoli , including many from the Philippines and Sri Lanka , as well as Libya 's neighbors Chad , Egypt and Tunisia . 
`` We have received 2,000 requests at this point . 
The potential caseload is huge . 
We 're exploring the possibility of land , sea and air evacuations , '' he told Reuters . 
Libya 's rebel National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- denies holding secret talks with Gaddafi to end the war . 
But suspicions persist that some form of end-game negotiation may be going on . 
The NTC , however , insists Gaddafi step down and leave Libya , saying talks ignoring this basic demand would be `` unthinkable '' . 
