ZAWIYAH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Libyan rebels seized an oil refinery in the city of Zawiyah and took control of Sabratha further west on the main highway from Tripoli to Tunisia as NATO aircraft struck targets in the capital . 
Air strikes rocked Tripoli several times during the day , witnesses said . 
The targets were not immediately identified . 
ZAWIYAH , Libya , Aug 18 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Libyan rebels took control of an oil refinery in the western town of Zawiyah and blocked the main highway south of the capital on Thursday , further isolating Muammar Gaddafi 's Tripoli stronghold . 
Rebel advances in recent days have cut Gaddafi 's forces off from their main international resupply routes following a months-long stalemate , putting the Libyan leader 's 41-year rule GARYAN , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Driving Muammar Gaddafi 's soldiers from this mountain town south of Tripoli came at a high price for rebel fighter Hamid Mahmoud . 
`` -LRB- My son -RRB- was killed by a sniper while I was on the other side of the street , '' Mahmoud said of his 32-year-old son Ahmed , who fought alongside him during the battle for Garyan . 
ZAWIYAH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Libyan rebels took control of an oil refinery in the western town of Zawiyah and blocked the main highway north to the capital on Thursday , further isolating Muammar Gaddafi 's Tripoli stronghold . 
Rebel advances in recent days have cut Gaddafi 's forces off from their main resupply routes following a months-long stalemate , putting the Libyan leader 's 41-year rule under unprecedented pressure . 
RAS JIDR , Tunisia -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Five months after Sudanese worker Mohammed Hassan fled civil war in Libya he is still stranded in a tent city just across the border in Tunisia . 
`` In my own country there is a conflict and violence . 
I can not go there so where do I go now ? '' 
said Mohammed , who comes from Sudan 's troubled Darfur region . 
He left years ago for Libya to escape violence at home . 
representatives of Muammar Gaddafi 's government held negotiations late on Sunday in a hotel in southern Tunisia , a source with direct knowledge of the talks told Reuters . 
A spokesman for Gaddafi 's government denied there were any talks about the Libyan leader 's departure , and said reports about such negotiations were part of a media war against Tripoli . 
There was no immediate comment from rebel officials . 
DJERBA , Tunisia -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Libyan rebels and representatives of Muammar Gaddafi 's government held negotiations late on Sunday in a hotel in southern Tunisia , a source with direct knowledge of the talks told Reuters . 
A spokesman for Gaddafi 's government denied there were any talks about the Libyan leader 's departure , and said reports about such negotiations were part of a media war against Tripoli . 
There was no immediate comment from rebel officials . 
KHARTOUM\/JUBA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- North Sudan has halted an oil shipment from landlocked South Sudan in a dispute over customs fees , it said on Friday , signalling a rise in tensions that could disrupt supplies from one of Africa 's largest producers . 
For use of its oil facilities , North Sudan has demanded fees worth a third of the export value of South Sudan , which became independent last month , after a referendum in January agreed under a 2005 peace deal that ended decades of civil war . 
KHARTOUM -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- North Sudan has halted an oil shipment from landlocked South Sudan in a dispute over customs fees , it said on Friday , signaling a rise in tensions that could disrupt supplies from one of Africa 's largest producers . 
South Sudan became independent last month after a referendum in January agreed under a 2005 peace deal that ended decades of civil war with the North . 
KHARTOUM -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Staring at the small handful of change she got back from a merchant after buying spices and beans in a market in central Khartoum , Nadia Ahmed realizes just how badly inflation is hurting her family . 
`` The market is generally expensive , '' she said . 
`` Food commodities are very , very expensive . '' 
`` I am Senior Correspondent , Saudi Arabia , covering from the Saudi capital Riyadh political , economic and social news and in-depth analyses from the world 's top oil exporter and biggest Arab economy . 
I have also reported for Reuters from Kuwait , Yemen and Iraq . '' 
