Transmission details in the Network Radio Programme Information 7-day version are not updated after publication . 
For updates , please see individual day pages . 
Skip to a day of the week : 7.00-11 .00 pm BBC RADIO 1XTRA AND BBC RADIO 1 -LRB- simulcast -RRB- BBC Radio 1Xtra returns to one of the summer 's biggest party destinations , Ayia Napa , for three days of special programming , culminating in a night of live simulcast broadcasts across BBC Radio 1 and Radio 1Xtra . 
It 's been 10 years since Radio 1 first broadcast from the clubbing capital of Cyprus and , since then , Radio 1 and 1Xtra have visited the resort every year bringing listeners the very best summer flavor . 
Tonight , Westwood and MistaJam broadcast their shows live from the island with special guests and DJ mixes and bring listeners the very best of what Napa has to offer with a mix of the biggest anthems and best summer dance tunes . 
Westwood 's show -LRB- 9-11pm -RRB- comes live from Club Ice in Ayia Napa with two hours of the hottest summer club bangers and PAs , while MistaJam 's show -LRB- 7-9pm -RRB- celebrates 10 years of Ayia Napa . 
During this show MistaJam unveils an exclusive downloadable Jaguar Skillz mix and is joined by special guests . 
Later in the evening -LRB- 11pm-1am -RRB- , Rampage are live from Club Black & White , continuing the party in true Napa style . 
BBC Radio 2 presenter Dermot O'Leary Dermot O'Leary has Saturday Sessions from The Divine Comedy and Emit Bloch . 
Over the years , The Divine Comedy has encompassed other musicians , but the driving force of the band and its main -LRB- sometimes only -RRB- member has always been Neil Hannon . 
Formed as a trio when Neil was still at school , the band 's name was chosen after he spotted a copy of Dante 's epic poem on the family bookshelf . 
More than a decade -- and several side projects -- later Neil recently released Bang Goes The Knighthood , his 10th studio album . 
London-based American singer-songwriter Emit Bloch uses voice , guitar and harmonica to create his lo-fi brand of bluegrass . 
Steeped in the rich musical history of his native America , Emit learned to play the guitar `` on a porch in Utah watching a cowboy named Dave King pluck Hank Williams songs silhouetted against the kind of burnt russet sky that only the Southwest desert can supply '' . 
He secured a recording contract with a demo recorded on a cassette dictaphone at his kitchen table which was eventually released as his debut album , Dictaphones Vol 1 . 
Presenter\/Dermot O'Leary , Producer\/Ben Walker for Labora TV Claudia Winkleman continues to host the irreverent comedy panel show as part of the network 's comedy season . 
Once again , Hot Gossip unleashes UK comics and commentators into the silicon-filled world of glossy magazines and showbiz columns for a unique take on the week 's most `` important '' celebrity news . 
The penultimate program of the series features BBC Two comedy panel show Argumental 's team captain , the Let 's Dance champion for Sport Relief , Rufus Hound . 
Presenter\/Claudia Winkleman , Producer\/Phil Critchlow for TBI Media The mighty Father Willis organ of London 's Albert Hall is unleashed by David Briggs , organist emeritus at Gloucester Cathedral , as Bach Day continues at the BBC Proms . 
The program starts with two contrasting original works for the instrument -- a small-scale chorale prelude based on the Advent hymn Sleepers Wake , preceded by the great Passacaglia in C minor : 21 variations and a fugue founded on a repeated bass line . 
The rest of the program demonstrates the organ 's traditional role playing transcriptions of orchestral works -- a role extending back to Bach 's own day -- including the cantata movement Sheep May Safely Graze , and David Briggs 's own arrangement of the best known of Bach 's orchestral suites , including the popular Air on the G String . 
The program also features two special commissions from young composers who have taken Bach pieces as a springboard for their compositions . 
This Prom is also broadcast live on BBC Two and is repeated on Thursday 19 August at 2pm on BBC Radio 3 . 
Adil Ray explores how the lack of Asian faces in rock and pop has mortified and marginalised generations of music-loving Asian kids in Britain . 
He talks to famous British Asians about why there have been so few Asians in popular music , and finds out why Bhangra and Bollywood can never be enough . 
EastEnders star Nitin Ganatra talks about growing up in the Seventies in Coventry , where his parents ran a corner shop . 
Comedian Paul Sinha remembers being a chess-loving academic kid who did n't care about liking cool music . 
Anita Rani and Hardeep Singh Kohli discuss being called a `` coconut '' -LRB- brown on the outside but white on the inside -RRB- for liking rock and indie music . 
The program also features newsreader Mishal Husain ; writer Sathnam Sanghera ; and Goodness Gracious Me star Kulvinder Ghir about musical passions , parental tensions and the struggle to fit in and be accepted in Britain . 
Helped by Malik Meer , former NME writer and now editor of The Guardian Guide , Adil charts the journey of Asians in British music from Freddie Mercury , who rarely mentioned his Indian heritage , through the rise of the Asian underground to modern-day superstars including MIA . 
The program also hears from Talvin Singh as well as upcoming artists Nadine Shah and Prash Mistry from Engine Earz Experiment . 
Presenter\/Adil Ray , Producer\/Vernee Samuel for Alfi Media Limited Peter Mandelson looks back at his life through the BBC archives The man dubbed Labor 's `` Prince of Darkness '' , Peter Mandelson , looks back at his life through the BBC archives , in the first program of a returning series . 
From Labor PR supremo to cabinet minister and peer , Lord Mandelson reflects on his life in politics . 
He talks to John Wilson about his career , hears recordings of his younger self and discusses how he has changed over the decades . 
Mandelson grew up with Labor in his blood ; his grandfather was Labor cabinet minister Herbert Morrison . 
After university and early jobs he became first the party 's Director of Campaigns and Communications and then MP for Hartlepool . 
After Labor 's 1997 General Election victory , he served in Tony Blair 's cabinet but was forced to resign twice -- once over a home loan and the second time over the Hinduja passport affair . 
After a move to Brussels as European Union Trade Commissioner , a surprise request by the then Prime Minister Gordon Brown saw Mandelson given a cabinet post for an unprecedented third time , serving this time as a peer in the House of Lords . 
In this program , John takes Mandelson through the sound archive of his life from his earliest appearance in the Seventies up to Labor 's 2010 election defeat . 
Presenter\/John Wilson , Producer\/Emma Kingsley for the BBC 12.00noon-6 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Pougatch presents 5 Live Sport on the opening day of the 2010-11 Premier League season , kicking off with live commentary of the opening game as Tottenham Hotspur face Manchester City at White Hart Lane at 12.45 pm . 
There are also regular updates from Inverness CT versus Celtic on the opening day of the Scottish Premier League from 12.15 pm . 
At 3pm there 's commentary from Blackpool 's first match in the top tier of English football since 1971 as they play Wigan at the DW Stadium , and there are also regular updates of the day 's other 3pm kick-offs including Aston Villa versus West Ham United and Bolton versus Fulham in the Premier League , and Millwall versus Hull in the Championship . 
Throughout the day there are reports from cricket 's Twenty20 semi-finals and final at the Rose Bowl , Southampton ; updates from the penultimate day of the European Swimming Championships in Budapest ; and news from the semi-finals of tennis 's Roger Cup in Toronto . 
At 5pm , Mark presents Sports Report , restored to a full hour for the new season , with reports and reaction from all the day 's big games , the classified results read by the legendary James Alexander Gordon and updates from the Premier League 's late kick-off -LRB- at 5.30 pm -RRB- , as Chelsea play West Bromwich Albion . 
6.06-8 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Chapman and Derby County midfielder Robbie Savage present the nation 's most popular football phone-in , 606 -- a new line-up for the new football season and back to its original time slot . 
Mark and Robbie take calls on the day 's big talking points from the opening day of the Premier League and the day 's Championship and Football League matches . 
They also read out the best tweets , texts and Facebook comments . 
Presenters\/Mark Chapman and Robbie Savage , Producer\/Jo Tongue for Somethin' Else BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 11.15am-6 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary of the semi-finals of the Twenty20 Cup comes live from the Rose Bowl , Southampton . 
The first match starts at 11.30 am , followed by the second semi-final at 3pm . 
7.00-10 .15 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary of the final of the Twenty20 Cup comes live from the Rose Bowl , Southampton . 
10.15pm-12 .30 am BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary on the third round of the USPGA Championship comes live from Whistling Straits , Kohler , Wisconsin . 
BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra Publicity Aled Jones says Good Morning Sunday to former Zimbabwean cricketer Henry Olonga . 
This week 's faith guest is Dr Musharraf Hussain from the Karimia Institute in Nottingham who talks about Ramadan . 
Dr Hussain also provides the Moment Of Reflection . 
Presenter\/Aled Jones , Producer\/Hilary Robinson for the BBC Sir Terry Wogan is joined by Fyfe Dangerfield who performs live at the BBC Radio Theatre for this edition of Weekend Wogan . 
There 's also live music from the Elio Pace House Band , plus John `` Boggy '' Marsh drops in with some wit and aplomb , and no Sunday would be complete without a healthy dose of Janet And John . 
Presenter\/Sir Terry Wogan , Producer\/Alan Boyd for the BBC Johnnie Walker presents his show , live from Vintage At Goodwood Johnnie Walker is live at the Vintage At Goodwood festival for this week 's Sounds Of The 70s . 
Founded by designer Wayne Hemingway and Lord March , Vintage At Goodwood is the first festival to celebrate music , fashion , art and design and British Cool from the Forties to the Eighties . 
The Vintage site will host a pop-up high street brimming with designer brands , bars and cafs , a cinema , hundreds of cool cars and the largest vintage clothes market ever assembled . 
There will also be 80 live performances from heritage artists including the Earth , Wind & Fire Experience , The Damned and Alvin Stardust ; 85 pioneering DJs ; five on-site nightclubs ; and a roller disco . 
Johnnie talks to some of the Seventies stars appearing at the festival , including The Faces , who 've reformed especially for the event with an all-new line-up of Ronnie Wood , Ian McLagan , Kenney Jones , Mick Hucknall and Glen Matlock . 
Johnnie reminisces with festival-goers , artists and experts about everything Seventies , from fashion , music , art , design , cars , glitter balls and platforms to naff wallpaper . 
He also visits the Soul Casino which houses a replica mid-Seventies ballroom , complete with wooden dance floor , where archive footage , vintage memorabilia and posters adorn the walls . 
The festival is sure to attract legions of Seventies fans and Johnnie talks to some about their love of the decade . 
Listeners are also invited to send an email to walker@bbc.co.uk and share their memories of the Seventies , live on the show . 
Presenter\/Johnnie Walker , Producer\/Natasha Costa Correa for Wise Buddah Mathematics is defined as the science of quantity and space . 
In this week 's Sunday Half Hour , Brian D'Arcy looks at its logic and reasoning and explores how science and faith sit alongside each other . 
The featured choir is the Eltham College Choir and hymns include Ye Servants Of God , Teach Me My God And King and We Have A Gospel To Proclaim . 
The musical director is Alastair Tighe and the organist is Charles Andrew . 
Presenter\/Johnnie Walker , Producer\/Janet McLarty for the BBC Lucie Skeaping explores the lives and music of Francesca and Settimia Caccini , the two musical daughters of singer and composer Giulio Caccini . 
Caccini was one of the most successful composers and highly renowned singers of his age . 
But lesser known are his two daughters ; in the 17th century both women were highly accomplished singers in their own right , and composers as well , and they both rose to become the highest-paid members of their respective courts . 
Francesca also held another claim to fame -- she was the first-ever female composer of an opera , and has been lauded as the most important female composer between the 12th century Hildegard of Bingen and the 19th century . 
Lucie Skeaping investigates the lives of these two extraordinary women . 
Susan Hitch joins an audience at the Royal College of Music to mark 100 years since the death of Leo Tolstoy , author of War And Peace and Anna Karenina , and a writer whose works regularly appear in the top 10 greatest novels of all time . 
Susan 's guests on stage are James Meek , former Moscow correspondent and prize-winning author of The People 's Act Of Love , set in turn-of-the-century Russia , and Anthony Briggs , translator of a recent edition of War And Peace and a biographer of Tolstoy . 
This program is part of a series of debates at this year 's Proms Literary Festival celebrating the three Russian authors whose anniversaries fall this year : Chekhov , Pasternak and Tolstoy . 
Anna Maxwell Martin stars in The White Devil Patrick Kennedy and Anna Maxwell Martin star in a new production of John Webster 's classic play of murder and revenge , The White Devil , and this adaptation is set in a Fifties underworld . 
The wealthy Brachiano conceives a violent passion for the married Vittoria Corombona . 
Her brother , Flamineo , Brachiano 's secretary , plots to bring his sister and his master together in the hope of advancing his own career . 
Their plans are impeded by the return to Rome of Isabella -- Brachiano 's wife , and sister to the powerful Francisco . 
Desperate for Vittoria , Brachiano arranges to have both Isabella and Vittoria 's husband murdered and , in so doing , makes an implacable enemy of the deadly Francisco . 
The play was first performed in 1612 but this production sets the action in a murky underworld of the Fifties -- a world that seeks to hide its shifting alliances , betrayals and sudden violence beneath a flaky veneer of honor and respectability . 
Patrick Kennedy plays Flamineo , Anna Maxwell Martin plays Vittoria , Shaun Dingwall plays Brachiano , Christine Kavanagh plays Isabella and Peter Wight plays Francisco . 
The cast also includes Frances de la Tour , Sean Baker , Harry Myers , David Seddon , Sam Dale , Michael Shelford , Lloyd Thomas , Tony Bell , Pippa Bennett Warner and Jude Akuwudike . 
The White Devil is adapted and directed by Marc Beeby . 
Sunday 15 to Thursday 19 August 2010 marks 200 years since Chopin 's birth In this Chopin anniversary year , Jonathan Swain leads listeners through some Polish discoveries previously unheard in the UK , and through music of others who lived and worked in exile . 
There are symphonies by ETA Hoffmann -LRB- of Tales Of Hoffmann fame -RRB- , Frantisek Mirecki -LRB- Saint-Sans meets Brahms -RRB- , Henryk Wars -LRB- who wrote the music for Flipper -RRB- , Jozef Elsner -LRB- Chopin 's teacher in Warsaw -RRB- and Erich Wolfgang Korngold . 
There are concertos by Ignacy Jan Paderewski , Clara Schumann and Zygmunt Stojowski . 
There are also waltzes for guitar by Jan Bobrowicz , a piano fantasie by Julian Fontana -LRB- who was a student with Chopin in Warsaw , and was responsible for editing Chopin 's surviving works after his death -- the Op . 
posth 's -RRB- , Opera arias by JMK Poniatowski -LRB- a relation to the last king of Poland -RRB- and a work from 2008 , Wojciech Kilar 's Te Deum . 
On 18 August listeners can enjoy the first UK broadcast of the one-act opera Flis -LRB- The Raftsman -RRB- , by Stanislaw Moniuszko . 
Please note this program starts late Sunday night\/early Monday morning and continues in the early mornings throughout the week . 
Lionel Kelleway and Mark Lawrence hunt for birds ' nests hidden on Dartmoor . 
Thousands of birds make their nests among the bracken and gorse of Dartmoor . 
Finding them is Mark 's passion but , as they are totally hidden , Lionel is keen to learn how he goes about it . 
Lionel joins Mark on a nest-finding expedition to watch him in action . 
Mark explains that it is all about observation -- picking up clues from the behavior of the parent birds which signal where the nests are . 
In just one morning , Mark and Lionel find pippits ' nests , two of which have been taken over by enormous cuckoo chicks ; a whinchat brood just hatched ; and a rare and precious family of young grasshopper warbler chicks . 
Presenter\/Lionel Kelleway , Producer\/Tania Dorrity for the BBC Actress Kathy Burke joins Kirsty Young to choose her Desert Island Discs . 
Kathy talks to Kirsty about her life and career and describes how she would cope on BBC Radio 4 's mythical desert island . 
Presenter\/Kirsty Young , Producer\/Leanne Buckle for the BBC Actress Greta Scacchi pays a personal tribute to the life and work of Aboriginal poet Oodgeroo Noonuccal Greta Scacchi pays a personal tribute to the life and work of Aboriginal poet Oodgeroo Noonuccal , formerly known as Kath Walker . 
A pioneer of Aboriginal poetry , Oodgeroo was the first indigenous Australian woman to have her work published , a milestone in Australian history . 
She was also a trailblazing Aboriginal rights campaigner and environmental activist who paved the way for contemporary Aboriginal artists and political campaigners . 
In this program Greta , who spent much of her childhood in Australia , shares how , over the years , Oodgeroo 's poetry has grown with her and still continues to surprise and excite her today . 
Joining Greta are close friends and family of Oodgeroo who share their memories of this remarkable woman and the impact she had not only on their lives , but also on millions of Australians , too . 
Throughout the program , listeners will hear Oodgeroo 's poems read by Aboriginal actress Roxanne McDonald . 
Presenter\/Greta Scacchi , Producers\/Charlotte Austin and Diana Bentley for Whistledown Productions 12.00noon-6 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Between 12noon and 1pm in BBC Radio 5 Live 's Sunday Roast With Colin Murray , Colin is joined by fans and special guests to look back at Saturday 's football action and preview today 's games . 
From 1.15 pm there 's live Championship commentary on Nottingham Forest versus Leeds United live from The City Ground , plus updates from Motherwell versus Hibernian in the Scottish Premier League -LRB- kick-off at 12noon -RRB- . 
From 4pm there 's live Premier League commentary as Liverpool face Arsenal at Anfield . 
The program also brings updates from the final day of the European Swimming Championships in Budapest and news from finals day of tennis 's Roger Cup in Toronto . 
Award-winning journalist and broadcaster Tim Samuels hosts Men 's Hour . 
Tim is accompanied by leading males from the worlds of entertainment , sport , politics , media and also an on-hand shrink as they leave their comfort zones behind . 
Men 's Hour features familiar people talking about unfamiliar things . 
Choreographer and star of Pineapple Dance Studio , Louie Spence , joins Tim as a regular weekly guest . 
Presenter\/Tim Samuels , Producer\/Jon Holmes for Tonic Production BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 9.30pm-1 .00 am BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Live commentary of the final round of the USPGA Championship comes from Whistling Straits , Kohler , Wisconsin . 
3.55-6 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra brings uninterrupted commentary of the European Swimming Championships from Budapest , Hungary , and the World Paralympic Championships in Eindhoven . 
7.00-11 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Josh Chetwynd and Nat Coombs present BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra 's weekly Major League Baseball program , with a round-up of all the latest news from the week in baseball . 
There 's also live commentary on Kansas City Royals versus New York Yankees in the American League . 
Producer\/Simon Crosse for USP Content BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra Publicity On the eve of the release of the Manic Street Preacher 's 10th studio album , Matt Everitt speaks to the band 's front-man James Dean Bradfield about the music and moments that have defined him and his band 's often troubled history . 
He tells the story of their struggle for recognition as nihilistic Guns & Roses obsessives in Blackwood , Wales , through to the group attaining status as an outspoken and controversial cult band , before finding massive mainstream success as one of the UK 's best-loved bands . 
James also discusses what his Welsh birthplace means to him as an artist ; his relationship with the band 's iconic lyricist guitarist Ritchie Edwards ; the impact his , as yet unresolved , disappearance had on his life and work ; and the emotional route he took to eventually come to terms with the loss of his friend . 
Huey Morgan chats to Kiwi dub , funk and afrobeat collective the Black Seeds . 
He talks to them as they hit the UK to talk about their unique musical style and influences . 
He asks them about the New Zealand music scene , putting out their European releases on Sonar Kollektiv and their upcoming plans . 
BBC Radio 1 DJ Scott Mills After the huge success of last year 's Scott Mills The Musical , BBC Radio 1 DJ Scott Mills and his team return to the Edinburgh Festival Fringe with a new challenge ; to write and perform their own one-man show in front of an entertainment-hungry audience and festival critics . 
Over the past few weeks , Scott , Becky and `` The One That Does n't Speak '' have been asking listeners for ideas and inspiration on how to entertain an audience all on their own . 
Music , comedy , dance , physical theater , opera -- anything goes -- but will any of them create a five-star success ? 
Scott broadcasts live from the Pleasance Courtyard from 4-7pm each day , as the team take it in turns to perform their one-man shows in the evenings . 
Fellow Radio 1 DJ Nick Grimshaw also broadcasts live from the Fringe and takes on the one-man show challenge . 
Scott Mills The Musical was the surprise hit of last summer 's festival -- but can the team do it again , on their own ? 
Nick Grimshaw broadcasts live from the Edinburgh Festival Fringe as he takes up the challenge set by fellow BBC Radio 1 DJ Scott Mills -- to write and perform his own one-man show at this year 's festival . 
Nick will chat to comedians , artists and seasoned Fringe performers on his show each evening , as he gears up to perform for the very first time at the world 's biggest arts festival . 
He will also be joined by one of his BBC Radio 1 friends each night -- Scott Mills , Beccy and `` The One Who Does n't Speak '' -- fresh off stage from their own one-man shows which they are taking turns to perform during the week . 
Will they provide some welcome tips for Nick , or will their experiences only make him more nervous for his own challenge ? 
Nick comes live from Edinburgh Fringe nightly from 10pm-12midnight , broadcasting from the Pleasance Courtyard . 
Empire State Of Mind is a two-part documentary presented by Huw Stephens , who goes native in New York to get under the city 's skin and find out what makes it one of the most fascinating music cities in the world . 
In this first episode , Huw investigates the thriving Brooklyn indie scene which , over the last decade , has introduced the world to numerous influential and critically lauded artists including The Strokes , MGMT and Dirty Projectors . 
With the help of some New York-based friends -LRB- LCD Soundsystem , The Drums , Grizzly Bear , Vampire Weekend -RRB- and Spin magazine journalist Michael Azerrad , listeners discover with Huw how New York 's musical legacy and attitude is the perfect breeding ground for indie music to thrive . 
In the second part of the series Huw looks to hip hop -- the sound that grew from the New York streets to become the sound of global youth culture . 
BBC Radio 1 's Stories explores the musical back-stories of listeners ' favorite artists , eras , genres and scenes . 
Previous episodes of the series have included The Art Of Noise , Africa Makes Some Noise and The A-Z Of Arcade Fire . 
`` Whispering '' Bob Harris joins Ken Bruce for a very special Tracks Of My Years as Bob celebrates the 40th anniversary of his first broadcast on BBC Radio 1 on 19 August 1970 . 
Bob picks 10 of his favorite tracks during the week and reveals the reasons behind his selection . 
Bob 's choices include the very first record he bought -- Paul Anka 's Diana which he bought on 78rpm ; Alone Again Or by Love which was gifted to him by John Peel ; T-Rex 's Get It On which brings back memories of the first T-Rextasy tour ; and Steve Earle 's Guitar Town which launched BBC Radio 2 's Bob Harris Country show back in 1999 . 
And on Friday , Bob reveals his all-time favorite single . 
From 11.50 am on Friday 20 August Bob Harris 's Tracks Of My Years -- The Directors Cut will be available on the BBC Radio 2 website -- bbc . 
co. uk\/radio2 -- offering an extended version in which Bob offers more insight and shares stories about what makes these 10 particular records special to him . 
Bob Harris can be heard on Radio 2 on Saturday nights between 12midnight and 3am and on Thursday nights at 7-8pm for Bob Harris Country . 
Janice Long is joined tonight by the legendary Sir Tom Jones for a special session and chat , recorded in the BBC 's Maida Vale studios . 
Presenter\/Janice Long , Producer\/Mark Plant for the BBC Forget Samuel Sebastian Wesley as a pillar of the Anglican Cathedral world . 
He was an eccentric , inconsistent and irascible character , who frequently abandoned his Sunday duties of conducting the choir or playing the organ to visit the nearest river for fishing . 
His life is one of regret , having left the world of musical opportunities in London at an early age to be considered , from that point , a composer of church music . 
His career spans many churches and cathedrals , most of which he resigned from due to circumstances relating to his neglect of duties , and his outspoken views concerning the clergy 's power over music . 
Wesley is largely forgotten today , but during his time he was rated highly by the likes of Gounod , Parry and Elgar , and he even got to perform duets with Rossini -- his father was also a celebrated composer . 
Other relatives of note include his great uncle John Wesley -LRB- the preacher -RRB- and his grandfather Charles -LRB- the hymn writer -RRB- . 
However , SS Wesley was illegitimate , and he and his siblings were largely shunned by their extended family . 
Donald Macleod marks the bicentenary of Wesley 's birth , surveying the life and music of this bad-tempered composer . 
His career took him from London to Hereford , then on to Exeter and Leeds , moving on again to Winchester and then Gloucester . 
However , Wesley , for most of his life , wished to return to Devon where he 'd been happiest in that rural landscape , fishing in the local streams and rivers . 
He eventually got his wish upon his deathbed , being returned to Exeter to be buried next to his baby daughter . 
Throughout the week there are a number of recordings made specially for the series , including performances by the BBC National Orchestra of Wales , the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra , the BBC Singers and former New Generation artist , pianist Tom Poster -- including an anthem not heard since 1854 . 
In the first of this week 's explorations of Wesley 's life and music , Donald looks at the composer 's childhood and early career , including rare works such as his Piano Waltz , the Benedictus for voices and piano and the orchestral Overture in E. Valery Gergiev and the London Symphony Orchestra perform the scintillating ballet score for The Firebird , which Stravinsky wrote 100 years ago for Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes . 
Based on the Russian folktale of the exotic Firebird imprisoned by the evil magician Kashchey , the work made him famous overnight . 
Scriabin too was nothing if not ambitious : in his Symphony No. 1 in E major he began his symphonic output with a massive work in six movements , complete with a choral finale in praise of art and including two solo vocal roles , taken tonight by members of Gergiev 's Mariinsky Theatre . 
This Prom is repeated on Monday 23 August at 2pm . 
Susan Hitch explores the life and work of Boris Pasternak , Nobel Prize-winning poet and author , who died 50 years ago . 
Her guests on stage at the Proms Literary Festival are Jonathan Myerson , who dramatised Dr Zhivago for the BBC , and Professor of Russian Donald Rayfield . 
Pasternak is most famous in the UK for his sprawling epic novel Dr Zhivago which sets the concerns , desires and stories of individuals in the vast landscape of Russian revolutionary politics and history . 
Susan and guests discuss the circumstances of the book 's publication : it was smuggled out of Russia during the height of the Cold War , and the subsequent film adaptation by David Lean made Pasternak a global literary hero . 
But does that tell the real story of Pasternak ? 
Myserson and Rayfield explore the misunderstood complexity of the novel , and the fact that the compromises Pasternak adopted in his life mean he 's no straightforward Cold War darling of the West . 
This week in The Essay , scientists revisit mould-breaking experiments in history . 
Today , biologist Matthew Cobb ruminates on the quest for spontaneously generated life . 
In the sweltering heat of a 17th-century Tuscan villa , surrounded by jars of putrefying meat , Francesco Redi doubts the idea , handed down from Aristotle , and accepted unquestioningly by his contemporaries , that insects and reptiles emerge without parents from dead flesh . 
The painstaking experiments not only established the notion of testing theories by exhaustive experimentation , but also laid the foundations of modern ideas of continuous heredity in all life . 
Monday 16 to Friday 20 August Stuart Kelly examines the powerful images of Scotland created by Sir Walter Scott . 
His name , image and influence can be seen everywhere , from Scottish banknotes to place names across the globe . 
Sir Walter Scott invented the modern novel , began Scotland 's tourist industry and was the first celebrity author . 
Lauded by contemporary critics and his impressive readership in the 19th century , today he is hardly ever read . 
Stuart examines Scott 's contradictory legacy as best-selling bankrupt , iconic unknown and the Tory defender of the Union who fought to save Scotland 's banking independence . 
Stuart considers the influential images of his own country created by Scott -- the stereotype of the kilted native dwelling within rugged , romantic landscapes -- images that haunt Scotland to this day . 
Stuart was born and grew up in the Scottish Borders . 
He studied English at Oxford and is the literary editor of Scotland on Sunday . 
The book is abridged by Laurence Wareing . 
Presenter\/Stuart Kelly , Producer\/Eilidh McCreadie for the BBC Monday 16 to Friday 20 August The nation 's favorite agony uncle , Mr Spectator , returns for a second series to offer his wit and wisdom on the morals and manners of his countrymen in his daily writings . 
London 1710 ; political upheaval , national debt , spin -- and in the midst of it all , a young , eager and naive Ned Dempsey has just arrived in the capital , determined to make his way in the big city . 
With Britain in debt to the tune of # 9m , Chief Minister and Lord of the Treasury , Robert Harley , has a plan to raise the funds the country so desperately needs . 
However , he requires public support to get his bill through Parliament and to do that he needs someone influential to speak out in support of his scheme . 
Someone with the ear of the country , someone people respect , someone people turn to , listen to and obey -- someone like Mr Spectator ! 
Enlisting the aid of Palace paperboy Ned , Harley determines to track down the elusive Mr Spectator in order to convince him to come out in support of the bill before it goes before the House on Friday . 
In his quest , Ned is swept along in a mercenary world of spin and manipulation , where he must question whether anyone is really who they seem , and whether everything and everyone has their price . 
The cast stars Benjamin Whitrow as Mr Spectator , Bryan Dick as Ned Dempsey , David Schofield as Harley , Christina Cole as Abigail , Jemma Redgrave as Queen Anne , Claire Rushbrook as Anne Baldwin , Sam Dale as Defoe , Stella McCusker as Aunt Maude and David Revels as the Opera Singer . 
The drama is adapted by Elizabeth Kuti from Addison and Steele 's Spectator essays . 
Producer\/Heather Larmour for the BBC A-level results come out soon and some of the pupils who gave it their all will achieve the newly introduced A \* grade . 
To find out what it takes to achieve the new A \* grade at A-level , actress Imogen Stubbs enlists the help of actor Adam Long and director Trevor Nunn -- Imogen 's husband -- who agree to sit an English exam . 
Imogen has watched her children go through the agonising experience of exams and has often wondered who the people are who set the questions and how they mark them . 
In this program , Imogen goes on a quest to discover what the magic ingredient is to achieve the new A \* and talks to teachers , pupils and examiners on her journey . 
Adam and Trevor both agree to sit one A-level Shakespeare exam question to see how they get on when they have it graded by a genuine examiner who does not know who they are . 
Presenter\/Imogen Stubbs , Producer\/Lore Windemuth for Loftus Audio Justin Butcher 's dark comedy is set in Africa and explores globalisation and climate change . 
It presents the Job story from the Old Testament , but with a new twist . 
In the fictional West African country Ghanzania , Mr Job , an African farmer and an unofficial head of his village , has an unshakeable faith in the benevolence of the West . 
There 's a flurry of excitement in the village . 
Mr Kismet from the World Development Agency has sent a letter offering rich rewards if the region sells its timber and moves to cut-flower production . 
Mr Job obeys the WDA scrupulously , even when the instructions prove extremely inconvenient . 
But , as they wait for Mr Kismet 's arrival , a series of disasters strikes . 
The cast stars Jude Akuwudike as Mr Job , Adjoa Andoh as Mrs Job , Danny Sapani as Mr Eliphaz , Kobna Holdbrook-Smith as Mr Bildad , Lloyd Thomas as Mr Achebe and Paul Courtney Hyu as Mr Lucy . 
Producer\/Claire Grove for the BBC Mike Thomson returns for a new series of BBC Radio 4 's investigative history program which examines documents that shed new light on past events . 
The series begins with a paper trail surrounding an oil disaster -- not the most recent example in the Gulf of Mexico but one much closer to home , in the North Sea . 
While President Obama has told BP that it will be held fully responsible for cleaning up the damage caused by the massive oil spill off the American coast , papers seen by Document show that the oil company Occidental got off far more lightly after the Piper Alpha disaster in 1988 off the Scottish coast , which left 167 people dead . 
After seeing the recently released documents , the environmental pressure group Greenpeace claims too little was done to deal with more than five tons of highly toxic chemicals released in the disaster . 
The documents also shed light on the decision to topple the remains of the Piper Alpha platform , an operation that threatened to worsen contamination and was fiercely opposed by relatives who wanted the search for bodies to continue . 
Mike speaks to marine biologists , politicians from the time and survivors to find out if more should have been done to clean up after the disaster . 
Presenter\/Mike Thomson , Producer\/Julia Johnson for the BBC 7.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Chapman is live from Old Trafford with all the day 's sports news and is joined by special guests for The Monday Night Club to discuss the latest big football stories . 
At 8pm there 's Premier League commentary of Manchester United versus Newcastle United , live from Old Trafford . 
Uninterrupted commentary of the World Paralympic Championships comes from Eindhoven . 
Flying Lotus , aka Steven Ellison , joins Nemone to discuss his current album Cosmogramma . 
Flying Lotus is an electronic artist\/hip-hop beat-maker currently signed to Warp Records . 
Being the great-nephew of Alice Coltrane , John Coltrane 's wife , Ellison comes from musical heritage . 
His new ambitious 17-track LP features Laura Darlington , Ravi Coltrane and Thom Yorke , who is a big fan of his work . 
Ellison has since remixed acts like Radiohead and Kanye West , released dubstep-inflected singles on Hyperdub Records and gathered a roster of like-minded artists on his own imprint , Brainfeeder . 
Montreal 's The Besnard Lakes are live in session to play tracks from their new album The Besnard Lakes Are The Roaring Night . 
The band are husband-and-wife duo Olga Goreas and Jace Lasek . 
Their new album boasts influence from ELO to the Alan Parsons Project in its orchestration . 
The album was recorded on Breakglass Studio 's latest acquisition , a 1968 Neve germanium mixing console , which is rumored to have been used to record portions of Led Zeppelin 's Physical Graffiti . 
While Gideon Coe is on holiday new-boy-on-the-block Tom Ravenscroft takes the opportunity to rummage through the BBC 's vast live music archive to play concert tracks from The Smiths and Wilco , and session archive from Norfolk 's early Eighties janglers the Farmer 's Boys , earnest bluesy young Texan Micah P Hinson and warped electronica from Aphex Twin . 
Ameet Chana is sitting in for Tommy Sandhu all week on the Breakfast Show . 
Looking back over the Melas , Ameet highlights the summer 's best bits and talks about the much-anticipated launch of the BBC Asian Network 's A Summer Of Melas highlights program which is available from today for digital TV viewers on the BBC Red Button . 
The program features top performances and highlights from across the summer from each Mela . 
There will also be the usual great music and entertainment from Breakfast . 
The Muslim Brotherhood is the oldest and most influential Islamist movement in the world , having spread from its Egyptian birthplace to the wider Middle East , Europe and even the United States . 
Officially , the group rejects violence in favor of dialogue with other faiths . 
Their objective is to reconcile Islam with modernity . 
But its leadership remains deeply conservative . 
Critics say its world view makes it an entry point for extremism . 
In this two-part series , Magdi Abdelhadi tells the story of the Brotherhood and investigates the group 's intentions , how far their influence spreads and why , despite all the controversy , the group has not only survived but thrived , from the teeming streets of Cairo to the leafy boulevards of American suburbia and beyond . 
Andy McCluskey joins Mark Radcliffe and Stuart Maconie live from Manchester to talk about Orchestral Manoeuvres In The Dark 's new album History Of Modern . 
The classic OMD line up of Andy McCluskey , Paul Humphreys , Martin Cooper and Malcolm Holmes are embarking on a tour this autumn , mixing new material with classic hits . 
Presenters\/Mark Radcliffe and Stuart Maconie , Producer\/Viv Atkinson for Smooth Operations The Final Words Of A Pioneer And Guitar Legend Ep 2\/2 Duane Eddy continues his celebration of Les Paul , the man who not only helped pioneer the solid body electric guitar , but also developed such modern recording techniques as multi-tracking , overdubbing , phasing and tape delay . 
Without Les Paul , popular music would truly not be what it is today . 
And without him , who knows what would have become of the likes of Ace Frehley -LRB- Kiss -RRB- , Albert Lee , Andy Summers -LRB- The Police -RRB- , BB King , Jimmy Page , Jeff Beck , Joe Bonamassa , Joe Perry -LRB- Aerosmith -RRB- , Keith Urban , Nile Rodgers , Peter Frampton and Will I Am -LRB- Black Eyed Peas -RRB- . 
They 're all on-hand to pay tribute to a remarkable musician and an unrivalled musical innovator in the second part of this two-part documentary . 
Presenter\/Duane Eddy , Producers\/Marya Burgess and Paul Kobrak for the BBC Edward Gardner conducts the BBC Symphony Orchestra in the four evocative Sea Interludes from Benjamin Britten 's opera Peter Grimes , followed by the heart-rending strings and tolling bell of the Cantus by Arvo Prt -LRB- 75 this year -RRB- , and the Fifth Symphony by one of Britten 's great friends , Shostakovich -- a work which brought the composer back into favor with the Soviet authorities . 
Former Radio 3 New Generation Artist Alina Ibragimova is the soloist in the new violin concerto by Huw Watkins , commissioned by BBC Radio 3 and which receives its world premire tonight . 
This Prom will be broadcast on BBC Four on 19 August at 7.30 pm and is repeated on Tuesday 24 August at 2.45 pm on Radio 3 . 
Listeners are invited to join Andrew McGregor as we step inside the bow maker 's workshop , following the master craftsman who needs to be engineer , woodcarver and silversmith . 
Twenty Minutes reveals how precision and technical skill are only the foundation of the art and examines the modern-day issues facing bow makers -- such as how Pernambuco , a rare Brazilian hardwood which has been used in the making of string bows for more than 250 years , has been driven to the point of extinction . 
With insights from violinists Rachel Podger and Daniel Hope , listeners discover the difference a good bow can make and how the bow continues to evolve today . 
The thoughtful , dignified , spacious music of Estonian composer Arvo Prt has become one of the most distinctive sounds in contemporary music . 
This evening 's Late Night Prom presents a performance of a choral work which summarises his unassuming and deceptively simple style -- a setting of the Christian Passion narrative from the Gospel according to St John . 
Prt 's St John Passion is not a work in which the harrowing events of Christ 's arrest , trial , crucifixion and death are used as the vehicle for large-scale , overly dramatic musical gestures . 
Rather , the piece makes its impact through quiet understatement and ritualised intensity -- the music only occasionally raising its voice . 
In a noisy , over-emotionalised , hyper-sensitive contemporary world Prt 's piece takes listeners to a place of deep contemplation and solemn ceremony -- sounding both fresh and modern , and -- at the same time -- as if it springs from some great well of primeval music . 
The concert features the BBC Singers with tenor Andrew Kennedy as Pilate and baritone Brindley Sherratt as Jesus , Iain Farrington is the organist and David Hill the conductor . 
Quentin Letts returns with another series of What 's The Point Of ... offering a witty and thought-provoking look at some of Britain 's cherished institutions . 
Over the next four weeks Quentin casts a quizzical eye over Marylebone Cricket Club , the public library , the Kennel Club and , in the first of the new series , the RAF . 
As the nation commemorates the 70th anniversary of the Battle of Britain , Quentin asks whether we still need an independent air force in 2010 . 
Britain was the first country in the world to have an independent air force , so to even consider eradicating it would be unthinkable , surely . 
Defense secretary Liam Fox has promised that the government 's strategic defense review will be ruthless and unsentimental . 
The RAF 's critics claim that a bloated higher command structure in Whitehall argues for unaffordable fast jets for a war the country wo n't be fighting . 
And many say its uniforms are horrible and they ca n't march properly ! 
Historian Max Hastings , war correspondent Sam Kiley , former defense secretary Geoff Hoon and retired colonel Tim Collins are among those who join Quentin to ask the question , what is the point of the RAF ? 
Presenter\/Quentin Letts , Producer\/Rosemary Dawson for the BBC Dr Hilary Jones explores the history of obesity , from the fairground to the tabloids . 
The media , government and medical reports all over the world echo the same sentiment -- the obesity epidemic has arrived . 
But obesity is as old as mankind . 
In this series , Dr Hilary looks back into its history , and asks what can be learned today from the mistakes and successes of overweight ancestors . 
The series starts with an investigation of the immensely corpulent individuals who put themselves on show to the public . 
It begins in Stamford -- scene of the death and extraordinary burial of Daniel Lambert , hailed in 1809 as `` the most corpulent man in the history of the world '' . 
Professor Vanessa Toulmin of the National Fairground Archive and Professor David Haslam , chair of the National Obesity Forum , explore the world of circus obese folk . 
And from America , listeners can hear a snatch of the Strates Carnival in 1941 , featuring Big Bertha and Slim Jim , `` the world 's strangest married couple '' . 
Times have changed , and nowadays the idea of obese individuals exhibiting in freak shows is highly uncomfortable . 
But is the portrayal of obesity in sensationalist , prurient tabloid articles and on TV , the modern-day equivalent of the freak show ? 
Other programs in the series explore depictions of obesity in art , music and literature ; diets through the ages ; and the weird , wonderful and downright dangerous obesity remedies of the past . 
Presenter\/Dr Hilary Jones , Producer\/Susan Kenyon for Ladbroke Productions In the final program of In Living Memory , Jolyon Jenkins explores the rise of the ostrich investment mania of the Nineties -- and why it all went so badly wrong . 
In the mid-Nineties , companies sprung up offering huge returns on ostrich farming . 
Ostrich fever took hold , and birds changed hands at 10 times their true market value . 
It seemed too good to be true -- and it was . 
The Department of Trade moved in and closed down the companies on the grounds that that they were running pyramid schemes . 
In the case of the biggest company , the Ostrich Farming Corporation , an investigation by the Serious Fraud Office revealed that the directors had also been siphoning off millions of pounds into offshore accounts , and three directors went to prison . 
In this program , Jolyon tries to discover why so many apparently intelligent people fell for the ostrich scams . 
He discovers what happened to the ostriches when the Ostrich Farming Corporation collapsed , and he follows the fortunes of the two companies , each run by retired military officers , which were set up to try to carry on ostrich farming . 
Presenter and Producer\/Jolyon Jenkins for the BBC Sheila McClennon discovers how a tiny venue in a converted Paris chapel became one of the most popular and infamous venues in the country 's theatrical history . 
At the end of the 19th century , in the seediest quarter of Paris , a new theater opened its doors offering a recipe of blood and terror . 
Soon the Grand Guignol was to become as big an attraction in the city as the Eiffel Tower and the Arc de Triomphe . 
The success of an evening 's performance -- made up of a succession of short comedy and horror plays -- was measured by how many members of the audience fainted , as they witnessed gougings , garrottings and gory murders on a nightly basis . 
After more than 60 years the theater finally closed its doors , but only after helping influence the development of horror in the cinema , as well as introducing the phrase Grand Guignol into common parlance as a byword for shocking , blood-soaked terror . 
In this program , Sheila visits Paris to revisit the scene of this most shocking of theater movements , she also goes to London to find out how the likes of Joseph Conrad and Noel Coward got involved in its English incarnation , which fought a staunch but unsuccessful battle with the censors at the beginning of the Twenties . 
Presenter\/Sheila McClennon , Producer\/Geoff Bird for the BBC Professor Robert Winston concludes his exploration of the relationship between the music and medical conditions of composers who suffered mental and physical illness . 
Peter Warlock was the pseudonym of Philip Heseltine , a troubled British composer who died of apparent suicide in 1930 . 
Professor Winston wades through the many colorful and outrageous episodes in his life to investigate if the apparent `` Jekyll and Hyde '' quality in his character and his music was the result of a serious psychological condition . 
Presenter\/Professor Robert Winston , Producer\/Chris Taylor for the BBC Michael Butt 's innovative drama delves into one of most illusive events in English literary history -- the killing of the playwright Christopher Marlowe in May 1593 . 
This drama dons the cloak of documentary to get into the heart of the Elizabethan plot . 
The story is told through first-hand testimonies and interviews and explores the anatomy of a killing through the eyes of the witnesses . 
The scene is Deptford on 30 May 1593 . 
Four gentlemen enter a tavern . 
They order lunch , take a room above the public bar and ask for privacy . 
The official story was that a fight resulted after an argument regarding the bill . 
All four gentlemen dealt in the perennial currency of that day : bargains , tricks , betrayals and lies . 
The narrator opens the play while crouching next to Marlowe 's dead body , now growing cold . 
Over the next 45 minutes he speaks to the people who knew Marlowe and enters a world of half-truths and outright lies , as he tries to elicit answers that will finally lead to the truth . 
The cast stars Paul Rhys as Narrator , Blake Ritson as Thomas Walsingham , Harry Lloyd as Thomas Kyd , Burn Gorman as Robert Poley , Tim McMullan as Lord Cecil , Christine Kavanagh as Mrs Bull , Tony Bell as Ingram Frizer , Sam Dale as Richard Baines , Sean Baker as Cambridge Porter and Lloyd Thomas as Drew Woodleff . 
Producer\/Sasha Yevtushenko for the BBC Opening Lines returns to give emerging short-story writers their radio debut . 
Today 's story is Horses by Emma Greengrass . 
The sight of four coal-black horses , glimpsed through the window of a London bus , encourages an elderly lady to believe her luck is changing . 
Julia McKenzie reads this life-affirming story about making every second count . 
Wednesday 's story is The Amazing Arnolfini And His Wife by Jonathan Pinnock . 
A husband-and-wife tightrope-walking team travel across America wowing audiences with their daredevil acrobatics . 
A jaw-dropping finale is promised in this high-wire thriller , read by Laurel Lefkow The final story in this series on Thursday is Kiss by Heather Reid . 
A quirky coming-of-age tale in which thoughts of that all important first kiss occupy the mind of a teenager as she travels home from school on the bus . 
Kiss is read by Morven Christie . 
Readers\/Julia McKenzie , Laurel Lefkow and Morven Christie , Producer\/Gemma Jenkins for the BBC Disgraced American President Richard Nixon Matthew Parris invites historian Dominic Sandbrook to explain why the life of disgraced American President Richard Nixon is , to him , a great one . 
The disgrace and resignation of Richard Nixon in 1974 was a profoundly traumatic moment in the history of the American presidency , leaving the world with the endlessly influential word `` Watergate '' and a cynicism about politics that arguably has only now , with Barack Obama , started to heal . 
Hence Nixon 's life is perhaps a strange one to nominate as `` great '' , but Dominic unhesitatingly selects him for celebration in this program . 
Matthew talks to him about his intriguing choice , and calls on Professor Philip Davies of the Eccles Centre for American Studies to fill out the picture . 
Presenter\/Matthew Parris , Producer\/Christine Hall for the BBC Tim McInnerny and Andrew Sachs star in a comedy about the staff of an antiques shop , in the final part of the BBC Radio and Television collaboration showcasing new comedy pilots . 
Sassy , cutting , clever , perceptive and in desperate need of a job , Faye Chambers is new to the team . 
She joins Rupert Bull , an old school bounder and cad who has somehow managed to survive into the 21st century , and Toby Atkins , his useless but enthusiastic assistant manager . 
Rupert won the shop in a poker competition many years ago , and sees it as little more than a way to make a fast buck . 
In this pilot episode , the immeasurably lovely local shop-owner Mr Richards has a set of priceless Faberg eggs that need restoring . 
Written by John-Luke Roberts and Gareth Gwynn , the cast features Tim McInnerny as Rupert Bull , William Andrews as Toby , Nadia Kamil as Faye , Andrew Sachs as Mr Richards , David Reed as Chicken Seller and Christine Kavanagh as Amulet Seller . 
Producer\/Victoria Lloyd for the BBC 7.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Pougatch has all the day 's sports news and live Champions League play-off first-leg coverage . 
Uninterrupted commentary of the World Paralympic Championships comes live from Eindhoven . 
Lauren Laverne is joined by Surfer Blood for a live session in the BBC 6 Music studios . 
The great hopes of American indie hail from Florida and released their debut album Astro Coast to great acclaim in June . 
They bring their Pavement influenced power pop to the 6 Music audience this morning . 
Klaxons release their new single Echoes , their first new material since their 2007 Mercury winning debut album Myths Of The Near Future . 
Echoes appears on their long-awaited second record , Surfing The Void , which was produced by Korn and Slipknot tweaker Ross Robinson . 
The new-ravers put together some of their influences to hand-pick tracks for this week 's Lunchtime playlist . 
BBC 6 Music presenter Tom Ravenscroft Tom Ravenscroft plays live concert archive from the Psychedelic Furs from 1984 and Gang Of Four at the Indian Summer festival in 2006 . 
Session tracks come from PJ Harvey , late-Eighties Bristol indie-quintet Groove Farm and the alt-country-tinged Cherry Ghost . 
Mike Harding presents an hour of the very best in folk , roots and acoustic music Mike Harding presents an hour of the very best in folk , roots and acoustic music , including an interview with the Carolina Chocolate Drops and music from their album Genuine Negro Jig . 
Based in Durham , North Carolina , the Carolina Chocolate Drops are a rare thing in 2010 : an African-American old-time string band . 
Formed in 2005 by three young multi-instrumentalists -- Rhiannon Giddens , Dom Flemons and Justin Robinson -- the Drops perform traditional music from the Piedmont region of the Carolinas , as well as string band versions of 21st-century hits . 
The three members first met via an internet group and went on to visit and learn from old `` black fiddler '' Joe Thompson , who passed on to them tunes that had been in his family for generations . 
Their name is a nod to Thirties African-American country blues band the Tennessee Chocolate Drops . 
Presenter\/Mike Harding , Producer\/Kellie While for Smooth Operations Mark Radcliffe and Stuart Maconie are live from Manchester with more great music , witty banter and features . 
In tonight 's show , legendary singer Martha Reeves chats to Stuart about her start at Motown and the story behind Dancing In The Street . 
Presenters\/Mark Radcliffe and Stuart Maconie , Producer\/Viv Atkinson for Smooth Operations Legendary Welsh film star Richard Burton BBC Radio 2 takes another trip to the movies this summer , profiling further luminaries of the silver screen . 
The first actor in the spotlight in the BBC Radio 2 At The Movies season is the late , great Richard Burton . 
Michael Sheen grew up in the shadow of the steel and coal industries of South Wales , but there was another towering figure in his youth as he started showing signs of what was to become a glittering acting career . 
That figure was his fellow South Walian Richard Burton . 
Rich , as he was known to his friends , was one of the world 's richest and most famous men in his day . 
But above all else , he was a proud Welshman and an actor of extraordinary power , both on stage and on screen . 
And then of course there were the exploits beyond drama . 
His marriage to Elizabeth Taylor dominated the tabloids of the Sixties and his reputation as a drinker is legendary . 
In this program Michael looks back at the Burton legacy with the help of a selection of family , friends and colleagues , including Burton 's last wife Salley ; his nephew Guy Masterson ; his close friend Robert Hardy ; his biographer Melvyn Bragg ; and film critic Barry Norman . 
And there 's also plenty of the man himself , with that extraordinary voice -- suffused with `` coal dust and rain '' , according to Burton himself . 
Michael aims to measure how much of Burton 's life and work still resonates today , be it the stage performances that entranced audiences ; the films ; or the myth he made , including the grand passion with Taylor for which he sacrificed a family and became pursued by paparazzi . 
But the Burton legacy may be at its most lasting in his championing of the people he revered above all others . 
A copy of Shakespeare 's plays was always at his side , and he cherished poets : Hopkins , Donne and , perhaps above all others , his friend Dylan Thomas . 
One of the greatest treasures in the BBC archive is Under Milk Wood and there , beguiling listeners , is the Burton voice at its very best . 
Presenter\/Michael Sheen , Producer\/Tom Alban for the BBC After a dramatic overture by Beethoven , depicting the heroic Roman general Coriolanus , the orchestra focuses on music from its homeland . 
Rachmaninov is a composer close to the heart of soloist Nikolai Lugansky , who performs the radiant and inventive piano variations Rhapsody On A Theme Of Paganini . 
Tchaikovsky 's orchestral Suite No. 3 in G major was initially conceived as a symphony , but he found this form to be more flexible , and he also included a set of flamboyant variations at the end . 
This Prom will be repeated on Wednesday 1 September at 2.40 pm . 
Stephen Fry investigates whether men and women really use and understand language differently , as his series exploring the highways and byways of the English language continues . 
As a former presenter on Woman 's Hour , Sue MacGregor has a unique insight into the way men used to use language to patronise or dominate , and recalls one of her guests on the program referring to her as `` my dear '' . 
But as women began to win equality there was a genuine need to discover whether and how women and men differed in the way they spoke . 
This program tries to uncover the truth , with the aid of academics , a sex change surgeon , a speech therapist and a bit of comedy from Ronnie Barker . 
Presenter\/Stephen Fry , Producer\/Ian Gardhouse for Testbed Productions Edward Stourton revisits a debate from the archives about the origins of the Second World War , as he continues his series reconsidering passionate broadcast debates of the Sixties and Seventies and exploring the ideas , the great minds behind them and echoes of the arguments in present-day politics . 
From 1961 , historians AJP Taylor and Hugh Trevor-Roper engage in a fiery confrontation over the origins of the Second World War . 
AJP Taylor and Hugh Trevor-Roper were two big-name historians and the `` telly dons '' of their time . 
In 1961 the fall-out from the war was still fresh in the minds of the British people . 
Taylor had just published his provocative revision of the orthodox view of the causes of the war in 1939 -- that Britain had scuppered a lunatic dictator 's plans for world domination . 
Taylor argued , instead , that Hitler was a rational statesman who carried out the expected foreign policies of any German leader , and that a war against Britain and France was unintended . 
In the studio dissecting the debate is Adam Sisman , biographer of both AJP Taylor and Hugh Trevor-Roper , and Richard Evans , regius professor of Modern History at Cambridge . 
Presenter\/Edward Stourton , Producer\/Dominic Byrne for Blakeway Productions Claudia Hammond presents more case studies that help unravel the mysteries of the human mind . 
Today 's program details the remarkable case of a young boy who underwent a gender reassignment operation . 
Janet and Ron Reimer 's twin sons , Bruce and Brian , were born in Winnipeg in Canada in August 1965 . 
All went well until April 1966 , when the twins were circumcised . 
In the process , Bruce suffered a catastrophic injury to his penis . 
A year later , on the advice of Dr John Money , founder of the Gender Identity Clinic at Johns Hopkins University Medical Centre in Baltimore , Bruce became Brenda and the Reimers began to raise their son as a daughter . 
Yet by the time Brenda was a teenager she was suicidal . 
When her parents finally told her the truth , Brenda decided to change back to her original gender ; she became David Reimer . 
As a man , David appeared finally to have found happiness in marriage and stepchildren . 
However , a series of events took their toll : his twin brother 's death , the loss of his job and separation from his wife all proved too much and he took his own life on 4 May 2004 . 
Presenter\/Claudia Hammond , Producer\/Marya Burgess for the BBC Alistair McGowan stars as a late-night BBC Radio 4 continuity announcer in this subversive new sitcom . 
A continuity announcer 's booth can be a lonely place -- especially on the late shift , when you 've barely seen your wife and children for a week . 
But this Radio 4 continuity announcer is a consummate professional , and he 's not going to let his own insignificant little problems get in the way of everybody else 's listening pleasure -- especially when there are so many exciting programs coming up for him to describe to listeners . 
Alistair McGowan stars as the continuity announcer brooding on the escalating disasters of his private and professional life at the same time as attempting to give listeners a preview of the programs on offer in the coming week on Radio 4 . 
Written by Hugh Rycroft -- stalwart of The News Quiz and co-creator of Parliamentary Questions and Life , Death And Sex With Mike And Sue -- the series also features the voices of Lewis Macleod , Sally Grace , Charlotte Page and David Holt . 
Producers\/Frank Stirling and David Spicer for Unique Broadcasting Mark Pougatch has all the day 's sports news and reaction . 
From 8pm The Phil Tufnell Cricket Show reports on the first day of the third Test between England and Pakistan at the Oval . 
10.45am-6 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary on the first day of the third Test between England and Pakistan comes live from the Oval , with the Test Match Special commentary team . 
Friends of the show , Sheffield 's very own garage rockers Bromheads , are live in session . 
The band comprises Tim Hampton and Dan Potter . 
They formed in Sheffield as a three-piece in 2005 and have , to date , released two albums : Dits From The Commuter Belt -LRB- 2006 -RRB- and On The Brain -LRB- 2008 -RRB- . 
Marc Riley is a huge fan and the band are regular guests on the show . 
He loves their energy and enthusiasm , which has n't waned despite losing their third member , bass player Jono West . 
Tom Ravenscroft plays a classic session double from Siouxsie And The Banshees and Bad Manners live from 1981 . 
Hawkwind are Tom 's other archive concert from 1972 , plus there 's a recent Marc Riley session from harpist Serafina Steer . 
Asian Network Reports is at the Oval in London , reporting live from the ground on the third Test between England and Pakistan for the duration of the match . 
In addition , there are live updates every 15 minutes into programs and news throughout the day , from the Asian Network sports team . 
It was 1,400 years ago , in the year 610 of the Common Era , that a man meditating in a cave near Mecca had an experience that was to change the course of history . 
As he reported later , the Angel of Revelation appeared before him , grabbed him and commanded , `` Recite ! '' . 
Despite the man 's initial confusion , the encounter ended with the revelation of the first portion of what was to become the holy book of Islam -- the Quran . 
To mark the anniversary , Razia Iqbal explores the beginnings of the text that continues to inspire Muslims and non-Muslims around the world . 
She finds out why the oral tradition of memorising and reciting the Quran continues to be so powerful 1,400 years after Prophet Muhammad 's closest followers first learned it by heart , and she meets children who eagerly compete in Britain 's national Quran recitation contest . 
At the British Museum , Razia discovers the history of one of the oldest surviving copies of the Quran , and another one written entirely in gold . 
She also finds out what it means that the sacred text has now moved into cyberspace , available to download as text , facsimile , in translation or audio . 
Where does that leave the traditional reverence for the Quran ? 
A London imam -- a self-confessed techno-geek -- provides some surprising answers . 
Jo Whiley presents a special show featuring a headline gig from Scottish singer-songwriter Paolo Nutini . 
BBC Radio 2 In Concert takes Paolo Nutini back to Paisley to perform an exclusive home-coming gig at Paisley Town Hall , recorded on Tuesday 17 August . 
This is the first time Paolo has played a concert in his home town since finding success as a singer . 
Introduced on stage by Jo Whiley , Paolo performs hits from his albums These Streets and Sunny Side Up in front of an audience of Radio 2 listeners and adoring fans . 
The show also features music from local support bands who share the stage with Paolo this evening . 
There are also highlights from an intimate acoustic session featuring Paolo and his band recorded at Paisley Town Hall before the concert , as part of Radio 2 's Great British Songbook . 
Paolo talks to Jo about his career and musical influences , and answers questions from members of the audience . 
Jo also looks back at all the best live music offered up on Radio 2 over the past week , and brings listeners the latest ticket news for up-and-coming tours in her Gig Guide . 
Listeners can contact Jo by emailing inconcert@bbc.co.uk . 
Presenter\/Jo Whiley , Producer\/BBC Radio 2 Live Music Nigel Ogden turns the clock back with a program of popular organ recordings from the 78rpm era which have been re-released on CD . 
The players include Sidney Torch , Reginald Dixon and Dudley Beavan on instruments that , with one notable exception , ca n't be heard today . 
The Compton organ installed in St George 's Hall in London , the home of the BBC Variety Department , was known as BBC Theatre Organ No. 1 but was destroyed during an air raid in 1940 . 
It 's played by Reginald Foort with Alfredo Campoli on violin . 
Dudley Beavan plays the small but extremely effective Wurlitzer that ended up in the Granada , Clapham Junction ; and Harry Davidson , who became better known as a dance band leader , plays one of the few installations in the UK by the Dutch firm Standaart at The Commodore Theatre in Hammersmith . 
The Wurlitzer at Blackpool 's Tower Ballroom has been active since 1935 and is the only organ in the program which can still be heard live today . 
It 's played by Reginald Dixon , who recorded hundreds of 78s at its famous console . 
Before 1941 Sidney Torch regularly displayed his mastery of the theater organ , demonstrating a technical expertise that was second to none . 
After that he hardly ever touched it as he embarked on a glittering career as an orchestral conductor , composer and arranger , but tonight 's program ends with his creation around the song There 's Something About A Soldier played on the Christie Organ at the Regal , Marble Arch , London . 
Presenter\/Nigel Ogden , Producer\/Terry Carter for the BBC Frank Renton presents the Carlton Main Frickley Colliery Band , conducted by Phillip McCann , performing music specially recorded for the program . 
The band features star cornetist Kirsty Abbotts and their tuba talent Ben Dixon . 
They perform music by John Williams , an excerpt from Swan Lake and some classic Salvation Army sounds arranged by William Himes . 
Presenter\/Frank Renton , Prouducer\/Terry Carter for the BBC Sir Tim Rice celebrates Arkansas , the `` Natural State '' , as he continues to celebrate the musical heritage of the United States . 
Tonight there 's music from Johnny Cash , Louis Jordan And His Tympany Five , Ketty Lester , Little Willie John , Al Green , Jerry Keller , Junior Walker And The All Stars , Michelle Shocked with Alison Krauss and Ne-Yo . 
Presenter\/Sir Tim Rice , Producers\/Anthony Cherry and Ruth Beazley for the BBC Michael Buerk talks to Romy Tiongco about his choice to risk his life challenging corruption in the Philippines , as the series exploring the processes behind his guests ' life-altering decisions continues . 
Romy fought against poverty and corruption before leaving to live in Britain with his wife . 
Upon his return to the Philippines he found himself drawn back into a dangerous and murky world which presented him with the most difficult choice of his life . 
After Romy 's best friend was killed , people called upon him to challenge corruption by standing for political office -- a decision that would put his own life on the line . 
Romy talks to Michael about the dilemmas he faced and how he came to make his decision . 
Presenter\/Michael Buerk , Producer\/Amanda Hancox for the BBC David Bowie 's mythical rock star Ziggy Stardust was inspired by British-born singer Vince Taylor , as Martyn Day discovers in this documentary . 
Ziggy Stardust was a rock 'n' roll fantasy . 
But David Bowie 's fictional rock star , around whom his 1972 album , stage show and film were built , was inspired by a real performer : Vince Taylor , born in Isleworth , Middlesex . 
Vince Taylor made a name for himself in the early days of rock 'n' roll in London and , later , France . 
This program uncovers the truth about a singer whose wild lifestyle ultimately destroyed him , but in so doing gave rise to a myth that transcended glam rock and science fiction . 
His record Brand New Cadillac remains to this day a British rock 'n' roll classic , covered later by The Clash . 
But Vince was frustrated by his limited success in Britain and , already displaying the unpredictable behavior and volcanic temper that were to dog him for the rest of his days , moved to France where he was dubbed Le diable noir -- the Black Devil . 
Decked out in black leathers , chains , kohl eye make-up and with his hair greased up into a high pompadour , he was immediately signed to the French Barclay label . 
But , fuelled by alcohol and drugs , Vince 's behavior became increasingly erratic . 
At a party he tried LSD for the first time . 
In his state of mind at the time it was the last thing that he needed . 
Vince Taylor underwent a kind of public breakdown at his next gig , where he started claiming he was a divine being . 
David Bowie bumped into him in London and later said : `` Vince Taylor was the inspiration for Ziggy ... he always stayed in my mind as an example of what can happen in rock 'n' roll . 
I 'm not sure if I held him up as an idol or as something not to become . 
There was something very tempting about him going completely off the edge . '' 
The program , presented by Martyn Day , tracks down many of the people who worked with Taylor , including members of his original band and his family . 
Presenter\/Martyn Day , Producer\/Bob Dickinson for the BBC Poet Paul Farley investigates the compulsion of some men to collect wild birds ' eggs . 
Paul went `` egging '' as a boy , guarding his guilty secret until now . 
He examines what the attraction is and how some men never outgrow it , even if egging lands them in prison . 
Generations of boys have robbed nests during their childhoods . 
Most grow out of it , making a moral journey towards a less rapacious relationship with the natural world . 
But some do n't , and this can have terrible consequences for both birds and men : the red-backed shrike became extinct in Britain because its beautiful speckled eggs proved irresistible to collectors . 
This happened as recently as the Eighties , even though it has been illegal to steal eggs from nests since 1954 . 
Punishment then was limited to a fine , related to the offender 's ability to pay , but the law was no deterrent to people such as Colin Watson . 
He offended repeatedly , paid fines totalling # 6,000 and was once caught trying to fell a tree with a chainsaw to get at an osprey 's nest . 
He tumbled from a tree while trying to reach a nest in 2005 , and died , killed by his obsession . 
In 2001 a change in the law meant egg collectors faced prison . 
Several were apprehended in Operation Easter by detectives from the National Wildlife Crime Unit . 
It is now pursuing 70 suspected collectors in Britain and is liaising with Interpol ; as Alan Stewart of Tayside Police reveals , cheap flights have led to `` egg-collecting tourism '' . 
Mark Thomas , investigation officer with the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds , believes that while the recent sentences are significant , they are not doing enough . 
Paul Farley talks to those involved on both sides of the law , including John Dodsworth , who has a number of convictions relating to egg collecting . 
He speaks about his passion and his love of nature , and says that he feels he has done no harm and has been treated unjustly . 
Farly visits the headquarters of the RSPB where Mark Thomas shows him some of the confiscated egg collections , which include red-backed shrike eggs . 
Here he reads the journals of Colin Watson . 
Presenter\/Paul Farley , Producer\/Julian May for the BBC 7.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Eleanor Oldroyd has the latest sports news and , from 8pm , live athletics from the Diamond League event in Zurich in 5 Live Track And Field . 
At 9.30 pm Russell Fuller takes a look ahead to the women 's Rugby World Cup which starts tomorrow at Surrey Sports Park . 
10.45am-6 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary on the second day of the third Test between England and Pakistan comes live from the Oval , with the Test Match Special commentary team . 
Marc Riley welcomes Edinburgh 's Withered Hand , aka Dan Wilson , into the studio for a live session . 
Dan is a visual artist and Withered Hand is his musical collective project . 
Live and on record , Dan may be accompanied by any or all of the following : Hannah Shepherd -LRB- cello -RRB- ; Neil Pennycook -LRB- banjo -RRB- ; Alun Thomas -LRB- drums -RRB- ; Faith Nicholson ; Jo Foster ; Chris Bryant ; and Bart Owl . 
Withered Hand have made three records . 
Their Religious Songs EP was recorded at home by Neil Pennycook and released through SL Records and Bear Scotland in 2008 . 
You 're Not Alone is a solo EP , recorded by King Creosote and released through Fence Records and SL in spring 2009 . 
Good News is the band 's first album , funded by the Scottish Arts Council and mixed by cult American producer Kramer -LRB- Low\/Galaxie 500\/Daniel Johnston -RRB- , and was released by SL Records in September 2009 . 
Tom Ravenscroft takes the opportunity to rummage through the BBC 's vast live music archive to play concert highlights from Edwyn Collins and Hugh Masakela , plus sessions from young rock 'n' roll revivalists Betty And The Werewolves and Canterbury 's psychedelic folksters , Soft Machine . 
Property expert Sarah Beeny joins Nihal as today 's phone-in show guru . 
Callers can talk to Sarah about getting on the property ladder and selling their house , as well as general advice on money matters . 
Friday Night Is Music Night Judges Robin Stapleton , Dame Kiri Te Kanawa and Anne Howells at a masterclass for The BBC Radio 2 Kiri Prize The BBC Radio 2 Kiri Prize reaches its fourth semi-final in the search for an opera star of the future . 
Tonight 's semi-finalists are soprano Shuna Scott Sendall , tenor Mario Sofroniou and soprano Catrin Aur . 
Accompanied by the BBC Concert Orchestra , conducted by Richard Balcombe , they compete for a place in the final in a concert recorded at the BBC 's Television Centre in London , presented by Penny Smith . 
Their performances are judged by Dame Kiri Te Kanawa , mezzo-soprano Anne Howells , renowned conductor Robin Stapleton and director John Cox . 
Five singers will then go through to the final which is broadcast on Radio 2 on Friday 3 September . 
Shuna lives in Glasgow , trained at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama and graduated from the Alexander Gibson Opera School . 
She works with Scottish Opera and her roles have included The Aunt -LRB- Madame Butterfly -RRB- , Micaela -LRB- Carmen -RRB- , Magdalena -LRB- Die meistersinger -RRB- and the Innkeeper 's Wife -LRB- The Cunning Little Vixen -RRB- . 
Mario , from Swindon , Wiltshire , completed his post-graduate diploma in vocal performance at Trinity College of Music . 
He has performed roles including Don Jose -LRB- Carmen -RRB- and Peter -LRB- Peter Grimes -RRB- . 
Catrin is from Cardiff and studied at the Royal Welsh College of Music and the Royal Academy of Music and is currently at the International Academy of Voice in Cardiff . 
She recently represented the UK at the Montreal International Singing Competition and the Vinas International Singing Competition in Barcelona . 
The winner of the Radio 2 Kiri Prize will perform with Dame Kiri at BBC Proms In The Park in London 's Hyde Park on Saturday 11 September and be given the opportunity to attend a three-week residential course at the Solti Te Kanawa Accademia in Italy . 
Presenter\/Penny Smith , Producer\/Jodie Keane for the BBC Claudia Winkleman hosts a dance special in this week 's Arts Show and features leading choreographer Arlene Phillips in a special interview about her career from Hot Gossip to Strictly Come Dancing . 
Esa-Pekka Salonen and the Philharmonia Orchestra celebrate Arvo Prt 's 75th birthday with the UK premire of his Fourth Symphony , plus classics by Ravel , Scriabin and Mosolov . 
Esa-Pekka Salonen has been principal conductor of the Philharmonia Orchestra for less than two years , but his distinctive programming and conducting has already made its mark on London 's concert life , and their BBC Prom together epitomises their relationship . 
It starts with a bang -- Alexander Mosolov 's futuristic aural picture of industrial Twenties Soviet Russia in The Foundry -- and continues with a UK premire from Estonian composer Arvo Prt -- his Symphony No. 4 , Los Angeles , bringing to a climax the BBC Proms celebrations of his 75th birthday . 
Two early 20th-century classics complete the program : Ravel 's remarkable piano concerto for the left hand only , with Jean-Efflam Bavouzet as soloist , and a sensual orchestral showpiece from Scriabin -- The Poem Of Ecstasy . 
This Prom will be broadcast on BBC Four at 7.30 pm tonight , and is repeated on BBC Radio 3 on Thursday 26 August at 2.45 pm . 
Before Ravel 's Concerto For The Left Hand in tonight 's BBC Prom concert , novelist Louise Doughty investigates the influence left-handedness has on creativity , including her own . 
After losing his right hand in the First World War pianist Paul Wittgenstein commissioned several composers to write pieces specifically for the left hand , including Ravel , whose Concerto For The Left Hand is performed in tonight 's Prom concert . 
But why , as 10 per cent of the population is left-handed , should it take such a loss for composers to consider doing this ? 
Why -LRB- especially as the incidence of left-handedness is even higher among musicians -RRB- are musical instruments designed by right-handers , for right-handers ? 
Louise Doughty is left-handed and feels this has had considerable bearing on her becoming a writer . 
There is a preconception that left-handers are more creative than most of the population , more likely to develop as artists . 
Louise enquires into the truth of this , talking to Chris McManus , Professor of Psychology and Medical Education at University College London and the author of Right Hand , Left Hand , a book about handedness and asymmetry . 
Lopa Kothari presents sounds from around the world , including a Nigerian-German soul session by Nneka . 
Born to a Nigerian father and German mother , Nneka was educated in both countries and qualified as an anthropologist . 
She 's had mainstream chart success but does n't shy away from difficult subjects such as colonialism in Africa , corruption and religion . 
Since 2003 Nneka has been working closely with hip-hop beatmaker DJ Farhot , a producer living in Hamburg . 
Peter Curran mingles with dogs , owners and punters at Ireland 's top hare-coursing meeting Peter goes to the County Tipperary town of Clonmel to meet the dog owners and trainers , betting syndicates and bookmakers who flock to the 85th National Hare Coursing Meeting . 
While the ancient yet controversial sport of hare coursing was banned in the UK some time ago , it continues to thrive in the Irish Republic where a rich social , gambling and sporting culture climaxes at this event , now in its 85th year . 
Said to be worth millions to the Irish economy , the Clonmel gathering unsurprisingly also finds itself under attack from a vociferous animal rights lobby . 
For his three days at the races , Peter finds himself battling through a sea of fanatical dog owners and trainers , applauding an all-women betting syndicate that bursts into song with little provocation and meeting a family dynasty of bookmakers whose whole lives revolve around the National Coursing Meeting . 
Presenter\/Peter Curran , Producer\/Conor Garrett for the BBC Lee Mack interviews Ade Edmondson in BBC Radio 4 's talk show with a twist . 
The tag-team talk show continues as last week 's guest , one of the UK 's most celebrated comics Lee Mack , takes the microphone to interview alternative-comedy legend Ade Edmondson . 
Presenter\/Lee Mack , Producer\/Lianne Coop for the BBC 7.00-10 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Colin Murray presents Kicking Off With Colin Murray , looking ahead to the weekend 's sporting action . 
Colin is joined by Friday night regulars Perry Groves and Pat Nevin to preview the weekend 's football fixtures including Arsenal versus Blackpool , Wigan versus Chelsea , Newcastle United versus Aston Villa and Fulham versus Manchester United . 
10.45am-6 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary on the third day of the third Test between England and Pakistan comes live from the Oval , with the Test Match Special commentary team . 
7.55-9 .45 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary of Leeds Rhinos versus Catalans Dragons comes live from Headingley , in rugby league 's Super League . 
