Libya plans to ship crude from Tobruk by end of September BENGHAZI , Libya | Sun Aug 28 , 2011 2:36 pm EDT BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya plans to restart production at two eastern oil fields in mid-September and resume shipping oil from Tobruk by the end of the same month , offering relief to European countries reliant on its imports . 
Oil production in the OPEC country has been at a virtual stand-still for months as clashes between rebels and troops loyal to Muammar Gaddafi have damaged infrastructure and caused foreign workers to flee . 
This has forced global economies to pay more than $ 100 a barrel for Brent crude since the civil war began in February and driven up import costs for major buyers like Italy , Germany and France . 
`` Operations will start on September 15 and by the end of the month we will have the capability to export from Tobruk , '' Abdeljalil Mayuf , spokesman for Arabian Gulf Oil Company -LRB- AGOCO -RRB- told Reuters , referring to the Sarir and Mesla fields deep in the Libyan desert . 
He said technical teams would be sent out to the fields after the Muslim holy month of Ramadan ends , in the first week of September . 
Initial production will be at around 60,000-100 ,000 barrels per day and any further increase would depend on the condition of underground wells , he said . 
Some of this oil will be used to feed AGOCO refineries in east Libya once they restart , he said . 
The oilfields in eastern Libya were damaged by troops loyal to Gaddafi during the country 's civil war , killing 14 oil workers . 
The damage has now been repaired , AGOCO said , while rebel officials say they have set up a special security force to protect oil infrastructure from saboteurs . 
Around 80 percent of Libyan oil fields are in the east of the country around the Sirte basin , with rebel fighters now in control of the key oil ports of Brega and Ras Lanuf . 
AGOCO has a total production capacity of around 420,000 barrels per day , or around a quarter of the country 's total output before the war began . 
Mayuf did not say if former supply contracts negotiated before the war would be respected . 
`` This will be arranged with the marketing department . 
There are many clients to choose from . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Emma Farge ; Writing by Emma Farge and Christian Lowe ; Editing by Karolina Tagaris -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
