Tuesday 1 February 2005 14.59 GMT Al-Jazeera has been ranked the fifth most influential brand in the world , behind global icons Apple and Google , in a survey by a worldwide branding consultancy . 
The Arab news satellite channel had the fifth largest impact on the lives of 1,984 readers of Interbrand 's Brandchannel.com , behind Apple , Google , Ikea and Starbucks . 
The Qatar-based network has been a constant feature of news reports in the last two years as a result of its coverage of the Iraq war and its aftermath , when terrorist network al-Qaida became the focus of American ire . 
One of its reporters was arrested in Spain and it has been kicked out of Baghdad by the Iraqi interim government on the grounds that it was a destablising influence . 
The network faced controversy again today when it was forced to defend its use of a video that purports to show the shooting down of an RAF Hercules in Iraq , which killed 10 people . 
The editor of Brandchannel.com , Robin Rusch , said the survey showed brands that were making a big instant impact but might not have the global staying power of `` super brands '' such as McDonald 's or Coca-Cola . 
`` The reason why viewers chose it both in the global section and in European and African survey is that it is the alternative news source for anyone in the west to get another point of view that 's not coming to them from their own media , '' she said . 
`` Osama bin Laden uses it as his station of choice to get his message across and here in the US with a population that is not Arab speaking we see regular mentions of al-Jazeera reports . '' 
This year the channel will move further towards the mainstream with the launch in November of an English-language international news channel that will run alongside its Arabic news service and rival CNN and BBC World . 
`` As the issues of 2004 hovered heavily around the Middle East and Islamic populations , al-Jazeera 's relevancy soared , '' the Brandchannel.com report said . 
`` Al-Jazeera is viewed as relatively independent within its region and is increasingly gaining mainstream credibility beyond its borders . '' 
The channel , launched in 1996 and watched by some 35 million viewers , recently reconfirmed that it was going to seek private equity partners or go for a flotation . 
However , a spokesman today said such a move was some way off and a feasibility study would be submitted to the Emir of Qatar , the owner of the channel by the end of the year . 
Brandchannel 's 2004 Reader 's Choice Awards listed 75 global brands and 75 regional brands and asked readers to list the top five brands that had affected them personally , in either and positive or negative way , the most last year . 
Ms Rausch said non-government organizations and charities , such as Tsunami Relief , would have a huge impact this year due to the Boxing Day tsunami that killed more than 250,000 people . 
She said the survey methodology sometimes threw up interesting results , such as the 2001 survey , which led to al-Qaida ranking 14th , even though some objected to the terrorist group being classified as a brand . 
To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or phone 02072399857 If you are writing a comment for publication , please mark clearly `` for publication '' . 
