The Vietnam turnout was good as well No amount of spin can conceal Iraqis ' hostility to US occupation Tuesday 1 February 2005 02.38 GMT On September 4 1967 the New York Times published an upbeat story on presidential elections held by the South Vietnamese puppet regime at the height of the Vietnam war . 
Under the heading `` US encouraged by Vietnam vote : Officials cite 83 % turnout despite Vietcong terror '' , the paper reported that the Americans had been `` surprised and heartened '' by the size of the turnout `` despite a Vietcong terrorist campaign to disrupt the voting '' . 
A successful election , it went on , `` has long been seen as the keystone in President Johnson 's policy of encouraging the growth of constitutional processes in South Vietnam '' . 
The echoes of this weekend 's propaganda about Iraq 's elections are so close as to be uncanny . 
With the past few days ' avalanche of spin , you could be forgiven for thinking that on January 30 2005 the US-led occupation of Iraq ended and the people won their freedom and democratic rights . 
This has been a multi-layered campaign , reminiscent of the pre-war WMD frenzy and fantasies about the flowers Iraqis were collecting to throw at the invasion forces . 
How you could square the words democracy , free and fair with the brutal reality of occupation , martial law , a US-appointed election commission and secret candidates has rarely been allowed to get in the way of the hype . 
If truth is the first casualty of war , reliable numbers must be the first casualty of an occupation-controlled election . 
The second layer of spin has been designed to convince us that an overwhelming majority of Iraqis participated . 
The initial claim of 72 % having voted was quickly downgraded to 57 % of those registered to vote . 
So what percentage of the adult population is registered to vote ? 
The Iraqi ambassador in London was unable to enlighten me . 
In fact , as UN sources confirm , there has been no registration or published list of electors - all we are told is that about 14 million people were entitled to vote . 
As for Iraqis abroad , the up to 4 million strong exiled community -LRB- with perhaps a little over 2 million entitled to vote -RRB- produced a 280,000 registration figure . 
Of those , 265,000 actually voted . 
The Iraqi south , more religious than Baghdad , responded positively to Grand Ayatollah al-Sistani 's position : to call the bluff of the US and vote for a list that was proclaimed to be hostile to the occupation . 
Sistani 's supporters declared that voting on Sunday was the first step to kicking out the occupiers . 
The months ahead will put these declarations to a severe test . 
Meanwhile Moqtada al-Sadr 's popular movement , which rejected the elections as a sham , is likely to make a comeback in its open resistance to the occupation . 
The big vote in Kurdistan primarily reflects the Kurdish people 's demand for national self-determination . 
The US administration has hitherto clamped down on these pressures . 
Henry Kissinger 's recent proposal to divide Iraq into three states reflects a major shift among influential figures in the US who , led by Kissinger as secretary of state , ditched the Kurds in the 70s and brokered a deal between Saddam and the Shah of Iran . 
George Bush and Tony Blair made heroic speeches on Sunday implying that Iraqis had voted to approve the occupation . 
Those who insist that the US is desperate for an exit strategy are misreading its intentions . 
The facts on the ground , including the construction of massive military bases in Iraq , indicate that the US is digging in to install and back a long-term puppet regime . 
For this reason , the US-led presence will continue , with all that entails in terms of bloodshed and destruction . 
In the run-up to the poll , much of the western media presented it as a high-noon shootout between the terrorist Zarqawi and the Iraqi people , with the occupation forces doing their best to enable the people to defeat the fiendish , one-legged Jordanian murderer . 
In reality , Zarqawi-style sectarian violence is not only condemned by Iraqis across the political spectrum , including supporters of the resistance , but is widely seen as having had a blind eye turned to it by the occupation authorities . 
Such attitudes are dismissed by outsiders , but the record of John Negroponte , the US ambassador in Baghdad , of backing terror gangs in central America in the 80s has fuelled these fears , as has Seymour Hirsh 's reports on the Pentagon 's assassination squads and enthusiasm for the `` Salvador option '' . 
An honest analysis of the social and political map of Iraq reveals that Iraqis are increasingly united in their determination to end the occupation . 
Whether they participated in or boycotted Sunday 's exercise , this political bond will soon reassert itself - just as it did in Vietnam - despite tactical differences , and despite the US-led occupation 's attempts to dominate Iraqis by inflaming sectarian and ethnic divisions . 
Sami Ramadani was a political refugee from Saddam Hussein 's regime and is a senior lecturer at London Metropolitan University Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
