Crusading in the public interest Phil Shiner became an overnight hate figure for his opposition to British army abuses in Iraq . 
But , as Richard Norton-Taylor discovers , the lawyer is used to controversy Tuesday 1 February 2005 00.01 GMT Mention his name and the Ministry of Defense shudders . 
He is the target of death threats . 
An investigation was launched into his activities after he was viciously attacked in the pages of the Daily Mail . 
The inquiry is being carried out by the Legal Services Commission , the body which oversees legal aid - the same organization that subsequently welcomed one of his high court victories as `` historic '' . 
That case was cited recently when he won the Liberty and Justice human rights lawyer of the year award . 
He received the award for `` outstanding skill and tenacity in taking test cases to protect the rights of Iraqi civilians tortured and killed by British forces '' . 
He was also praised for his `` personal sacrifice and professional dedication in fighting for justice and individual rights '' . 
Phil Shiner , on whom praise and blame , it seems , is heaped almost in equal measure , is not afraid to court controversy . 
Just as well , given the causes he has taken up , ranging from the rights of former Gurkha soldiers to the wrongs of nuclear weapons . 
He set up his Birmingham-based law firm , Public Interest Lawyers , in 1999 after a spell in private practice concentrating on environmental law . 
One of his earliest cases , he remembers , was against Edwina Currie . 
She was then a Conservative member of Birmingham city council . 
Shiner was , he says , a `` fresh-faced idealistic member of Small Heath law center '' . 
She was pushing forward what he calls a `` punishment block '' for what were considered the worst tenants . 
He took the case to the high court , forcing the council to demolish the flats . 
Shiner , 48 , was educated at Bishop Ullathorne Roman Catholic comprehensive school in Coventry . 
Last week , he returned there to give a talk to the sixth form , encouraging the pupils , he says , to believe in themselves and to go places . 
So what drives him ? 
`` Throughout my life , I have always been a passionate believer in social justice . 
It comes from my Catholic upbringing . '' 
He goes on retreat to Iona every year and he has always been a socialist , he says . 
`` Socialism and Catholicism go hand in hand . '' 
Is n't the title Public Interest Lawyers - the firm has just six employees , including three solicitors - a bit presumptuous ? 
Shiner replies that he is not out to define the public interest ; rather , to make the point that there is a strong public-interest component to the cases - and causes - he takes on . 
For many human rights lawyers , a lot of the issues he tackles are pretty unfashionable . 
Take some of his environmental cases . 
They include damage done by incinerators burning hazardous or dangerous substances , landfills , open-cast coal schemes , quarries , chemical plants , inappropriately sited mobile-phone masts , and industrial or commercial developments on greenfield land . 
`` Litigation through judicial review is a relatively blunt instrument , '' says his firm 's website . 
`` We aim for a preventative approach to these polluting developments . 
We are not personal injury lawyers who act to sue for damages once a project has caused harm to public health and the environment . '' 
It continues : `` PIL try to take pre-emptive action , that is , to make representations to a decision-maker prior to a decision being made , say , to grant planning permission for a particular project . 
In that way we feed our legal representations into the broader political process so that an authority might be persuaded not to grant consent at all . 
For example , if an incinerator is unacceptable to the local community because of the increased levels of prescribed pollutants , it is better to persuade a local planning authority of that than expect a judge on judicial review to enter the debate as to whether that is or is not acceptable . 
Many of our successes have been in persuading public bodies to refuse consent for polluting projects so that , once the developer decides not to appeal , the community can close the book on the problem . '' 
Shiner also takes on nuclear power - every aspect of it . 
Tomorrow , he is appealing against the refusal of legal aid for a case to decide whether the nuclear weapons facility at Faslane in Scotland should abide by the Radioactive Substances Act , an issue , he says , which is important for the local community . 
The nuclear weapons plant at Aldermaston in Berkshire , and the naval dockyard at Devonport , the navy 's nuclear submarine base , should also be subject to extra safeguards , he says . 
He is taking comfort from the decision by the European Commission to seek a ruling from the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg that health and safety rules should apply to military as well as civil sites . 
Shiner has pursued equally strenuously the issue of the legality of nuclear weapons and Britain 's special nuclear weapons relationship with the United States . 
He acted for CND - with Rabinder Singh QC , a founding member of Matrix barristers ' chambers with Tony Blair 's wife , Cherie Booth QC - in an unsuccessful attempt to persuade the high court to rule on whether the invasion of Iraq was legal . 
He believes the use of cluster bombs is an issue that should be heard by the International Criminal Court . 
And he is now preparing a case on behalf of Quakers and others , arguing that they should not have to pay the part of their taxes which is spent on armaments and warfare . 
Unsurprisingly , he is not the most Ministry of Defense 's most popular lawyer . 
Last year , he threatened a judicial review of the prime minister 's decision to give ex-Gurkhas the right of abode in Britain , but only those who had recently left the regiment . 
The government gave way and Geoff Hoon , the defense secretary , has now announced a full review of the terms and conditions of service of all Gurkhas . 
It is not the first time that Shiner has taken up the Gurkhas ' cause . 
He says one of his high points is winning the argument , in the high court and then the court of appeal , that ex-Gurkhas captured by the Japanese should be given a # 10,000 ex gratia payment on a par with other armed services inmates of the wartime concentration camps . 
Some 1,000 Gurkhas and their families benefited . 
A `` low moment '' was his decision to seek evidence from Iraqi families whose relatives , allegedly , had been killed , mistreated or even tortured by British troops in southern Iraq after the last Iraq war was declared over . 
The high-profile case provoked huge controversy . 
`` Anyone Else Want to Sue ? '' 
the Daily Mail asked last year in a banner headline . '' 
` Murder ' Slur on Our Soldiers '' , it declared , adding : `` Solicitor who yesterday accused British troops of murder went touting for clients in Iraq - and , yes , you 've guessed it , wants legal aid , too . '' 
The newspaper published a cartoon of a large Iraqi at dinner with his wife , reading a phrasebook , a solicitor hanging upside down from a rafter in the background . 
`` I 've just worked out what he said after ` I 'm English ' , '' she says . 
`` It was : ` Do you want to sue anybody ? ' '' 
Shiner received a number of death threats as a result of his work on this case . 
`` You 're doing it for Muslims , and Arabs , and other dirty Iraqi bastards , '' said one . 
He was sent packets of white powder . 
That was not all . 
The Legal Services Commission launched an investigation over allegations that he touted for business . 
The pressure was so great , Shiner says , that he almost felt that he could not go ahead with his marriage to Rachel , his second wife . 
`` For three hours , I thought , ' I ca n't do this . 
This is too much . ' '' 
Then , in December , Shiner , who is now acting for some 40 Iraqi families , won his case . 
In a landmark judgment , the high court ruled that British troops on foreign operations are bound by the European Convention on Human Rights , which bans torture and inhuman or degrading treatment of prisoners . 
Specifically , it ruled that the convention extended to a prison in Iraq where Baha Mousa , a hotel receptionist , died last year while in the custody of British soldiers . 
In what Lord Justice Rix and Mr Justice Forbes called a `` difficult and troubling case '' , the judges said that British troops were `` in effective control '' of the prison where Mousa died . 
The MoD is appealing against the judgment . 
Clare Dodgson , the Legal Services Commission 's chief executive , trumpeted the commission 's part in funding the case , describing the judgment as a `` historic legal ruling '' . 
Though it carried no implication of guilt or wrongdoing by British soldiers , she said , it allowed for allegations surrounding deaths in custody to be `` fairly and independently investigated '' . 
Meanwhile , the commission is still looking into the allegations against the lawyer who brought this historic case to court . 
Shiner describes the support he has received from his peers as phenomenal . 
He is fighting in an honorable lawyers ' tradition , he says - `` guilty of pursuing cases in a single-minded way and upsetting powerful people '' . 
