PORT SULPHUR , LA. -- It sounds like a bottomless gusher of money : a $ 20 billion fund to help make Gulf Coast residents and businesses whole . 
But here in the bayou , where rich oyster beds have provided livelihoods to many and brought wealth to a few , people worry just how far BP 's handouts will go . 
`` They may satisfy the shrimpers and crabbers , but for the oystermen , they do n't realize how much money it is going to take if this becomes a long-term effect , '' said Mitchell Jurisich , 47 , a third-generation Croatian American oysterman who 's done well for himself helping oversee a business that rakes the mollusks out of these brackish waters . 
The $ 5,000 claim checks that BP has already given out have largely gone to fishermen , deckhands and captains , Jurisich and other oystermen point out . 
The $ 20 billion fund may be enough to pay off the little guys or small-boat owners whom President Obama promised to look after . 
But what about the not-so-little guys and salespeople ? 
What about the kings of the oyster trade such as Jurisich and the man he sells his catch to -- Eddie Kurtich , who 's spent 40 years building himself a booming business as an oyster broker ? 
Kurtich , 66 , works as a middleman selling shellfish by the tractor-trailer-load to shucking houses , seafood distributors and restaurants in Alabama , Kent Narrows along Maryland 's Eastern Shore , and others in Virginia , Texas , Florida and North Carolina . 
He , along with a few partners and other Croatians in the area , lease about one-quarter of the 400,000 state-owned acres available for oystering in southern Louisiana . 
He is one of the most successful members of a business run largely by immigrants from Croatia and their offspring . 
With a full head of white hair and a round face , Kurtich -- who sports two gold chains and a chunky 18-karat gold ring with a circle of white diamonds surrounding a single brown diamond -- seems content with success in his first-floor office in his Mediterranean-style home near the bayou . 
Right now , though , in the heart of the oyster harvesting season , he ca n't figure out how much of that $ 20 billion he 's owed . 
`` How do you calculate for what you do n't know yet ? '' 
asked Kurtich , who speaks in a deep voice with an accent that 's a mix of Croatian and Cajun . 
`` Your livelihood could be in jeopardy for one , two , three years or maybe seven or eight . 
God only knows . '' 
It 's complicated to figure out how much he should claim from BP . 
Should he estimate lost income to date ? 
And how should he factor in what he 'll make when many of the now-closed waterways reopen ? 
Should he try to figure out what he could potentially lose a year or two from now if his oyster beds are ruined by oil , dispersants or too much fresh water -LRB- which is being pumped into canals to keep the oil away but threatening to upset the delicate mix of salinity needed for oysters -RRB- ? 
Another tricky factor is the price of oysters : Before the spill , they were averaging $ 25 per 100-pound sack ; now they 're at a high of $ 35 . 
Any calculation of loss that he and others come up with will need to be proved to BP . 
But a lot of deals in the oyster business are made through handshakes and long-term agreements . 
Kurtich keeps his business contacts from the past 40 years in a red address book held together with tape and a rubber band . 
His wife works at a small table , across from his daughter , who sits at a computer helping to track bookkeeping . 
It is not a corporate boardroom . 
He has a small insurance policy for about $ 300 a year that covers his oyster beds , which he says is similar to crop insurance for farmers . 
He bought it this spring before the spill . 
The son of a Croatian farmer , Kurtich came in the 1960s to this town of 3,100 named for the sulfur that used to be processed and transported from here . 
A close-knit community of about 1,500 Croatians lives in the surrounding area of Plaquemines Parish . 
Some of them are third - and fourth-generation oystermen . 
Kurtich 's success story has been one of hard work and steady growth : He started at his cousin 's grocery store as a bag boy . 
On the weekends , he 'd hustle , making $ 15 a day in tips . 
He eventually bought two businesses from his wife 's uncle : a convenience store and an oyster shucking house . 
He also began acquiring leases for oyster beds . 
He made deals with a network of about 40 captains who sold him their oysters , which he 'd then sell to wholesalers . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
