A dispersant plane passes over an oil skimmer as it cleans oil from a leaking pipeline that resulted from last week 's explosion and collapse of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico near the coast of Louisiana Tuesday , April 27 , 2010 . 
AP Photo\/Patrick Semansky Oil-dispersing chemicals used to clean the vast BP spill in the Gulf of Mexico carry their own environmental risks , making a toxic soup that could endanger marine creatures even as it keeps the slick from reaching the vulnerable coast , experts say . 
`` The concentration of detergents and other chemicals used to clean up sites contaminated by oil spills can cause environmental nightmares of their own , '' said Terry Hazen , a microbial ecologist in Berkeley Lab 's Earth Sciences Division who has studied such notorious oil-spill sites as the Exxon Valdez spill into Alaska 's Prince William Sound . 
`` It 's important to remember that oil is a biological product and can be degraded by microbes , both on and beneath the surface of the water , '' Hazen said . 
`` Some of the detergents that are typically used to clean up spill sites are more toxic than the oil itself , in which case it would be better to leave the site alone and allow microbes to do what they do best . '' 
Manufacturers argue that prompt use of such detergents , also called dispersants , can move oil more rapidly to those microbes . 
But BP announced late Wednesday that it would halt dispersant of the chemicals while agencies further assess its environmental impact . 
Dispersants work on an oil spill as dishwashing detergent works on a greasy skillet : They break up oil into tiny droplets that sink below the water 's surface where naturally occurring bacteria consume them . 
Without dispersants , oil stays on the water 's surface , where bacteria ca n't get at them , said Mani Ramesh , chief technology officer of dispersant manufacturer Nalco . 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has approved 14 dispersants for use on oil spills , including Corexit 9500 , which Nalco produces . 
Crews battling the spill have already used more than 156,000 gallons of dispersants including Corexit . 
Nalco has exhausted its entire inventory and is producing more , said Mani Ramesh , Nalco 's chief technology officer . 
Ramesh said Corexit 's active ingredient is an emulsifier also found in ice cream ; he disputed environmental groups ' claims that it is harmful to marine life , although the exact chemical make up of the the product is a trade secret . 
Coast Guard Rear Adm. Mary Landry , the federal on-scene coordinator , called the tests so far `` very promising , very promising . '' 
He told the Associated Press that sonar and camera images from the first test last week appeared to show a reduction in oil on the surface , although federal officials said they want more information from planes that will examine the leak site from the air . 
The problem , according to Jackie Savitz , a senior scientist at the marine environmental group Oceana , is that the dispersants themselves can be toxic to wildlife . 
Dispersants can also enhance oil 's toxicity in the dispersion process . 
`` A decision is being made where it 's the shore wildlife and oysters and beaches versus the animals that live in the water , '' Savitz said . 
`` When they use a dispersant , it 's taking the oil and essentially dissolving it in the water so that it does n't wash up on the beach . '' 
Hazen cities the aftermath of the Amoco Cadiz and the Exxon Valdez disasters , two spills where chemical detergents led to ecological problems . 
In 1978 , the oil tanker Amoco Cadiz split in two three miles off the coast of Normandy , releasing about 227,000 tons heavy crude oil that ultimately stained nearly 200 miles of coastline . 
The spill site was so large that only the areas of greatest economic impact were treated with detergents . 
Large areas in the more remote parts of the coast went untreated . 
`` The untreated coastal areas were fully recovered within five years of the Amoco Cadiz spill , '' says Hazen . 
`` As for the treated areas , ecological studies show that 30 years later , those areas still have not recovered . '' 
A combination of detergents and bioremediation were used to clean up the 1989 spill from the Exxon Valdez . 
The detergents were nutrient rich , being high in phosphorous and nitrogen compounds . 
In addition , as part of the bioremediation effort , fertilizers were also used to promote microbial growth . 
After the first year , the treated areas were dramatically cleaner , Hazen says , but after the second year no improvements were observed . 
Long-term prospects for the treated area are grim . 
`` What happened was that we took a low-nutrient environment and added lots of nutrients to it to speed up the degradation of the oil , which we probably did , '' Hazen says . 
`` However , we upset the ecological balance of the system , which could not handle the influx of nutrients . 
As a result , the severe environmental damage resulting from the spill is expected to persist for decades to come . '' 
Improvements to detergents have been made over the years , including some degree of biodegradability . 
Allison Nyholm , a policy adviser at the American Petroleum Institute , noted that current dispersants are different from the thick solvents used in 1967 on an oil spill off the California coast at Santa Barbara . 
But all agree that short of capping the leak , there are few good solutions to this ecological disaster . 
Reuters contributed to this report . 
