White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs briefs reporters at the White House in Washington , Wednesday , May 5 , 2010 . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- Despite BP 's vow to pay `` all necessary and appropriate clean-up costs '' from the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , White House officials are not shying away from suggesting potential misconduct by the company before the accident -- a scenario that would put BP on the hook for all economic damages despite a $ 75 million cap . 
As the White House works with Congress to change a law that caps at $ 75 million the liability of BP and other companies for economic damages on businesses and the tourism industry , administration officials in recent days have repeatedly highlighted the exceptions to the cap . 
`` Understand this : There is -- they are fully liable for cleanup and recovery costs per the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 , '' White House spokesman Robert Gibbs said this week . 
`` The cap is not in place if somebody is found to be either grossly negligent , conduct willful -- involved in willful misconduct , or in violation of federal regulations . 
As you know , there 's an investigation ongoing as to the cause behind -- behind the spill . '' 
Communications Director Dan Pfeiffer repeated this assertion on the White House blog this week and added : `` The bottom line is that the administration will aggressively pursue compensation from BP for any damages from this spill . '' 
It 's understandable why the White House is quick to point out exceptions to the cap : The total cost of economic damages from the oil spill is expected to easily exceed the $ 75 million liability limit and the tide in the Gulf of Mexico moves faster than the tide of Congress . 
The Senate is seeking to raise the cap of the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 to $ 10 billion . 
The White House wo n't endorse a specific dollar limit but Gibbs said Wednesday that the administration `` would be in favor of significantly lifting '' the current $ 75 million cap . 
It 's unclear how much BP will ultimately have to pay but analysts estimate the company is facing billions in containment and clean-up expenses . 
`` This figure is rising as activity increases , '' the company said in a written statement . 
`` It is too early to quantify other potential costs and liabilities associated with the incident . '' 
BP says it is spending more than $ 6 million a day to try and contain the oil slick and just announced $ 25 million grants for four Gulf Coast states affected by the oil spill . 
But that does n't include federal and state spending , such as the deployment of National Guard troops , that BP is responsible for reimbursing . 
The Pentagon just approved requests from Louisiana and Mississippi for 6,000 Guard members each , Alabama for 3,000 and Florida for 2,500 . 
Sen. Mary Landrieu , D-La . 
, on Wednesday called for BP to assist the devastated Gulf of Mexico fishing industry . 
She noted that in 2008 , commercial fishermen there generated $ 659 million in revenue from their harvests and Louisiana seafood industry alone is worth $ 2.4 billion and employs more than 27,000 jobs . 
A Democratic Senate aide working on the new legislation noted a difference between the cleanup costs and `` economic damages to small businesses , fisheries -- businesses that are going to suffer through no fault of their own . '' 
`` The question is , who 's going to make those businesses and families whole again , '' the aide told FoxNews.com . 
`` In an instance like this , $ 75 million would be a drop in the bucket compared to what local businesses , fisheries and landowners need to be made whole . '' 
The White House has not ruled out requesting supplemental funds from Congress to help pay for the cleanup now , but a request has not been made . 
`` We are monitoring the whole situation and what the impact will be on businesses , communities and individuals in the Gulf Coast , '' Kenneth Baer , spokesman for the Office of Management and Budget , told FoxNews.com . 
`` But it 's too soon to say whether we need to request supplemental funds from Congress . '' 
