May 4 : Workers put the finishing touches on the Pollution Control Dome in Port Fourchon . 
AFP\/Getty Images NEW ORLEANS -- The best short-term solution to bottling up a disastrous oil spill threatening sea life and livelihoods -- a tremendous dome BP will lower a mile to the sea floor -- has proven successful in the past . 
The contraption , called the Subsea Oil Recovery System , is a 100-ton structure is designed to be placed over the largest source of oil leaking 5,000 feet beneath the Gulf of Mexico . 
The system collects the leaking oil and pumps it through a funnel and pipe to a tanker at the surface , which stores it and ships the oil to shore . 
Dr. Bill Eustes , an associate professor with the Colorado School of Mines , told Fox News correspondent Phil Keating that he has n't heard of anyone trying anything like this since the 70s , when oil company ARCO attempted a similar feat . 
The company -LRB- which was subsequently bought by BP -RRB- lowered a rudimentary funnel over a naturally occurring oil leak in Santa Barbara Channel . 
By all accounts , ARCO 's efforts were a success says the professor , whose Golden , Colorado , school graduates many of the world 's best petroleum engineers . 
Eustes described as clever BP 's plan to use containment boxes like these ; in the past , such domes have been used only in shallow water for containment during hurricanes . 
The Subsea Oil Recovery System -- essentially a 40-foot tall steel and concrete chimney -- is being shipped to the Gulf oil leak , where it will be lowered to the ocean floor , a process that can take up to two days . 
It should be on the seabed by Saturday , and as early as Sunday should start pumping oil up to the Deepwater Enterprise , which is capable of storing 139,000 barrels of oil , processing it at a rate of 15,000 barrels per day . 
BP hopes it will be able to collect as much as 85 percent of the oil leaking from the sea floor . 
The company , along with contractor Wild Well Control , are also building two other domes at a manufacturing facility in Port Fourchon , LA , just south of Houma . 
The other two domes should follow a few days behind the first . 
`` We do n't know for sure '' whether the equipment will work , BP spokesman Bill Salvin hs said . 
`` What we do know is that we have done extensive engineering and modeling and we believe this gives us the best chance to contain the oil , and that 's very important to us . '' 
Meanwhile , chemical dispersants piped 5,000 feet to the main leak have significantly reduced the amount of oil coming to the surface , BP said . 
The company has already managed to shut off one of the smaller of three leaks , though that plug might not reduce the flow much , said Doug Suttles , BP PLC 's chief operating officer . 
`` It 's a gift of a little bit of time . 
I 'm not resting , '' U.S. Coast Guard Rear Adm. Mary Landry said . 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
