By the CNN Wire Staff NEW : `` To me , the most important thing is just figuring out the way to cover it '' Hondros always took steps to minimize risks , a friend says In a recent video clip in Libya , Hondros described young unarmed teens Benghazi , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The ship carrying the bodies of a U.S. and a British journalist killed Wednesday in Misrata reached port Thursday night in the rebel stronghold of Benghazi . 
Oscar nominee Tim Hetherington and acclaimed photojournalist Chris Hondros died Wednesday while chronicling the gritty violence in the war-torn city of Misrata in Libya , their agencies said . 
Two other photojournalists were hurt in the incident , according to news reports . 
The International Organization for Migration ship , called the Ionian Spirit , was greeted by a number of young Libyans and about 20 rebel fighters . 
At the port , people carried banners reading , `` US and UK with your loss , you shared with us the price of freedom '' and `` US and UK your blood was mixed with ours in Misrata . '' 
Friends of the journalists remembered them Thursday as brave men committed to finding and exposing the truth even in dangerous conditions . 
Hondros had written an e-mail Wednesday `` basically saying that everything was fine and stable and he was enjoying his assignment and getting some good photographs , '' his friend Greg Campbell , who recently traveled to Libya with Hondros , told CNN . 
Gallery : Chris Hondros ' final photos Photojournalist Hetherington killed in Libya Two photojournalists killed in Misrata `` Every time you 're in an environment like that , I think in the back of your mind you 've realized that you may not come out of there , '' Campbell said . 
He and Hondros covered conflicts in Sierra Leone , Kosovo , and Nigeria together , he said . 
Hondros `` was always very , very safe . 
He realized the risks and he tried to minimize them as much as possible . 
So when I was traveling with Chris , we would take as many precautions as we possibly could . '' 
`` There are times , unfortunately , when you just do n't know which decision is right or wrong . 
Unfortunately , that 's what Tim and Chris found themselves in . '' 
Hetherington received an Academy Award nomination this year for `` Restrepo , '' a documentary chronicling the deployment of a platoon of U.S. soldiers in Afghanistan 's Korengal Valley . 
It was co-directed by journalist Sebastian Junger . 
Employed by Panos Pictures , Hetherington also worked with CNN in Afghanistan two years ago . 
CNN National Security Analyst Peter Bergen described Hetherington as humble , modest and a gentleman skilled in the taking of gritty photos of combat . '' 
` Restrepo ' was a labor of love for Tim ; he had a great deal of empathy for the young soldiers he documented , '' Bergen wrote . 
`` The resulting film is not only the best documentary about war I have ever seen , it is simply one of the greatest of all war films , sharing the epic quality of movies like ` Apocalypse Now ' or ` Full Metal Jacket . ' 
It is also very beautifully shot , revealing Tim 's great sense of picture composition . '' 
Hetherington 's last Twitter entry appears to have been made Tuesday : `` In besieged Libyan city of Misrata . 
indiscriminate shelling by Qaddafi forces . 
No sign of NATO . '' 
The journalists were walking in the front-line area at the end of Tripoli Street on the western edge of Misrata when a rocket-propelled grenade exploded , according to a town resident who wanted to be identified only as `` Mohammed '' for safety reasons . 
The group was traveling with rebel fighters , he said . 
Vanity Fair magazine , where Hetherington , 40 , was a contributing photographer , described him as `` widely respected by his peers for his bravery and camaraderie . '' 
Its profile says he had dual U.S. and British citizenship . 
Vanity Fair released a statement from Hetherington 's family . 
`` Tim was in Libya to continue his ongoing multimedia project to highlight humanitarian issues during time of war and conflict , '' it said . 
`` He will be forever missed . '' 
Hondros , 41 , suffered a fatal brain injury , according to The New York Times , which had a reporter in the hospital who spoke to a colleague at a triage center . 
Getty Images , Hondros ' employer , said it was `` deeply saddened '' by his passing : `` Chris never shied away from the front line having covered the world 's major conflicts throughout his distinguished career and his work in Libya was no exception . 
We are working to support his family and his fiancee as they receive this difficult news , and are preparing to bring Chris back to his family and friends in the United States . 
He will be sorely missed . '' 
Hondros , born in New York City to immigrant parents , won the 2005 Robert Capa Gold Medal from the Overseas Press Club of America for coverage of Iraq . 
He was a 2004 Pulitzer Prize breaking news photography finalist for `` his powerful and courageous coverage of the bloody upheaval in Liberia . '' 
Hondros ' work is featured in a multimedia exhibit slated to open May 7 in Chicago that features war images and is called Conflict Zone . 
At a panel discussion on war reporting in 2006 put on by the International Reporting Project in Washington , Hondros -- who had been to Iraq nine times by then -- had little sympathy for journalists who complained about conditions on the ground . 
`` I can talk about how I wish it was , '' he said , `` but , to me , the most important thing is just figuring out the way to cover it , which is what war journalists do all over the world . '' 
2010 : Photographer goes inside war 2009 : Images of Liberia 's civil war He said he was disappointed to hear that news organizations were having a hard time finding volunteers to go to Baghdad . 
`` I understand it from a human level , but it 's kind of surprising to me from a personal , journalistic one , '' he said . 
Guy Martin , a British citizen working for Panos Pictures , a photo agency , suffered shrapnel wounds to the pelvis and underwent vascular surgery Wednesday night , according to The New York Times . 
Mohammed said Martin was in critical but stable condition . 
Photographer Michael Christopher Brown suffered non life-threatening shrapnel wounds to his left shoulder . 
James Hider , Middle East correspondent for the Times of London , told CNN the four journalists were documenting fighting on Tripoli Street in Misrata . 
Hider said he was at a hospital and saw Hetherington die in a triage tent . 
`` It was shocking . '' 
The journalists , including Hetherington , had traveled Saturday by boat from Benghazi to Misrata , enjoying jokes and making sandwiches for refugees , Hider said . 
Martin and Brown remained hospitalized in Misrata , Human Rights Watch said . 
The office of the White House press secretary expressed concern about the safety of journalists in the country . 
`` The Libyan government and all governments across the world must take steps to protect journalists doing this vital work , '' it said in a statement . 
The office said , `` Chris 's tragic death underscores the need to protect journalists as they cover conflicts across the globe . '' 
The Committee to Protect Journalists said four journalists have died in the Libyan conflict . 
`` Two other journalists have been killed this year in the Libyan conflict . 
An unknown gunman killed Mohammed al-Nabbous , founder of the online Libya Al-Hurra TV , as the journalist was streaming live audio from a battle in Benghazi on March 19 . 
Cameraman Ali Hassan al-Jaber was shot when his Al-Jazeera crew was ambushed near Benghazi on March 13 , '' the group said on its website . 
CPJ has documented more than 80 attacks on members of the news media since unrest erupted in Libya in February , including `` numerous injuries , 49 detentions , 11 assaults , two attacks on news facilities , the jamming of two international television transmissions , at least four instances of obstruction , the expulsion of two international journalists , and the interruption of Internet service . 
At least six local journalists are missing amid speculation they are in the custody of security forces . 
One international journalist and two media support workers are also unaccounted for . '' 
`` Our hearts go out to family , friends , and colleagues of Tim Hetherington and Chris Hondros , whose work in some of the world 's most dangerous places has had a profound impact on how we understand and perceive war , '' said Joel Simon , CPJ executive director . 
`` Their deaths are another illustration of war 's cruelty and a reminder of how devastatingly difficult coverage of the Libyan conflict has become . '' 
After Hetherington 's death , Jalal al Gallal , a spokesman for the rebels , issued a statement saying , `` This is no longer the Gadhafi regime taking on Libya 's people . 
This is Gadhafi taking on the world . 
He has spared no one , not women , not children , not journalists . 
This is now everybody 's war . '' 
CNN 's Saad Abedine , Joe Sterling , Chelsea J. Carter , Katy Byron , Phil Gast and Jennifer Deaton contributed to this report . 
