By Robert Mahoney , Special to CNN Photojournalists Chris Hondros , left , and Tim Hetherington were killed in the Libya conflict . 
Chris Hondros and Tim Hetherington , two other journalists , killed in Libya Many others are missing or jailed by pro-Tripoli forces , Robert Mahoney says Mahoney : To show the truth of conflict , journalists must get up close , in highly risky situations He says Libya treacherous : irregulars , plainclothes soldiers , armed pro-Gadhafi forces Editor 's note : Robert Mahoney is deputy director of the Committee to Protect Journalists , an independent , nonprofit organization working to defend press freedom worldwide . 
Mahoney has worked as a reporter and bureau chief for Reuters , reporting on politics and economics . 
He has covered conflicts such as the civil war in Liberia , the Palestinian intifada , the Iraqi missile attacks on Israel and the assassination of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin . 
-LRB- CNN -RRB- -- It is a bitter irony that Chris Hondros , the prize-winning photographer killed in Libya on Wednesday alongside Oscar-nominated photojournalist Tim Hetherington , was to due to speak in New York next week on the dangers of covering conflict . 
I felt honored to be invited to sit on the same panel as him at the International Center of Photography , with other veteran battlefield photographers and their editors . 
The question for the panelists was essentially , `` Covering conflict : Is it worth it ? '' 
Each generation of journalists finds its own answers to that deceptively simple question . 
Advances in picture and audio technology , coupled with warp-speed mobile communications , have transformed newsgathering . 
But the essentials of sketching out the first draft of history , whether in words or in images , are the same . 
The only way to capture the truth is to get close to it . 
Despite powerful telephoto lenses , conflict photographers still work much like Robert Capa , who used a simple Contax camera to capture the Spanish Civil War in the 1930s . 
Hetherington and Hondros , who won the Robert Capa Gold Medal for his work in Iraq , understood the catalyzing power of the still image . 
Their work freezes the flow of blood or tears on a human face , rendering the real cost of fighting in Afghanistan , the Middle East , Africa and the Balkans . 
They knew that a single image , like the napalmed Vietnamese girl running from her burning village , can crystallize a whole war . 
Their work freezes the flow of blood or tears on a human face , rendering the real cost of fighting . 
That is why they were in the thick of bullets and mortar bombs in Misrata . 
Now , unfortunately , they join a tragically high honor roll of journalists who have given their lives to bear witness . 
The Committee to Protect Journalists has documented the deaths of 861 journalists over the past two decades . 
In that period , 150 have been killed directly in combat . 
Of those , about half were photojournalists or camera operators . 
Last year , 40 % of journalists who died in the line of duty were killed in combat-related crossfire and in dangerous assignments such as street protests . 
And this year , because of the uprisings in the Middle East , 12 of the 16 journalists killed worldwide have died covering combat or on dangerous assignments . 
Libya , with four combat deaths and brutal detentions of journalists , is especially dangerous for the press . 
The fighting is chaotic , with fluid or nonexistent front lines . 
Irregulars , soldiers without uniforms , pro-Gadhafi forces moving among civilians and firing into populated urban areas , all make for a deadly maze through which unprotected journalists must thread a path . 
Unlike the U.S.-prosecuted wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , journalists in Libya are not embedded with any military . 
Hetherington and Hondros had worked as both `` embeds '' and unilaterals , the military jargon for those journalists who go it alone . 
It was extremely difficult , if not impossible , to cover the fighting in both U.S. theaters without the army . 
Hetherington turned this to his advantage brilliantly by co-directing the 2010 Oscar-nominated '' Restrepo , '' a film about a year spent on a forward operating base in Afghanistan with U.S. troops . 
Libya , with four combat deaths and brutal detentions of journalists , is especially dangerous for the press . 
Hetherington and Hondros knew from training and experience how to handle themselves in combat . 
As a photojournalist , you learn where to stand to shoot , what to wear , how to approach combatants , how to hire a driver , a fixer , an interpreter , how to choose a hotel , and on and on . 
Any journalist may wear a bulletproof vest and a helmet . 
But in the end , reporters are exposed . 
Mortar rounds and rocket-propelled grenades like those whizzing through the streets of Misrata are no respecters of Kevlar chest plates . 
Hetherington and Hondros were not alone . 
Two other colleagues with them on the street were wounded in the same attack . 
To the east , still other photographers and reporters are missing or in detention , grabbed by pro-Tripoli forces . 
In the eight weeks since this civil war erupted , the Committee to Protect Journalists has documented more than 80 attacks on the press , including the killing of a cameraman for Al-Jazeera and reporter for Libya Al-Hurra TV . 
As of today , 17 journalists are missing or in detention , among them three photojournalists : Spaniard Manuel Varela , European Pressphoto Agency ; South African Anton Hammerl , Christian Science Monitor ; and American James Foley , Global Post . 
We never will get to hear Chris Hondros ' thoughts on covering war next week at the International Center of Photography . 
He already gave his answer by venturing onto Tripoli Street in Misrata with his camera . 
