Thursday 31 March 2005 00.05 BST A final analysis of the intelligence fiasco over Iraq 's non-existent weapons of mass destruction will today focus blame on the CIA and other spy agencies , largely clearing the White House and the Pentagon of allegations that they shaped the intelligence to justify the invasion , according to early accounts of the report . 
The assessment by a presidential commission on WMD intelligence follows 14 months of mostly secret inquiries in an undisclosed location in Virginia . 
It reportedly concentrates on mistakes in a multi-agency assessment in October 2002 , the national intelligence estimate , which portrayed Saddam Hussein 's weapons programs as a serious threat to the US . 
A year-long search by the US Iraq survey group later concluded that those programs had collapsed more than a decade before the invasion . 
The commission is expected to release a 400-page unclassified version of its report after delivering a complete version to George Bush this morning . 
According to leaks , the commission found that many of the intelligence shortcomings on Iraq are being repeated on Iran and North Korea . 
In all three cases , the commission is said to have found that human intelligence - actual spies - are in short supply , and intelligence has relied on satellite pictures , electronic intercepts , the testimony of exiles and guesswork . 
The Los Angeles Times yesterday quoted officials who had read some of the unclassified report as saying it pointed to `` glaring gaps in core US intelligence '' about nuclear programs pursued by Tehran and Pyongyang . 
According to the Washington Post the report will recommend that , in the light of `` group think '' over Iraq , dissent and debate should be encouraged among the nation 's 15 intelligence agencies . 
However , there will be relatively little scrutiny of alleged political pressure by senior administration officials to exaggerate the WMD claims . 
`` There 's nothing really about shaping the intelligence , '' said an intelligence source in Washington familiar with the report . 
A Senate inquiry into political manipulation of intelligence , postponed until after the November elections , now appears to have been quietly dropped by its Republican chairman , Pat Roberts . 
Ray McGovern , a former CIA official and persistent government critic , said the report was diverting the blame . 
`` I see it as part of the continuing attempt to blame the CIA and other intelligence agencies and divert attention away from the White House and the Pentagon . 
It 's worse than Butler -LRB- the inquiry into British intelligence shortcomings -RRB- , or anything you 've had over there . '' 
Dick Cheney made several trips to the CIA 's Langley headquarters in the months before the war to discuss findings on Iraq 's alleged WMD , and the agency 's ombudsman told the Senate that analysts had undergone constant `` hammering '' to come up with a connection between al-Qaida and Saddam . 
However , none of the CIA employees who testified before the Senate intelligence committee on the issue last year admitted changing their analysis to suit the administration 's wishes . 
Today 's report is expected to find that political pressure was not a significant factor , although it will advocate the creation of an ombudsman to hear from analysts who fear their work is being compromised , according to the Washington Post . 
It will reportedly include criticism of the Defense Intelligence Agency and the National Security Agency , both under the Pentagon 's control . 
But the burden of blame will fall once more on the CIA . 
`` I 'm told it is going to make the CIA look even worse than before , '' said Melvin Goodman , a former CIA official . 
As for top administration officials , Mr Goodman said : `` It looks like they 're going to escape again . '' 
