US unilateralism was a means of breaking the old order . 
Now it is building new alliances Thursday 31 March 2005 01.37 BST With any new political phenomenon , there is always a tendency to underestimate its novelty and treat it as some kind of short-term aberration . 
I vividly recall how long it took commentators and analysts , on the right and left , to recognize that Thatcherism was something quite new and here to stay . 
Similar doubts greeted the Bush administration and the neocon revolution : its novelty would be short-lived , it would not last and it was just not viable . 
It is always hard to imagine a new kind of world , easier to think of the future as an extension of the past , and difficult to comprehend a paradigm shift and grasp a new kind of logic . 
There was speculation last autumn that the second Bush term would be different , that the breach with Europe would be healed as a matter of necessity , that the US could not afford another Iraq , that somehow the new position was unsustainable . 
Already , however , from last November 's presidential election it was clear that the neocon revolution had wide popular support and serious electoral roots , that it was establishing a new kind of domestic political hegemony . 
In fact , the right has been setting the political agenda in the US for at least 30 years and that is now true with a vengeance . 
All the indications suggest that the revolution is continuing apace . 
The appointment of John Bolton as the US ambassador to the United Nations and the nomination of Paul Wolfowitz as president of the World Bank reveal a determination to place the cadres of the neocon revolution in key positions of power and influence and thereby create the conditions for its continuation and expansion . 
This was heralded almost immediately after the presidential election with the decision to replace Colin Powell , a man of very different political hue , with Condoleezza Rice as secretary of state . 
During the first Bush administration , and especially in its conduct of the Iraq war , the neocon revolution was often characterised as unilateralist , but this was always somewhat simplistic . 
No nation can simply go it alone , certainly not one that seeks to dominate the world . 
However strong it may be , it is still required to pursue its power and ambitions through a system of alliances . 
The end of the cold war led to the realisation that the US was now the world 's sole superpower . 
The period following 9\/11 persuaded the Americans that they now had an opportunity to remake the world in their own image , that the alliances that had been necessary in pursuit of the cold war , notably that with Europe , were no longer appropriate , certainly not on the old terms . 
The US has similarly renounced , or chosen to ignore , many of the international treaties that it had previously been party to - Kyoto , the international criminal court , even the Geneva conventions - either because it no longer believed in them or because it regarded them as a threat to the exercise of a new kind of American power . 
But it would be more accurate to see this unilateralism as a phase rather than a permanent new condition , as a means of breaking the old order rather than a long-term strategy for the new . 
The Bush administration has displayed a differential calculus . 
The heart of its strategy has been concerned with the Middle East where it has deployed a unilateralist policy of pre-emptive strikes and regime change as part of a wider attempt to remake the region . 
The Europeans were disregarded and relegated to the role of bystanders . 
In East Asia , the Americans have behaved quite differently . 
North Korea , like Iraq and Iran , was part of the axis of evil , but there has been no attempt at regime change . 
North Korea 's nuclear weapons , the geographical proximity of Seoul , the opposition of South Korea towards precipitous action , and the role and interest of China , have obliged the Americans to move with caution . 
Far from unilateralism , they have vested their efforts in the six-party talks , and the hope that China might act as a restraining force on Pyongyang . 
In the longer run , China remains the greatest global challenge to the US . 
But here again the Americans have moved with care and restraint . 
They sought to enlist China in the war against terror following 9\/11 , and since then relations between the two have been relatively calm . 
Meanwhile , the Americans will continue to give tacit support to Taiwan and quietly encourage Japan 's growing nationalism as a bulwark against China and a means of protecting their own role in the region . 
It is clear , in this context , that there are three main elements to American unilateralism : Iraq and the Middle East ; the Atlantic alliance ; and the US 's attitude towards international treaties and law . 
Although the Americans flagrantly ignored the Europeans over Iraq , and have loosened the bonds that previously existed in a way that undermines the notion of the west as shaped in the crucible of the cold war , they will seek to build a new relationship with Europe , albeit one far less intimate and far more unequal than before . 
As for Europe , there would appear to be clear limits as to how far it is prepared to go to resist the Americans . 
There are two small defining moments in this process . 
The Europeans may feel decidedly uneasy about Wolfowitz becoming president of the World Bank - with the exception , of course , of Bush 's European lapdog , our prime minister - but they are evidently going to acquiesce . 
American and European dominance of the institutions of the international economy ensures that the two will continue to cooperate , even if the relationship is likely to be more tense and fractious . 
The other example is the European Union 's attitude towards the arms embargo with China . 
Under American pressure , the likely decision to lift it will now be postponed : the ties are still sufficiently strong for Europe not to wish to anger the Americans beyond a certain point . 
The prospects of a drift towards any form of triangulation in the relationship between the US , Europe and China , even at the edges , are still very distant . 
The withdrawal of the US from international treaties does not condemn international law to the dustbin of history . 
It is evident , however , that the Americans are determined either to render these treaties redundant simply by ignoring them , force them to be renegotiated or perhaps both . 
In effect , what the Americans are intent on doing is reordering the world system to take account of their newly defined power and interests . 
Every part of the world is likely to feel the consequences of this geo-political earthquake , but some much more than others . 
The restless determination of the Bush administration to reorder global affairs is well-illustrated by a classified document prepared by the US defense secretary Donald Rumsfeld as a prelude to a massive review of Pentagon spending . 
It requires the military to build a far more proactive force focused on changing the world rather than responding to specific conflicts such as the Korean peninsula . 
It sees the development of very differently trained troops who would be able to intervene on a much more widespread basis . 
`` The idea is that you would have lots of teams operating in lots of places throughout the world , '' a senior defense official was reported as saying . 
At the same time , there is an absolute belief that the US must maintain such a large lead in crucial technologies that growing powers - in other words , China - will decide that it is simply too expensive to try to compete . 
Welcome to the new world order as seen from Washington . 
