updated : Sun Jul 29 2012 08:01:00 Since the start of the Arab spring in Tunis , Tunisian Malek Jaziri has risen almost 300 places in the men 's rankings . 
The Tunisian government declared a curfew Tuesday in eight governorates , including the capital city of Tunis , in an attempt to quell violence after protests that included radical Islamists . 
In the days following Tunisian dictator Zine el Abidine Ben Ali 's ousting last January , some media reporting on the so-called `` Jasmine Revolution '' presented the internet as the unique factor that led to the fall of his authoritarian regime . 
Thousands of people gathered on the main boulevard in Tunis on Saturday to commemorate the first anniversary of a demonstration that toppled the president and set in motion a string of revolts across the Arab world . 
Zine el Abidine Ben Ali will be remembered as the first leader to be toppled in what became known as the Arab Spring . 
After nearly 24 years in power , he became the former president of Tunisia . 
Tunisian authorities are trying former President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali in absentia Tuesday for his alleged role in the death of protesters in January 2011 . 
Tunisian Central Banker Mustapha Nabli speaks about the economic challenges faced by the new government . 
updated : Tue Dec 13 2011 11:22:00 Excerpt from the CNNI year-end special `` Defining Moments 2011 . '' 
The spark set ablaze in Tunisia spread in Arab world . 
Tunisia has sworn in a new president , a milestone in the North African country that kicked off the dramatic year-long cry for freedom across the Arab world . 
A Tunisian military court has sentenced former President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali to five years in prison , the state-run Tunisian News Agency said Wednesday . 
updated : Tue Oct 25 2011 18:04:00 Final results are n't in yet but Tunisia 's election is already being hailed as a model for other countries in the region . 
CNN 's Ivan Watson meets the woman whose confrontation with a vendor helped launch Tunisia 's revolution . 
Tunisia was the first Arab country this year to overthrow its long-ruling dictator . 
And it now is the first country of the Arab Spring to hold an election , one that international observers are calling remarkably free and fair . 
updated : Sun Oct 23 2011 17:08:00 Tunisians vote Sunday to pick delegates as democracy comes to the first Arab Spring nation . 
CNN 's Ivan Watson reports . 
While the world focuses on the gruesome images of a dead Gadhafi in Libya , many are missing another big game-changer taking place Sunday in the Arab world -- through ballots , not bullets . 
Less than a year ago , these four men were some of the most powerful in North Africa and the Middle East . 
Today one is dead , one in exile and another is in jail awaiting trial . 
Only one of them remains in power . 
updated : Fri Oct 21 2011 15:02:00 What a difference a year makes . 
Of four once-feared leaders , only one remains in power after the Arab Spring . 
Zimbabwean prosecutors drop treason charges against six activists updated : Mon Jul 18 2011 21:41:00 Prosecutors in Zimbabwe dropped treason charges Monday against six activists accused of plotting an Egyptian-style uprising against President Robert Mugabe . 
Tunisia , the country where the Arab Spring uprisings began this year , has joined the International Criminal Court , becoming the first North African country to do so . 
A Tunisian court sentenced ousted President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali and his wife to 35 years in prison in absentia on Monday after a one-day trial on corruption charges . 
The dust may only just have settled in Tunisia after the Jasmine Revolution , but that has not stopped the launch of a highly provocative marketing campaign designed to entice British and French holidaymakers to the country . 
Buses in London carrying controversial adverts for Tunisian tourism . 
Tunisia : Deposed leader to be tried in absentia next week updated : Tue Jun 14 2011 05:26:00 Former Tunisian President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali will be tried in absentia next week , the country 's interim prime minister said Tuesday . 
Deposed Tunisian leader : I 'm a scapegoat updated : Mon Jun 06 2011 22:23:00 Former Tunisian President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali said Monday he has been unfairly portrayed and discredited by political opponents seeking to make a break with their country 's past . 
Protesters gather in Tunisia 's capital after overnight curfew updated : Sun May 08 2011 08:49:00 Several hundred protesters were gathered in the center of Tunisia 's capital Sunday as riot police stood guard . 
Divergent views on U.S. role in revolutionary North Africa updated : Fri Mar 18 2011 06:59:00 The little Arab country that started the region 's wave of revolutions has wildly divergent reactions to the arrival of America 's top diplomat . 
A Tunisian court issued a ruling Wednesday dissolving the former governing party of ousted President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali , a lawyer said . 
6 activists to face treason charges in Zimbabwe updated : Mon Mar 07 2011 09:29:00 A court in Zimbabwe ruled Monday that six of 45 political and civil society activists arrested last month on charges of plotting to topple President Robert Mugabe in a Tunisian-Egyptian style uprising face a trial on treason charges and could be executed if convicted . 
The United States expressed concern Thursday about recent arrests in Zimbabwe of political and civil society activists and allegations by their lawyer that some of them were tortured . 
Tunisia sets date for parliamentary elections updated : Thu Mar 03 2011 23:59:00 Tunisia 's interim president declared Thursday that parliamentary elections will be held July 24 . 
Fouad Mebazaa said he plans to continue serving in his interim role until the new parliament begins to work , the country 's official news agency reported . 
More Tunisian ministers resign after protests updated : Tue Mar 01 2011 17:03:00 At least three Tunisian government officials resigned Monday and Tuesday , the country 's official news agency reported , in the wake of the resignation of the prime minister on Sunday . 
Political activists and union members arrested in Zimbabwe last week and accused of plotting an Egyptian-style uprising against longtime President Robert Mugabe were beaten by state security agents , their attorney said Thursday . 
Zimbabwe activists charged with treason updated : Wed Feb 23 2011 14:56:00 Dozens of political activists and union members rounded up in Zimbabwe last week faced a possible death sentence as prosecutors Wednesday accused them of plotting an Egyptian-style uprising against longtime President Robert Mugabe . 
Protesters , police clash in Algerian capital updated : Mon Feb 14 2011 10:24:00 Tensions erupted in another restive North African nation as security forces in Algeria on Saturday clashed with anti-government protesters who chanted , `` Change the power . '' 
updated : Mon Feb 14 2011 10:24:00 Police block an entrance to the capital in Algiers , Algeria , as the revolutionary ripple effect in the region spreads . 
Jihadist groups across the Middle East have applauded and encouraged the popular movements in Tunisia and Egypt , but their exhortations have made little impact on the course of events . 
In fact , they 've hardly been noticed . 
updated : Mon Feb 07 2011 14:48:00 CNN 's Fareed Zakaria shares a must-read book on Egypt 's future and his final thoughts on the turmoil in the country . 
The demonstrations that erupted on January 25 were driven by Egyptians ' aspirations for greater dignity in their lives . 
Most Egyptians have seen their standard of living deteriorate over the past decade because of rising unemployment , persistent inflation and stagnant wages . 
Time to give democracy a chance updated : Mon Jan 31 2011 06:12:00 With a mixture of anticipation and apprehension , the world is watching the largest pro-democracy protests in the history of Egypt and perhaps the Arab world . 
The United States lifted a travel warning for Tunisia on Friday as social unrest decreases and public order returns , according to the U.S. State Department . 
Tunisia 's unity government weathered another shake-up Thursday as the foreign minister resigned and Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi announced the composition of a cabinet that includes 12 new ministers . 
iReporter Marwan Guetari discusses the protests in Tunisia . 
Egypt has been rocked by protests in recent days , only weeks after similar disturbances sparked revolution in Tunisia and forced then-president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to flee the country . 
Tunisia issues warrant for ousted leader , family members updated : Wed Jan 26 2011 13:49:00 The restive North African nation of Tunisia has issued an international arrest warrant for its ousted president , his wife , and several members of their families , Tunisian media reported . 
updated : Wed Jan 26 2011 13:49:00 CNN 's Ivan Watson looks how and why the situation in Jordan is mirroring that in Tunisia . 
CNN 's Nic Robertson looks at whether what happened in Tunisia could occur in Egypt . 
Baton-wielding Algerian security forces clashed Saturday with protesters who defied a ban and took to the streets of the capital demanding political reform . 
updated : Sat Jan 22 2011 16:42:00 Protesters in Algiers defy 20-year ban , taking to the streets to demand political reform . 
Tunisian government lifts ban on political groups updated : Fri Jan 21 2011 00:49:00 Tunisia 's new government announced Thursday it will recognize political groups banned under the regime of ousted President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and grant amnesty to all political prisoners . 
updated : Fri Jan 21 2011 00:49:00 Ben Wedeman reports people in Tunisia want nothing to do with former members of the former ruling party , the RCD . 
Interim president in Tunisia pledges a break from the past updated : Wed Jan 19 2011 14:27:00 Tunisia 's interim president said Wednesday the country 's new government plans to sever `` any link with the past , '' a reference to widely unpopular years of rule under the former regime . 
Will Tunisia 's unrest have a ripple effect ? 
updated : Wed Jan 19 2011 12:57:00 The ouster of Tunisia 's longtime ruler has cast a shadow over the surrounding region , but few analysts were willing to predict Tuesday that the revolt would spread to other countries . 
A revolt against the politics of despair is sweeping across the Arab and Muslim world -- signs of which are on full display from Afghanistan and Iran to Palestine and most spectacularly in Tunisia . 
Tunisian opposition leaders joined the current ruling party Monday in a new government to replace the country 's ousted president , while U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called for a return to stability `` as soon as possible . '' 
updated : Mon Jan 17 2011 22:16:00 CNN 's Ben Wedeman and team are briefly detained in Tunisia and forced to replace a shaken cab driver . 
Hollywood A-listers Antonio Banderas and Freida Pinto kept working on a new movie in Tunisia even as the country was beset by turmoil and protests , and its president fled to Saudi Arabia . 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman reports on the unrest in Tunisia and its aftermath . 
Are jackboots already trampling the `` Jasmine Revolution '' ? 
updated : Sat Jan 15 2011 23:54:00 Social media helped ignite the movement to topple the Tunisian government . 
CNN 's Ralitsa Vassileva reports . 
Tunisian union wants inquiry into demonstrator deaths updated : Sat Jan 15 2011 23:01:00 As clashes spread Tuesday , a Tunisian workers union called on President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali to order an independent inquiry into the deaths of demonstrators protesting high unemployment and poor living conditions in Tunisia . 
Tunisian president vows to cut prices of food , end censorship updated : Sat Jan 15 2011 22:59:00 Tunisia 's president vowed Thursday to cut prices of basic foodstuffs , to lift censorship and to ensure police do not use live ammunition except in self-defense , and implied that he will not run again for president . 
Tunisian Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi discusses the protests and firing of the interior minister . 
Army patrolling streets in wake of Tunisian president 's departure updated : Fri Jan 14 2011 20:54:00 Army tanks and armored personnel carriers patrolled the streets of Tunis Saturday , a day after the prime minister announced that he is the interim president -- the latest development in a story of unrest and public outrage in a tiny but significant corner of the Arab world . 
updated : Fri Jan 14 2011 20:54:00 Tunisa 's president calls for new elections and a curfew is imposed after weeks of street protests . 
In Tunisia 's capital , protesters take to the streets updated : Fri Jan 14 2011 09:39:00 A day after the Tunisian president indicated that he would n't run again , protesters peacefully took to the streets in tense North African nation 's capital to protest his rule . 
updated : Fri Jan 14 2011 09:39:00 Protesters in Tunisia turn to social media to spread their voice and organize protests . 
The protests that have gripped Tunisia in recent weeks are , to say the least , unusual . 
Organized dissent in the streets is rarely tolerated in Arab states , and human rights groups say the Tunisian government has had a short fuse when dealing with opponents . 
But what 's going on in Tunisia is all the more unusual because the protests are being organized and supported through online networks centered on Twitter and Facebook . 
A leading human rights group condemned Friday what it called a violent crackdown by Tunisian authorities on recent protests over rising prices and a shortage of jobs . 
Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa is expected to tour Arab capitals in the days ahead to discuss plans for a summit in the wake of the cancellation of a meeting that was to begin Monday in Tunisia . 
