Anderson Cooper reports on the manhunt for former LAPD officer Christopher Dorner who 's accused of killing three and threatening to attack again . 
Watch AC360 at 8 & 10 p.m. ET . 
Anderson is reporting live from Cairo , Egypt tonight . 
He 'll have the latest developments from Egypt 's capital city . 
Protesters remain in Tahrir Square where they 're demanding that President Hosni Mubarak resign , but at this point he 's ignoring those calls . 
Tomorrow could be a critical day in Egypt . 
Demonstrators are organizing what they 're calling a `` march of millions . '' 
In preparation of that march , Egyptian security forces have placed concrete barriers in strategic locations . 
We 've also learned that Noor Group , an Internet service provider , has been shut down . 
This takes the country offline . 
The government is also planning to shut down mobile phone networks before the march . 
The Egyptian army said there will be `` no violence '' against the people . 
`` We reassure the armed forces are a force of stability and security for this great nation . 
The protection of the people is one of its core values , '' said a military spokesman on state TV . 
About 2,600 Americans are still trying to get out of Egypt tonight . 
Some 1,200 got on chartered flights today . 
Anderson will talk with two Americans trying to get out . 
They say they 're not getting much help from the U.S. embassy . 
Anderson also got an exclusive interview with Mohamed ElBaradei , the former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency who returned to his native Egypt last week as an opposition leader . 
ElBaradei told Anderson that the United States needs to `` let go '' of its longtime ally . 
`` My message to President Obama , and , I have lots of respect for him , I worked with him , you know , in the last year of my tenure was at IAA and I have a lot of admiration for him , but I tell him , you need to review your policy , you need to let go of Mubarak , you should n't be behind the curve and you need to start building confidence with the people and not with the people who are smothering the people . '' 
Join us for these angles and much more live from Egypt starting at 10 p.m. ET on CNN . 
hope the u.s. stands tall to help the people of Egypt in their struggle we failed Iran not so long ago . 
February 1 , 2011 at 11:09 am | I 've been watching closely 2 the reports on the CNN News about Cairo , Egypt . 
My concern now , is the safety of my fiancee & his family , living in Alexandria , Egypt & also 4 all our US reporters & tourists still remaining in Egypt at this time . 
My prayers r with u all . 
My God see justice 4 Egypt & may he keep everyone safe from harm in today 's protest without causing a war in Egypt . 
The internet & cellulars are down at this time , but I was able 2 get thru by calling my love 's home phone line . 
I 'm so glad their ok . 
Thank u , Anderson 4 bringing us the news live , may God be with u thru this difficult time in Egypt . 
February 1 , 2011 at 3:22 am | Keep safe Anderson and staff . 
I am amazed at the Egyptian people who are protesting in the face of the a giant government . 
They are a brave courageous people who have made it clear what they do n't want : Mubarak ! 
There are no voices rising up for what they do want . 
What is an acceptable temporary replacement so as to avoid anarchy after Mubarak is ousted ? 
I fear they could be over run by something\/someone they have n't chosen . 
February 1 , 2011 at 2:51 am | I 'd like to know if any other country & US have thought about doing a food drop , for the people of Egypt if there food supply is so low . 
We should be backing the people . 
mubarak has nothing to govern without the people of Egypt behind him . 
Stay safe February 1 , 2011 at 1:27 am | Anderson , be careful , it is going to be an explosive day . 
Mubarak will be out of reign . 
February 1 , 2011 at 12:29 am | I hope the army keeps its words to not turn on the unarmed people . 
I really wish someone of those people surrounding Mubarak , takes it upon himself , and walks up to Mubarak and whispers in his ears that he needs to leave . 
Actually Mubarak is 82 years old man , who is out of touch , and clinking on his day job . 
last time I checked , Hmmm , let me see ... Egypt is not a monarchy . 
He needs to leave - !!!! Once all the dust has settled and Mubarek is gone , the question being asked especially in the U.S. , is what next ? 
Who 's the leader ? 
The fact that there are no viable opposition parties seems to make westerners nervous , because their system of politics is all that they understand . 
What 's important is to trust these good people to prevent chaos , and to ensure that they are governed . 
A coalition of several prominent individuals could work as an interim government until an election is held . 
After all that they 've been through I have no doubt that Egyptians will get it done , and that they will be able to cooperate with one another . 
Perhaps the partisan , bitter party infighting which characterizes American politics is NOT the way for Egyptians to go . 
They have the floor , so let 's just watch rather than fretting that `` there 's no leader '' . 
January 31 , 2011 at 11:42 pm | Mr. mobarek pls have democratic election and 100 % no one will elected you . 
live the power in peace to others it will be good 4 all off the mid east and Africa . 
January 31 , 2011 at 11:41 pm | Anderson Cooper , Please expose to the world that the looting going on in Egypt is not from the protesters . 
They are plain clothes policemen and criminals that were let loose from the jails in Cairo . 
The regime is doing this to spread fear amongst Egyptians and to keep the protesters off the streets . 
Also , please expose the Egyptian chivalry and bravery . 
The ones protecting the streets now are the Egyptian people themselves . 
They are doing this in shifts and organizing themselves in the absence of law . 
With chaos on the streets caused by criminals and escape prisoners , there is no way to filter out the bad from the good without the army being given some power to take control . 
In order to effectively provide protection for the citizens of Egypt , the residents must return to their homes and clear the streets allowing a representative to speak on their behalf . 
The country is at greater risk of danger if the military are overtaken by evil doers pretending to be their friends . 
They must be strong now ... punish those who are committing crimes and protect the innocent . 
Use force if necessary to accomplish this . 
January 31 , 2011 at 11:26 pm | Anderson , Great job in coverage . 
Very fair and accurate coverage , as you always do . 
That however should not take any credit away from Ben , Nick , Iven . 
I am glued to the CNN . 
To be frank with you , I was torn between Aljazeera and CNN , but now The former is out , it is only CNN . 
Great and complete coverage . 
Keep up the good work January 31 , 2011 at 11:21 pm | I need to tell Obama that Mubarak is using The Muslim Brotherhood threat to gain his support . 
It is actually a fake threat , The people do not want The Muslim Brotherhood and will never choose them . 
The people prooved that they have a say and they will choose the right person . 
the US need not to worry about that , We are a nation who wants to live in peace , we want to build our country and have a better future for our kids and we can do that , all we need is our freedom . 
January 31 , 2011 at 11:19 pm | Want to know more ? 
Go behind the scenes with AC361 `` We are elated ... that there is one person or two who is off the streets who could cause harm . '' 
- Shatira Wilks , #Hadiya 's cousin #chicago 8:52 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET #Breaking : more details on the two men who are facing murder charges in the death of a #Chicago teen . 
#ac 360 8:47 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Heartbreaking words as Chris Kyle 's wife , Taya , said goodbye in a public memorial service today . 
#ac 360 RT @andersoncooper : New details about the killing of #BinLaden and what 's happening to the SEAL who reportedly fired the shots . 
@AC360 8:42 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET New details about the killing of #BinLaden and what 's happening to the SEAL who reportedly fired the shots . 
@AC360 8p , 10p 8:41 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET A hero speaks out : the man who killed #BinLaden and is now fighting for his livelihood at home . 
#ac 360 Widespread damage in #Mississippi & #Alabama : shocking pictures from the storm 's aftermath . 
#AC 360 8:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Coming up : the man who killed #BinLaden . 
He speaks out only to @PhilBronstein who joins us . 
#ac 360 What will you make of the #Pope 's legacy ? 
