January 31 , 2011 | From Dugald McConnell and Brian Todd , CNN While some governments are trying to walk a fine line between supporting Egypt 's president and supporting protesters in that tumultuous nation , Iranian officials are taking the side of the protesters . 
But an Iranian opposition leader is making a competing claim of solidarity with the demonstrators , pointing out that when Iran 's leaders faced a similar movement in their own backyard two years ago , they crushed it . 
Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi on Sunday praised Egypt 's protests , according to Iran 's semi-official Fars news agency , as did the speaker of Iran 's parliament , who said the parliament and the nation support uprisings against dictatorial regimes . 
`` The time has -LRB- been -RRB- reached to overcome puppet autocratic regimes by relying on the Islamic teachings , '' said speaker Ali Larijani , according to the news agency . 
And Ayatollah Ahmad Khatami , a top cleric in Tehran , was quoted last week by Fars as saying , `` An Islamic Middle East is being created based on Islam , religion , and democracy with prevailing religious principals . '' 
But Iranian opposition leader Mir Hossein Mousavi says that his 2009 mass protest movement , which was violently crushed in the streets of Tehran , was based on the same grievances as the ones now seen in Tunisia , Egypt , and Yemen . 
`` Today , the slogan of ` Where is my vote ? ' 
of the people of Iran has reached Egypt , '' Mousavi wrote on his website . 
And in the Egyptian government 's confrontations and clashes with protesters , he says , `` We can identify a similar pattern '' to the crackdown by the Iranian government in 2009 . 
With Iran 's regime and Iran 's opposition both trying to identify with Egypt 's protesters , `` there are two competing narratives , '' says Afshin Molavi of the Washington-based New America Foundation , which describes itself as a nonprofit , nonpartisan public policy institute . 
Analysts say Iran 's leaders have a strategic interest at stake in the turmoil in Egypt : It is weakening Iranian leaders ' biggest archrival in the region -- the secular , pro-Western Hosni Mubarak . 
Mubarak has been an ally of the West for decades , taking the opposite position from Iran on a number of issues -- opposing Iran 's nuclear program , supporting peace with Israel , and working to prevent border smuggling of weapons to Hamas militants in Gaza , according to American diplomatic cables released recently by WikiLeaks . 
