By John D. Sutter , CNN Is the internet the modern megaphone and is it essential for a protest movement ? 
Protests in the Middle East raise questions about the internet 's role in democracy Some say the internet is a human right ; others that it 's not necessary for protest Egypt has cut access to internet and mobile phones ; protests continue -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Are we in the age of internet revolutions -- where Facebook , Twitter and text messages are essential ingredients in democratic change ? 
Or , as the ongoing protests in Egypt perhaps show , is the internet only one tool in this process -- nothing more than the modern version of the telephone ? 
As violent demonstrations continue on the streets of Egypt -- where many are upset with the results of Hosni Mubarak 's 30 years in power -- tech pundits and bloggers are trying to sort out the internet 's role in the situation . 
Some say Egypt is violating modern human rights by cutting access to the internet and to mobile phone networks . 
Others say the fact that protests have continued despite these digital barricades reveals a massive hole in the argument that social media spawns modern revolutions . 
`` Where activists were once defined by their causes , they are now defined by their tools , '' Malcolm Gladwell writes in The New Yorker . 
To help make sense of these complicated arguments , here 's a wrap-up of what people are saying about the internet 's role in Egypt , where unrest continues , and in Tunisia , where protests earlier this month toppled the government and set off a wave of unrest in other Middle Eastern countries : `` We want to make sure that Egypt is not interfering with the use of social media . 
That 's a fundamental right as clear as walking into a town square . 
We 're making these points clear to Egypt , publicly and privately . '' 
Dave Pell , writing on the blog Tweetage Wasteland , says the internet is n't essential for revolution -- but it sure helps : `` Yes , folks . 
The Civil Rights movement took place at a time before Twitter . 
For those scoring at home , the same is true for every notable historical movement from the Big Bang through the release of Destiny Child 's Bootlylicious video . 
The realtime , social web is clearly not a required element to organize and execute a high impact revolution . 
Neither is a megaphone , but it sure makes it easier for the folks in the back to hear you . '' '' 
... Do n't confuse tools with root causes , or means with ends . 
The protests in Tunisia , Egypt and Yemen are against dictators who 've held power -- and clamped down on their people -- for decades . 
That 's the fuel for the engine of dissent . 
The dozen or more protesters that self-immolated in Egypt did n't do it for the tweets . 
` It 's about years of repression and dictatorship . 
Revolutions existed before Twitter and Facebook , ' Issandr el-Amrani , a Cairo writer and activist , said in a telephone interview from Tunisia . 
` It 's really not much more complicated than this . ' 
Only about a quarter of the Egyptian populace is online , el-Amrani estimated . 
So street protests have grown the old-fashioned way : by leaflets and spontaneous amalgamation . '' 
`` Humans are functioning as defacto news aggregators using the publication tools already available . 
This , while not a novel idea , really hit home in the past two weeks with the two subsequent revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt . 
What I and you probably noticed was that interested people we followed took it upon themselves to become individual nodes of information , using the tools they had to serve as their own news networks . '' 
In The New Yorker , Nicholas Thompson , a social media expert , writes that the internet can benefit both sides of a conflict : `` Governments control the pipes through which all that information flows . 
This means they can block sites or , as Egypt has just apparently done , shut down the entire Internet and thus confuse everyone who has come to rely on it . 
In Iran , the government clearly had some success using the Internet to disrupt and slow the green revolution . 
In Tunisia , the government hacked the password of nearly every Facebook user in the country . 
Had Ben Ali not fallen so quickly , that information would have been extremely useful . 
Technological tools can be used quite effectively by the masses , or by the man . '' '' 
... technology -- not just the Internet but also mobile phones -- make -LRB- sic -RRB- it easier to trace protesters and dissidents . 
It would be very hard , for example , to trace the names of everyone who gathered on Minsk 's central square to oppose the results of the recent elections in Belarus before mobile phones became ubiquitous . '' 
`` I think the right to connect now becomes a fundamental human right . 
And the problem here is we see that government is the single point of failure for the internet . 
Whether that 's the kill switch , as Egypt has used it , or whether it 's the fact that they control the structure for the internet . 
And so our future -- the means by which we 're going to build the next society -- is vulnerable here , and that worries me . 
At the same time , I celebrate the fact that the people in a nation can use these tools to take charge . '' 
`` Would the State Department have gotten involved early on -LRB- remember , their first public comment was in respect to Tunisian Net freedom -RRB- ? 
Would Al Jazeera -- without offices on the ground -- have been able to report on the unfolding story as they did ? 
Most importantly , would any of that have mattered ? '' 
Internet access is `` fundamental '' to the protests in Egypt , writes Khadija Sharife on the Huffington Post : `` More than ever , the internet remains a crucial vehicle of sustaining and transmitting resistance by allowing for Egyptians to ` network the world ' about the machinery of Mubarak 's brutal regime . 
While it is not technology that has given life to the revolution but Egyptians themselves , catalyzed in part by their Tunisian neighbors , access is fundamental . '' 
In The New Yorker , Malcolm Gladwell points out that protests -- and revolutions -- occurred long before the internet . 
Take the Civil Rights movement : `` Thousands were arrested and untold thousands more radicalized . 
These events in the early sixties became a civil-rights war that engulfed the South for the rest of the decade -- and it happened without e-mail , texting , Facebook , or Twitter . '' 
