By the CNN Wire Staff NEW : Egypt tries to cut off travel , communications ahead of new rallies NEW : `` There is no aggressive behavior from the army , '' activist says Mubarak 's VP promises reform , and the army says it wo n't shoot protesters U.S. needs to `` let go of Mubarak , '' ElBaradei says Editor 's Note : This article is being updated constantly by CNN reporters worldwide . 
Follow live blogging on This Just In and the latest tweets from CNN correspondents from the protests . 
Send your video , images to CNN iReport . 
Cairo , Egypt -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Egypt braced for a `` march of millions '' in anti-government protests Tuesday as embattled President Hosni Mubarak tried to throw up literal and figurative roadblocks in the way of demonstrators calling for his ouster . 
Major demonstrations are planned for Cairo , Alexandria and other cities , the latest in a series of rallies that began a week ago . 
Protesters have defied orders for a curfew , and the country 's powerful military announced Monday that it would not open fire on peaceful demonstrators . 
A leading opposition figure told CNN that the United States needs to be ready to `` let go of Mubarak , '' a longtime ally . 
`` You should n't be behind the curve , and you need to start building confidence with the people , and not with the people who are smothering the people , '' Mohamed ElBaradei , the former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency , told CNN 's `` Anderson Cooper 360 . '' 
Mubarak 's newly appointed vice president , longtime intelligence chief Omar Suleiman , announced Monday that he had begun discussing reform with opposition parties . 
Speaking on the state television network , Suleiman said a reform package should be drawn up `` expeditiously . '' 
Gunfire amid protests in Cairo Egypt VP : Reform comes through dialogue Egypt 's protesters not swayed by tanks `` The other parties will also have a role to play , which will lead to real political reform , '' Suleiman said . 
But there were no details of what proposals might be on the table , nor was there any immediate reaction from opposition figures or any indication of which parties were taking part . 
And at the same time , the government has shut down the country 's rail network , posted troops at key locations , closed banks and schools and pulled the plug on mobile phone and internet service ahead of Tuesday 's protests . 
Mubarak has ruled Egypt for nearly 30 years under a sweeping emergency decree , imposed after the 1981 assassination of his predecessor , Anwar Sadat . 
A wave of protests against his regime erupted following the uprising in Tunisia that ousted its longtime strongman January 14 , and Arab League Secretary-General Amre Moussa -- Mubarak 's former foreign minister -- called Monday for a peaceful transition of power `` from an era to the other , '' the French news agency AFP reported . 
Egypt 's military announced Monday evening that it recognized `` the legitimate demands of the honest citizens '' and would not open fire on peaceful protesters . 
`` The presence of the armed forces in the Egyptian streets is for your benefit to protect your safety and peace , '' an unnamed spokesman announced on state television Monday night . 
`` Your armed forces will not use violence against this great people , who have always played a significant role in every moment of Egypt 's great history . '' 
And human rights activist and blogger Ramy Raoof told CNN 's `` Parker Spitzer '' that troops are mingling with demonstrators in Cairo 's Tahrir Square . 
`` There is no aggressive behavior from the army toward the peaceful assemblies , '' he said early Tuesday . 
`` We hope that within a few hours , the same also will happen . 
We hope the army will not escalate violence against us . '' 
Though Mubarak has given no indication that he will bow to demands for his ouster , he fired his Cabinet on Saturday , and his designation of Suleiman as vice president marks the first time he has filled that post since he came to power in 1981 . 
Monday , Mubarak swore in Mahmoud Wagdy as the new interior minister to replace Habib el-Adly , who has been criticized by protesters because of police actions . 
Others sworn in on Monday were Finance Minister Samir Radwan , a former economist at the International Labor Organization , and Health Minister Ahmed Hosni Farid . 
iReporters help cover Egypt protests Tony Blair discusses Egypt crisis Will unrest spread to other countries ? 
At a glance : Nations facing unrest Radwan told CNN 's `` Quest Means Business '' that his priority is `` to show that this is a government that responds to the demands -- the fair demands , I would say -- of the people in Tahrir Square . '' 
`` We need to use public expenditure to achieve some sort of social justice and a better distribution of the fruits of growth , as to the bottom 40 % of this country , '' Radwan said . 
At the same time , he said , Egypt should n't sacrifice economic reforms and gains `` that enabled it to stand the storm of two successive crises -- the food crisis and the financial crisis . '' 
State television reported Monday that the crisis has cost the country an estimated 69 billion Egyptian pounds -LRB- nearly $ 12 billion -RRB- and set its economy back six months . 
Meanwhile , there are international indications that the world could accept a changed Egypt without Mubarak . 
In Washington , U.S. officials have been calling for an `` orderly transition '' that will include free elections in September , when Mubarak 's current term expires . 
`` The United States government does not determine who 's on the ballot , '' White House spokesman Robert Gibbs told reporters . 
`` The question is whether or not those elections are going to be free and fair . 
That 's what we would weigh in on and weigh in on strongly . '' 
While it was widely believed Mubarak was grooming his son , Gamal , as his successor , that plan now has been complicated by demands for democracy . 
ElBaradei is one of several opposition figures whose names surface when protesters talk about possible future leaders of Egypt . 
Another possibility is Moussa , a veteran diplomat who was Mubarak 's foreign minister until 2001 . 
But several opposition movements have been represented on the streets in the demonstrations , and Raoof said , `` There is no leader for the revolution . '' 
`` There is no political group leading the people . 
There is no one leading the people . 
People are going in a very organic way ... people are just doing it . '' 
Mounir Fakhry Abdel Nour , secretary-general of the Wafd Party , told CNN the group 's followers have been `` extremely active . '' 
In Alexandria , an armored personnel carrier fired warning shots Monday as about 2,000 to 3,000 people gathered . 
The shots were seen as an apparent effort to intimidate protesters near a hotel . 
While it 's difficult to ascertain a solid death toll during the violence , Human Rights Watch staffers have confirmed 80 deaths from two hospitals in Cairo , 36 deaths in Alexandria and 13 fatalities in Suez , said Human Rights Watch researcher Heba Morayef . 
The unrest has paralyzed daily life in Egypt . 
Many essential supplies are running low , said Peter Bouckaert , Human Rights Watch emergencies director . 
Gas stations throughout Cairo and Alexandria were closing because they were out of fuel . 
The amount of goods in shops were low and many were rationing how much food people could buy . 
The Egyptian stock exchange and banks were closed Monday , and the Moody 's ratings agency downgraded debt ratings for the country because of the turmoil . 
There were long lines in front of bread shops and supermarkets , ATMs and gas stations were closed , and there was a minimal police presence . 
In one neighborhood of Cairo , however , sanitation workers were seen collecting garbage . 
Men with makeshift weapons patrolled neighborhoods , creating checkpoints to fill the void left when police stopped patrolling the streets , and the self-appointed defense groups appear to be working closely with the military . 
Suez Canal authorities have said operations there are unchanged and the army is in control . 
However , shipping companies are predicting delays . 
And Egyptian soldiers are guarding the pyramids in Giza , one of the world 's top tourist draws . 
There have been reports of prison breaks , and state-run Nile TV said Monday nearly 2,100 escaped inmates had been arrested . 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman , Frederik Pleitgen , Ivan Watson , Housam Ahmed , Caroline Faraj , Salma Abdelaziz , Saad Abedine , Christine Theodorou , Zain Verjee and journalist Ian Lee contributed to this report 
