The scenes in Egypt have been dramatic , as thousands turn out onto the streets demanding that President Hosni Mubarak resign after 30 years in power . 
Few images have been more powerful than those of demonstrators dropping to the ground to pray in the face of security forces . 
And while some have been inspired by the role of religious faith in the protests , there are definite worries that the banned Muslim Brotherhood is waiting in the wings , hoping for a chance to take over . 
`` You do n't just have a government and a movement for democracy , '' former British Prime Minister Tony Blair cautioned on Monday . 
`` You also have others , notably the Muslim Brotherhood , who would take this in a different direction . 
We need to be anxious to meet the aspirations of the people , but do it in a way that produces something better . '' 
In the name of Allah , the Beneficent , the Merciful Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth halloweth Allah . 
And He is the Mighty , the Wise . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- O ye who believe ! 
wherefore say ye that which ye do not ? 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Most odious it is Unto Allah that ye should Say that which ye do not . 
-LRB- 3 -RRB- Verily Allah loveth those who fight in His way drown up in ranks , as though they were a structure well compacted . 
-LRB- 4 -RRB- And recall what time Musa said Unto his people : O my people ! 
wherefore hcurt ye me , When surely ye know that verily I am Allahs apostle Unto you ! 
Then when they sweryed , Allah made their hearts swerve ; and Allah guideth not a trans-gr-essing people . 
-LRB- 5 -RRB- And recall what time Isa , son of Maryam , said : children of Israil ! 
verily I am Allahs apostle Unto you , confirming the Taurat which was before me , and giving the glad tidings of an apostle who cometh after me : his name will be Ahmad . 
Then when he brought Unto them evidences , they said : this is magic manifest . 
-LRB- 6 -RRB- And who is a greater wrong-doer than he who fabricateth against Allah a lie even as he is summoned Unto Islam ? 
And Allah guideth not a wrongdoing people . 
-LRB- 7 -RRB- Fain would they extinguish the light of Allah is with their mouths and Allah is going to perfect His light , even though averse may be the infidels . 
-LRB- 8 -RRB- He it is Who hath sent His apostle with the guidance and the true religion , that He may make it triumph over all religion , even though averse may be associaters . 
-LRB- 9 -RRB- ye who believe ! 
shall direct you to a merchandise that will deliver you from a torment afflictive ? 
-LRB- 10 -RRB- It is that ye should believe in Allah and His apostle and strive in the way of Allah with your riches and Your lives That is best for you , if ye only knew ! 
-LRB- 11 -RRB- He will forgive you your sins , and make YOu enter Gardens whereunder rivers flow , and happy abodes in Gardenscc Everlasting . 
That is the mighty achievement . 
-LRB- 12 -RRB- And also another blessing which ye love : succor from Allah and a speedy victory . 
And bear thou the glad tidings Unto the believers . 
-LRB- 13 -RRB- O ye who believe ! 
be Allahs helpers , even as Isa , son of Maryam , said Unto the disciples : who shall be my helpers Unto Allah ? 
The disciples said : we are Allahs helpers . 
Then a part of the Children of Israil believed , and part disbelieved . 
Then We strengthened those who believed against their foe ; wherefore they became triumphant . 
In the name of Allah , the Beneficent , the Merciful There is no reproach for the Prophet in that which Allah maketh his due . 
That was Allah 's way with those who passed away of old -- and the commandment of Allah is certain destiny -- -LRB- 38 -RRB- Who delivered the messages of Allah and feared Him , and feared none save Allah . 
Allah keepeth good account . 
-LRB- 39 -RRB- Muhammad is not the father of any man among you , but he is the messenger of Allah and the Seal of the Prophets ; and Allah is ever Aware of all things . 
-LRB- 40 -RRB- O ye who believe ! 
Remember Allah with much remembrance . 
-LRB- 41 -RRB- And glorify Him early and late . 
-LRB- 42 -RRB- He it is Who blesseth you , and His angels -LRB- bless you -RRB- , that He may bring you forth from darkness unto light ; and He is Merciful to the believers . 
-LRB- 43 -RRB- Their salutation on the day when they shall meet Him will be : Peace . 
And He hath prepared for them a goodly recompense . 
-LRB- 44 -RRB- O Prophet ! 
We have sent thee as a witness and a bringer of good tidings and a warner . 
-LRB- 45 -RRB- And as a summoner unto Allah by His permission , and as a lamp that giveth light . 
-LRB- 46 -RRB- And announce unto the believers the good tidings that they will have great bounty from Allah . 
-LRB- 47 -RRB- And incline not to the disbelievers and the hypocrites . 
Disregard their noxious talk , and put thy trust in Allah . 
Allah is sufficient as Trustee . 
In the name of Allah , the Beneficent , the Merciful Those who disbelieve and hinder others from the way of Allah , He shall send their works astray . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- And those who believe and work righteous works and believe in that which hath been revealed Unto Muhammad - and it is the truth from their Lord - He shall expiate their misdeeds from them and shall make good their state . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- That is because those who disbelieve follow the falsehood , and those who believe follow the truth from their Lord . 
And thus Allah propoundeth Unto mankind their similitude . 
In the name of Allah , the Beneficent , the Merciful In the name of Allah , the Beneficent , the Merciful And when Abraham and Ishmael were raising the foundations of the House , -LRB- Abraham prayed -RRB- : Our Lord ! 
Accept from us -LRB- this duty -RRB- . 
Thou , only Thou , art the Hearer , the Knower . 
-LRB- 127 -RRB- Our Lord ! 
And make us submissive unto Thee and of our seed a nation submissive unto Thee , and show us our ways of worship , and relent toward us . 
Thou , only Thou , art the Relenting , the Merciful . 
-LRB- 128 -RRB- Our Lord ! 
And raise up in their midst a messenger from among them who shall recite unto them Thy revelations , and shall instruct them in the Scripture and in wisdom and shall make them grow . 
Thou , only Thou , art the Mighty , Wise . 
-LRB- 129 -RRB- And who forsaketh the religion of Abraham save him who befooleth himself ? 
Verily We chose him in the world , and lo ! 
in the Hereafter he is among the righteous . 
-LRB- 130 -RRB- When his Lord said unto him : Surrender ! 
he said : I have surrendered to the Lord of the Worlds . 
-LRB- 131 -RRB- The same did Abraham enjoin upon his sons , and also Jacob , -LRB- saying -RRB- : O my sons ! 
Allah hath chosen for you the -LRB- true -RRB- religion ; therefore die not save as men who have surrendered -LRB- unto Him -RRB- . 
-LRB- 132 -RRB- Or were ye present when death came to Jacob , when he said unto his sons : What will ye worship after me ? 
They said : We shall worship thy God , the God of thy fathers , Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac , One God , and unto Him we have surrendered . 
-LRB- 133 -RRB- Those are a people who have passed away . 
Theirs is that which they earned , and yours is that which ye earn . 
And ye will not be asked of what they used to do . 
-LRB- 134 -RRB- And they say : Be Jews or Christians , then ye will be rightly guided . 
Say -LRB- unto them , O Muhammad -RRB- : Nay , but -LRB- we follow -RRB- the religion of Abraham , the upright , and he was not of the idolaters . 
-LRB- 135 -RRB- Say -LRB- O Muslims -RRB- : We believe in Allah and that which is revealed unto us and that which was revealed unto Abraham , and Ishmael , and Isaac , and Jacob , and the tribes , and that which Moses and Jesus received , and that which the prophets received from their Lord . 
We make no distinction between any of them , and unto Him we have surrendered . 
-LRB- 136 -RRB- And if they believe in the like of that which ye believe , then are they rightly guided . 
But if they turn away , then are they in schism , and Allah will suffice thee -LRB- for defense -RRB- against them . 
He is the Hearer , the Knower . 
-LRB- 137 -RRB- -LRB- We take our -RRB- color from Allah , and who is better than Allah at coloring . 
We are His worshippers . 
-LRB- 138 -RRB- Say -LRB- unto the People of the Scripture -RRB- : Dispute ye with us concerning Allah when He is our Lord and your Lord ? 
Ours are our works and yours your works . 
We look to Him alone . 
-LRB- 139 -RRB- Or say ye that Abraham , and Ishmael , and Isaac , and Jacob , and the tribes were Jews or Christians ? 
Say : Do ye know best , or doth Allah ? 
And who is more unjust than he who hideth a testimony which he hath received from Allah ? 
Allah is not unaware of what ye do . 
-LRB- 140 -RRB- Those are a people who have passed away ; theirs is that which they earned and yours that which ye earn . 
And ye will not be asked of what they used to do . 
It is better to be Koranic-driven drive Rather than Satanic-driven drive ... any way thanks for your concern we are fine and thanks to God that what we had feared did not happen to our country as happened to others . 
From Sir Salman Rushdie 's book `` Satanic Verses '' , p. 376 , paperback issue -- for those 1 billion Muslims to read as they are forbidden to purchase or read said book : One of the passages that prompted the crazy Ayatollah Khomeini to issue a fatwa against Sir Rushdie : `` The faithful lived by lawlessness , but in those years Mahound or should one say the Archangel Gibreel ? 
should one say Al-Lah ? 
became obsessed by law . 
Amid the palm-trees of the oasis Gibreel appeared to the Prophet and found himself spouting rules , rules , rules , until the faithful could scarcely bear the prospect of any more revelation , Salman said , rules about every da-mn thing , if a man farts let him turn his face to the wind , a rule about which hand to use for the purpose of cleaning one 's behind . 
It was as if no aspect of human existence was to be left unregulated , free . 
The revelation the recitation - told the faithful how much to eat , how deeply they should sleep , and which se-xual positions had received divine sanction , so that they leamed that so-domy and the missionary position were approved of by the archangel , whereas the forbidden postures included all those in which the female was on top . 
Gibreel further listed the permitted and forbidden subjects of conversation , and earmarked the parts of the body which could not be scratched no matter how unbearably they might itch . 
He vetoed the consumption of prawns , those bizarre other-worldly creatures which no member of the faithful had ever seen , and required animals to be killed slowly , by bleeding , so that by experiencing their deaths to the full they might arrive at an understanding of the meaning of their lives , for it is only at the moment of death that living creatures understand that life has been real , and not a sort of dream . 
And Gibreel the archangel specified the manner in which a man should be buried , and how his property should be divided , so that Salman the Persian got to wondering what manner of God this was that sounded so much like a businessman . 
This was when he had the idea that destroyed his faith , because he recalled that of course Mahound himself had been a businessman , and a damned successful one at that , a person to whom organization and rules came naturally , so how excessively convenient it was that he should have come up with such a very businesslike archangel , who handed down the management decisions of this highly corporate , if noncorporeal , God . '' 
February 3 , 2011 at 8:05 am | Report abuse | Since as we know the first mankind kill on earth has started with these two sons of Adam : In the name of Allah , the Beneficent , the Merciful But recite unto them with truth the tale of the two sons of Adam , how they offered each a sacrifice , and it was accepted from the one of them and it was not accepted from the other . 
-LRB- The one -RRB- said : I will surely kill thee . 
-LRB- The other -RRB- answered : Allah accepteth only from those who ward off -LRB- evil -RRB- . 
-LRB- 27 -RRB- Even if thou stretch out thy hand against me to kill me , I shall not stretch out my hand against thee to kill thee , lo ! 
I fear Allah , the Lord of the Worlds . 
-LRB- 28 -RRB- Lo ! 
I would rather thou shouldst bear the punishment of the sin against me and thine own sin and become one of the owners of the fire . 
That is the reward of evil-doers . 
-LRB- 29 -RRB- But -LRB- the other 's -RRB- mind imposed on him the killing of his brother , so he slew him and became one of the losers . 
-LRB- 30 -RRB- Then Allah sent a raven scratching up the ground , to show him how to hide his brother 's naked corpse . 
He said : Woe unto me ! 
Am I not able to be as this raven and so hide my brother 's naked corpse ? 
And he became repentant . 
-LRB- 31 -RRB- For that cause We decreed for the Children of Israel that whosoever killeth a human being for other than manslaughter or corruption in the earth , it shall be as if he had killed all mankind , and whoso saveth the life of one , it shall be as if he had saved the life of all mankind . 
Our messengers came unto them of old with clear proofs -LRB- of Allah 's Sovereignty -RRB- , but afterwards lo ! 
many of them became prodigals in the earth . 
And on and on and on and on and on and on and on goes Muneef 's koranic-driven drivel !!!! February 3 , 2011 at 12:24 am | Report abuse | As it seems that the Domino effect is really taking effect for countries falling one after another as all idols fell at times of winds of change -LRB- El-Zalzalah -RRB- the Earthquake ... to those countries which have not invested in their populations but rather treated as if in a major Prison system . 
Their time , efforts being inslaved by other powerful and rich ones to make them richer while they always remain in debt to the system and the rising cost of living , jobless above all being ripped from savings by fragile financial org 's ?? It 's jungle out there ... poverty and starvation is the base of all filths to nations on earth and if those two were conquered and human greed was controlled am sure peace will find it way back to earth once again if ever it did happen before ? 
Got mixed up about which Gods we are talking about ? 
Are they the one 's on Earth controlling our lives or are you about God the creator of universe that is worshipped by mankind in different ways , given different names , given different looks and combinations , partners , sons ... others worshiped Satan or made him partner to God ... The Message of the `` Monotheism '' was there from time of existance up to Noah PBUH and the monotheist derived from those saved by Noah named Abraham PBUH who came up then with the message of `` Submission '' and rebuilt the house of worship in Mecca for religion teachings redirecting pagans worshiping idols , trees , or worshiping many Gods they made and named as in Greek mythology ... Partly correct that Religion is controlling masses ! 
Just as politics does ? 
Who is controlling these masses now ? 
Or are they uncontrolled now you are saying ? 
Laws control mankind , laws written by mankind were n't they ? 
Were the bases of those laws quoted from those books old the books of fairy tales , as told by many here ? 
God has addressed his messages to generations through chosen one 's to remind and warn those evil doers and the ones who are astray to come back to the truth but when messanger gives up on his people God would bring upon them heavy natural disasters , losses and grieves ... there among any religions or branches of religions you will find people worship and do good deeds for the sake of God and would do all could to raise his name and belief ... there are others who careless for it as a religion or faith but taking advantage of the posts for their own personal vast interest or the gangs interests as named by you ... `` Those are as a Walves using the Sheeps Skins in Disguise for hunting and feeding its greeds '' . 
Man is judged by God basis his inner soul intentions in heart and mind ? 
Loving and Fearing God means we should take into considerations of the signs or inspirations which comes more as alarms to those who are doing as God told as commandments in all Holy Books that came upon the sons of Israel by Moses , David , Jesus and then upon Muhammed PBUH who was derived from Ismael son of Abraham PBUB ... All those books landed or inspired are on the base of monotheism and God told he has all the beautiful names known or unknown to us ... so no matter what names we call him by Allah , Allahim , God , Lord , Creator , Almighty and so on ... But you have mentioned other religions that worshiped Planets , Stars , idols unendless list of beliefs which were actully reduced by Islam but return it became branches that contained those converted publicly but inner still on their old belief and that what has given Islam a multi cultures and beliefs that have came out of the one islamic belief , that has caused any seeing doings of one accuses the whole bunch under the name of Islam with out any suggrigation between branches . 
You know I think not all those accounted to Islam or Islamic countries are real Muslim in practice but Muslim only by Coding as by land or family of birth ... but they contain all those you might know in beliefs or in disbliefs in their inner soul , heart , mind , that 's why we were told we will be judged by our intentions and not by being accounted for religions as followers ... And on and on and on and on and on and on goes the koranic-based drivel !!!!! February 2 , 2011 at 7:52 am | Report abuse | Sorry could n't write better since i am a bit worried as understand that tomorrow Thrusday going to be a protest in my country as happened in Tunisia and Egypt but hope it will not result as theirs ... Wonder now whether it will be proven that Belief is Yemenite and Wisdom is Yemenite ? 
Our people will not be armed with stones and knives as was in both of those countries , in our country nearly most of the populations are armed with fire guns and above , my fear it would become worse . . 
But mind you here we are not talking about Religion but much worse it is politics which proved to be strong enough to divide people of one religion as well as dividing families among them selves . . 
So kindly pray for us to pass this test in safety with out hatred , bloodshed , destructions , looting wealths among population ... Sorry if I had been a trouble for any of you on these blogs ... In God Speed . 
February 2 , 2011 at 10:22 am | Report abuse | Why would the Muslim Brotherhood need to be feared ? 
Islam is a religion of peace , right ? 
Islam is religion of peace with who wants peace but not for those who look for war against it ... Besides quoting `` A force to be feared '' this what would the Israelies say worrying from reactions after 30 years of suppression by this party and president ruling the country ... another fear that they will spread their ideology all over Arabia . . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- 5 -RRB- Bali-in 2002-killing 202 people , 164 of whom were foreign nationals , and 38 Indonesian citizens . 
A further 209 people were injured . 
6 -RRB- Bali in 2005 - Twenty people were killed , and 129 people were injured by three bombers who killed themselves in the attacks . 
7 -RRB- Spain in 2004 - killing 191 people and wounding 2,050 . 
UK in 2005 - The bombings killed 52 commuters and the four radical Islamic suicide bombers , injured 700 . 
9 -RRB- The execution of an eloping couple in Afghanistan on 04\/15\/2009 by the Taliban . 
10 -RRB- -- Afghanistan : US troops 1,116 killed in action , 902 killed in non-combat situations as of 08\/10\/2010 . 
Over 40,000 Afghan civilians killed due to the dark-age , koranic-driven Taliban acts of horror 11 -RRB- The killing of 13 citizen soldiers at Ft. . 
Hood by a follower of the koran . 
12 -RRB- 38 Russian citizens killed on March 29 , 2010 by Muslim women suicide bombers . 
13 -RRB- The May 28 , 2010 attack on a Islamic religious minority in Pakistan , which have left 98 dead , 14 -RRB- Lockerbie is known internationally as the site where , on 21 December 1988 , the wreckage of Pan Am Flight 103 crashed as a result of a terrorist bomb . 
In the United Kingdom the event is referred to as the Lockerbie disaster , the Lockerbie bombing , or simply Lockerbie . 
Eleven townspeople were killed in Sherwood Crescent , where the plane 's wings and fuel tanks plummeted in a fiery explosion , destroying several houses and leaving a huge crater , with debris causing damage to a number of buildings nearby . 
The 270 fatalities -LRB- 259 on the plane , 11 in Lockerbie -RRB- were citizens of 21 nations . 
15 -RRB- Followed by the daily suicide and\/or roadside and\/or mosque bombings every day in the terror world of Islam . 
16 -RRB- Bombs sent from Yemen by followers of the koran which fortunately were discovered before the bombs were detonated . 
17 -RRB- The killing of 58 Christians in a Catholic church in one of the latest acts of horror and terror in Iraq . 
18 -RRB- Moscow airport suicide bombing : 35 dead , 130 injured . 
January 25 , 2011 . 
February 1 , 2011 at 11:42 pm | Report abuse | Islam is the religion of INNER PEACE . 
There is a mis-understanding about the use of the word PEACE which in common English usage refers to OUTER PEACE vis-a-vis war and conflict . 
A person following Islam is more likely to be at peace with himself and those around him\/her . 
This is reflected in the wars and conflicts you will see through out history . 
Muslims have not been involved in most of the bloodiest and harshest conflicts in the history of man . 
Conflicts in the Muslim World today , while occupying significant news time , A -RRB- pale in comparison to what non-Muslims have done in this past century and B -RRB- are mostly the result of secular governments in the Muslim World vying for power and resources C -RRB- often backed by non-Muslim armaments and vested interests . 
Islamic Governments and Rulerships have rarely indulged in brutality that is reflective of a lack of inner peace of its adherents . 
The only example that comes to mind is the Armenian Genocide and even that was committed by the Turks who soon thereafter morphed into a secular European Nation-State . 
They were basically Europeans in spirit while retaining the last vestiges of the soon to disappear Turkish Islamic Caliphate of many centuries . 
February 2 , 2011 at 10:39 am | Report abuse | `` Lacking the image-of-God doctrine , Mohammed emphasized something else in its place submission . 
The very name he gave to his new religion Islam means submission . 
Submission in Islam means submission to God , submission to Mohammed as the ultimate prophet of God , submission to the Koran as the ultimate revelation from God , submission of women to men and submission of everyone to the caliph , sultan , shah or whichever other kind of Muslim ruler is in power . 
Hence the same Muslims whom Mohammed taught to fight fiercely against infidels of the house of war are taught to be docile submitters within the house of submission . 
The problem is that blind , unthinking submission , submission , submission emphasized over eons of time does not encourage clearheaded critical thinking , without which no democracy can succeed . 
In a submission-focused context , what can voting mean ? 
Dozens of Muslims nations elect parliaments , yes , but to date there is always a strong man who can demand submission from the entire body of elected officials at will . 
Those who refuse to submit risk assassination . 
... A devout Muslim s sense of his own intrinsic value , accordingly , does not rest upon recognition of God s likeness within him . 
He measures it instead by the intensity of his uncritical submission to every requirement of the Koran ... '' -- D. Richardson February 2 , 2011 at 10:58 am | Report abuse | '' ... A devout Muslim s sense of his own intrinsic value , accordingly , does not rest upon recognition of God s likeness within him . 
He measures it instead by the intensity of his uncritical submission to every requirement of the Koran ... The Koran and the Requirement of World Domination Mohammed could not have known the size of the world , but several passages in the Koran show that he envisioned Islam dominating all of it , however large it might be : He it is who sent his messenger ... that he may cause it -LRB- Islam -RRB- to prevail over all religions -LRB- Koran 9:33 , M.M. Ali ; see also 48:28 and 61:9 -RRB- . 
M.M. Ali designates these three passages as the prophecy of the ultimate triumph of Islam in the whole world . 
Mohammed s successors , the caliphs , quoted passages like these to inspire Muslim armies as they advanced out of Arabia , imposing Islam by the sword upon a peacefully unsuspecting Middle East and North Africa , as I described in the previous chapter . 
Islamic armies , imbued with what Mohammed claimed was divine authorization , imposed Islam by force over vast areas , all the while extorting wealth from subjugated Jews and Christians to fund their ongoing conquests . 
As I noted , major defeats at Tours , France , in A.D. 732 , and again at Vienna , Austria , in A.D. 1683 , halted Islam s attempt to take all of Europe by force . 
Gradually Islamic forces were forced to retreat from Europe , except for part of the Balkans . 
But Islam has again set its sights on a conquest of Europe and of European civilization , wherever the latter has spread to North and South America and other regions . 
Muslim strategists ask their followers , Why do we find in these modern times that Allah has entrusted most of the world s oil wealth primarily to Muslim nations ? 
Their answer : Allah foresaw Islam s need for funds to finance a final politico-religious victory over what Islam perceives as its ultimate enemy : Christianized Euro-American civilization . 
So , Islam follows Nazism , fascism and communism as the world s latest hostile takeover aspirant . 
Nazis , fascists and communists failed . 
Does Islam have a better chance at success ? 
I believe it will flounder if we awaken to its threat in time ; yet , if there is not adequate planned resistance , Islam does have a better chance of succeeding . 
Communism s world takeover attempt was guaranteed to fail because its economic policy was naively contrary to human nature . 
Advocating the rubric What is mine is thine , and what is thine is mine , communism failed to see that human nature will not keep those two balanced propositions in equilibrium . 
Like a female black widow spider consuming her mate , the latter part of the formula makes a meal of the former , leading to the collapse of any system based upon that formula . 
In contrast , political systems do well if they can persuade people to adhere to What s mine is mine and What s thine is thine maxims . 
Only if a strong religious incentive is added does such an idealistic formula have any long-term chance . 
Even then success will be spotty . 
But communism -LRB- and Nazism , for that matter -RRB- excluded religion . 
And that mistake was the final nail eventually clamping a lid on communism s coffin . 
Communism , on a historical scale , perished while still in its childhood . 
Islam is not repeating communism s mistake . 
Mating political cunning and incredible wealth with religious zeal , Islam does have a chance to succeed and will succeed unless major parts of the Western world unite to take appropriate countermeasures . 
But many Western leaders , unable to believe that a mere religion could possible be a serious political threat , keep proclaiming themselves as Islam-friendly , reasoning that all religions are good-aren t they ? 
A Muslim strategist in Beverly Hills , California , declared several years ago , as quoted by a friend of mine : Now that the struggle between Western democracies and international communism is winding down , it is time for the real and final struggle to begin , and we are going to win ! 
- D. Richardson February 2 , 2011 at 11:02 am | Report abuse | The Muslim Conquest of India `` The likely death toll is somewhere between 2 million and 80 million . 
The geometric mean of those two limits is 12.7 million . '' 
Rank Death Toll Cause Centuries Religions involved \* 1 63 million Second World War 20C -LRB- Christians et al and Communists vs. Christians et al , Nazi-Pagan and `` Shintoists '' -RRB- 2 40 million Mao Zedong -LRB- mostly famine -RRB- 20C -LRB- Communism -RRB- 40 million Genghis Khan 13C -LRB- Shamanism or Tengriism -RRB- 4 27 million British India -LRB- mostly famine -RRB- 19C -LRB- Anglican -RRB- 5 25 million Fall of the Ming Dynasty 17C -LRB- Buddhism , Taoism , Confucianism , Chinese folk religion -RRB- 6 20 million Taiping Rebellion 19C -LRB- Confucianism , Buddhism and Chinese folk religion vs. a form of Christianity -RRB- 20 million Joseph Stalin 20C 8 19 million Mideast Slave Trade 7C-19C -LRB- Islam -RRB- 9 17 million Timur Lenk 14C-15C 10 16 million Atlantic Slave Trade 15C-19C -LRB- Christianity -RRB- 11 15 million First World War 20C -LRB- Christians vs. Christians -RRB- 15 million Conquest of the Americas 15C-19C -LRB- Christians -RRB- 13 13 million Muslim Conquest of India 11C-18C 14 10 million An Lushan Revolt 8C 10 million Xin Dynasty 1C 16 9 million Russian Civil War 20C -LRB- Christians vs Communists -RRB- 17 8 million Fall of Rome 5C -LRB- Pagans -RRB- 8 million Congo Free State 19C-20C -LRB- Christians -RRB- 19 7 million Thirty Years War 17C -LRB- Christians vs Christians -RRB- 7 million Fall of the Yuan Dynasty 14C \* : '' Is religion responsible for more more violent deaths than any other cause ? 
A : No , of course not -- unless you define religion so broadly as to be meaningless . 
Just take the four deadliest events of the 20th Century -- Two World Wars , Red China and the Soviet Union -- no religious motivation there , unless you consider every belief system to be a religion . '' 
Q : So , what you 're saying is that religion has never killed anyone . 
A : Arrgh ... You all-or-nothing people drive me crazy . 
There are many doc-umented examples where members of one religion try to exterminate the members of another religion . 
Causation is always complex , but if the only difference between two warring groups is religion , then that certainly sounds like a religious conflict to me . 
Is it the number one cause of mass homicide in human history ? 
Of the 22 worst episodes of mass killing , maybe four were primarily religious . 
Is that a lot ? 
Well , it 's more than the number of wars fought over soccer , or s-ex -LRB- The Trojan and Sabine Wars do n't even make the list . -RRB- 
, but less than the number fought over land , money , glory or prestige . 
In my Index , I list 41 religious conflicts compared with 27 oppressions under `` Communism '' , 24 under Colonialism , 2 under `` Railroads '' and 2 under `` Scapegoats '' . 
Make of that what you will . '' 
Belief is Yemenite , and wisdom is also Yemenite . 
And maybe Muneef or some other Muslim commentator can do the Arabic\/Muslim world a great service by translating the `` two-minute '' cure into Arabic for those lost souls who do not understand English ?? Thought you said google translator does it well ? 
and what about those who can not read since they are the most extremes ? 
Which their ruling tyrants kept them uneducated unable to think right or hard to convince ? 
Any way even if did that translation it will not help since issue is more complicated now after having seen Muslims are being killed since last 1995 Bosnia 's mass killings to Muslims ... February 1 , 2011 at 12:08 pm | Report abuse | You would not be happy with a Google translation and considering you know Arabic so well and insist every word be exact then go for it . 
Make your sister and brother Arabs proud . 
We await your contribution to saving these lost souls . 
What have you to fear ? 
February 1 , 2011 at 4:07 pm | Report abuse | It appears the Muslim Brotherhood -LRB- is there a Muslim Sisterhood -RRB- will be a topic for a few more days if not weeks so once again : `` The Muslim Brotherhood has given rise to a number of more militant and violent organizations , such as Hamas , Gama'a al-Islamiya , and Islamic Jihad . '' 
But there is an easy solution : The Five Steps To Deprogram 1400 Years of Islamic Myths : -LRB- The Steps take less than two minutes to finish - simply amazing , two minutes to bring peace and rationality to over one billion lost souls - Priceless !!! -RRB- Using `` The 77 Branches of Islamic `` faith '' a collection compiled by Imam Bayhaqi as a starting point . 
In it , he explains the essential virtues that reflect true `` faith '' -LRB- iman -RRB- through related Qur anic verses and Prophetic sayings . '' 
i.e. a nice summary of the Koran and Islamic beliefs . 
The First Five of the 77 Branches : aka as God , Yahweh , Zeus , Jehovah , Mother Nature , etc. should be added to your cleansing neurons . 
To believe that everything other than Allah was non-existent . 
Thereafter , Allah Most High created these things and subsequently they came into existence . '' 
Evolution and the Big Bang or the `` Gi-b G-nab '' -LRB- when the universe starts to recycle -RRB- are more plausible and the `` akas '' for Allah should be included if you continue to be a `` crea-tionist '' . 
To believe in the existence of angels . '' 
A major item for neuron cleansing . 
Angels\/de-vils are the mythical creations of ancient civilizations , e.g. Hitt-ites , to explain\/define natural events , contacts with their gods , big birds , sudden winds , protectors during the dark nights , etc. . 
No `` pretty\/ug-ly wingy thingies '' ever visited or talked to Mohammed , Jesus , Mary or Joseph or Joe Smith . 
Today we would classify angels as f airies and `` tin ker be-lls '' . 
Modern de-vils are classified as the de-mons of the de-mented . 
To believe that all the heavenly books that were sent to the different prophets are true . 
However , apart from the Quran , all other books are not valid anymore . '' 
Another major item to delete . 
There are no books written in the spirit state of Heaven -LRB- if there is one -RRB- just as there are no angels to write\/publish\/distribute them . 
The Koran , OT , NT etc. are simply books written by humans for humans . 
Prophets were invented by ancient scribes typically to keep the un-educated masses in line . 
Today we call them for-tune tellers . 
Prophecies are also invali-dated by the natural\/God\/Allah gifts of Free Will and Future . 
To believe that all the prophets are true . 
However , we are commanded to follow the Prophet Muhammad -LRB- peace and blessings be upon him -RRB- Mohammed spent thirty days `` fasting '' -LRB- the Ramadan legend -RRB- in a hot cave before his first contact with Allah aka God etc. via a `` pretty wingy thingy '' . 
Common sense demands a neuron deletion of # 5 . 
# 5 is also the major source of Islamic vi-olence i.e. turning Mohammed 's `` fast , hunger-driven '' hallu-cinations into horrible reality for unbelievers . 
Walk these Five Steps and we guarantee a complete recovery from your Islamic ways !!!! Unfortunately , there are not many Muslim commentators\/readers on this blog so the `` two-minute '' cure is not getting to those who need it . 
If you have a Muslim friend , send him a copy and help save the world . 
Those people needing change and were since 70 's are being dragged to prisons every time they wanted to practice their rights ... all of that because of the fantasy that if they come to power they would lead religiously ... ! 
But in this case the whole populations are rejecting the president and the whole of his political party which he represents whom been lying to the people for 30 years and achieved nothing for their populations but manage to secure their people while populations are starving with no jobs , prices rising currency dropping !? Lazy corrupted ruling system and party ... The person that says the bible and jesus is a meaningless myth . 
Just so he knows , the bible spoke of him as well . 
It speaks of eygpt turning on Israel in the last day . 
And it aspeaks of scoffers . 
That would be him . 
February 5 , 2011 at 9:51 pm | Report abuse | Exactly what I was thinking ... If we assume the bible is more than just bad fiction , an antagonictic Egypt could mean some biblical prophecy is about to come true . 
On the other hand , if Egypt remains friendly , then the biblical timeline for the return of jc is delayed . 
Either way , I believe the bible has no meaning at all -- zip , nada , nothing ! 
Ca n't wait for the `` no man knows the hour '' responses ... January 31 , 2011 at 11:40 pm | Report abuse | Since it is you and knowing this will be ridiculed by some , here goes . 
Currently the Egyptian president is moderate and friendly towards the west and Israel . 
Mubarek waa actually the VP during the days of Anwar Sadat -LRB- who was assassinated primarily for making peace with Israel -RRB- . 
Some biblical scholars belief that Eygpt will have a shift in relations with Israel and once again become an enemy ! 
in order for that to happen 1 of 2 things have to occur 1 . 
Mubarek is ousted in favor of a radical 2 . 
Murbarek becames more radical towards Israel . 
In Daniel Chapter 11 , Daniel has a vision of Israel being attacked in the last days . 
Daniel uses the term `` King of the South '' as one of the attackers . 
Many believe King of the South refers to Eygpt . 
Keeping in mind 2 points 1 . 
When Daniel wrote this Eygpt was in fact , a power ! 
That is what I meant . 
I am not saying it will happen tomorrow and probably should used the term `` could be '' . 
The center of this is Israel and to Israel 's south is the Sinai which in fact , is a part of Eygpt . 
February 1 , 2011 at 11:03 am | Report abuse | Do I understand this correctly ? 
The minority group called the Muslim Brotherhood and the people of the street are two differing groups ? 
If the Army were to stand for the people . 
they would then be opposing the Muslim Brotherhood ? 
The Army would be for a non-violent transition ? 
a more democratic government with Mubarak as leader until the people can vote for whomever they want as their leader ? 
If the Muslim Brotherhood are in the minority how could they take over unless people were afraid to get out and vote and if that is the case what are they afraid of . 
the Muslim Brotherhood or of getting killed if it were found out that they didn t vote a certain way ? 
The present president is a moderate and somewhat friendly towards Israel . 
It would not surprise me in the least if he is ousted and replace with a radical ! 
That would be very significant Biblically speaking ! 
January 31 , 2011 at 4:32 pm | Report abuse | -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
The CNN Belief Blog covers the faith angles of the day 's biggest stories , from breaking news to politics to entertainment , fostering a global conversation about the role of religion and belief in readers ' lives . 
It 's edited by CNN 's Eric Marrapodi with daily contributions from CNN 's worldwide newsgathering team and frequent posts from religion scholar and author Stephen Prothero . 
