You 've selected the U.S. Edition . 
Would you like to make this your default edition ? 
YES | NO Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Radsch , who is writing her dissertation on cyberactivism in Egypt , wrote on her blog that her fingers are crossed that Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
We should focus on how important it is to teach our children science and math , and not so much on mourning those lost , Atkeison said . 
Challenger 's seven astronauts did not look for attention , but -LRB- were filled with -RRB- the excitement of what science and space can do to improve our way of life here on earth . 
\* ` Candy-coded ' threats ? 
`` They should replace it with a candy-coded system . 
Gummy Bears for low , Mars Bar for guarded , Butterfinger for elevated , Reeses Peanut Butter Cup for high and Mike & Ike for severe . '' 
-- RMRCal \* More refined colors ? 
`` Vermilion , cerise , fuchsia , amaranth and magenta . '' 
-- ALP65 \* Albums ? 
`` How about using a warning system that goes from ` Blackwatch Plaid ' to the cover of Rush 's seminal album ` Moving Pictures ' ? '' 
-- DrivenTooFar \* Antoine Dodson ? 
`` New Code system : Level 1 : Hide yo kidz . 
Level 2 : Hide yo wife . 
Level 3 : Hide yo husband . 
Level 4 : They be rapin everybody out here . '' 
-- adrian401 \* Condiments ? 
`` The new system will be based not on color but on flavor . 
It is a 12-point system starting with Chocolate and ending with Tabasco . 
Today 's threat level is mustard with a dash of cilantro and a touch of horse radish . '' 
-- RalfTheDog \* Angry unicorns ? 
`` Alert level orange basically means it 's a weekday . 
Next up , mythical animals . 
Shelter in place when we reach ` Angry Unicorn ' level . '' 
-- Mark9988 \* Addams Family ? 
`` I think they 're planning on replacing it with the Addams Family code -- Code Pugsly : Not much going on . 
Code Wednesday : Everything LOOKS ok , but we know somethin 's not right . 
Code Morticia : ` nuff said . 
Code Gomez : Extreme terror threat to the nations railroads . 
Code Fester : Kabooom ! '' 
-- JAdams1776 Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Join us back here at 3:00 p.m. ET when we 'll begin the conversation . 
In the meantime , check out the Economy Tracker story on CNN to get familiar with the project . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
You can follow Doughtery on Twitter to get an insider 's view of the forum . 
Is the winter weather creating beautiful scenery where you are ? 
Share your photos with CNN iReport . 
Do you feel your views align with these commenters ' thoughts ? 
Post a comment below or sound off on video Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Update -- Wednesday : We 've published this quote gallery showcasing 15 of the tweets . 
Have you been participating in any of these protests ? 
Share your stories and photos with CNN iReport , but please put your personal safety above all else . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
I m looking for something newsy I want a fun challenge I want to get away Explore and find out what strikes your fancy . 
We ll be waiting to see what kind of stories come rolling in this weekend . 
Go forth with fresh assignments and be inspired . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
If you could illustrate a larger social issue in your city how would you do it ? 
We d love to find out how you could make the intangible into something visual . 
Share your photographs and give us a first-person perspective of what you see . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
An Thanks for sharing your amazing work , iReporters ! 
We always look forward to seeing what fresh `` iCandy '' you 'll bring us each day . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Now , we want to know : What sites and apps appeal most to you ? 
Let us know where we can find you online in the comments area below . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
The personal perspective on what s happening in Tunisia is a fascinating and valuable aspect of this story . 
We d love to hear more about the situation from people on the ground . 
Share your photos , videos and opinions with iReport . 
CD6910 wrote , `` He seemingly reflected Jesus in all that he was . 
Charismatic , intelligent , engaging , humble , loving , firm , devout , prayerful . '' 
A couple of commenters shared memories of the pope . 
trish said , `` I was in elementary school when he came to Vancouver and although there were 60,000 people in the stadium it seemed like he was connecting directly with you . 
It was a really strange feeling and one that has never left when I think about that day . 
While I have some issues regarding the Catholic doctrine today , I do not think you can take away from what a great man he was . '' 
JohnQuest said , `` I was a young man when he visited New York , I still remember how people -LRB- Non-Catholics -RRB- admired him . 
Although I came from a non-believing family , I understand how some would be inspired by him . '' 
There were some dissenters , like Silicon Valley , who said , `` He may have done much good , but he continued the legacy of Paul VI being theologically stuck in the Middle Ages , betraying the spirit of the Second Vatican Council called by John XXIII to move the Church into the modern era . 
Had he allowed priests to marry and\/or allowed women in the priesthood the abuse scandal would not have reached the proportions that it did . 
This was a step back for the RCC . '' 
Catholic or not , many people expressed love for the pope . 
TheDandyMan wrote , `` Absolutely the greatest pope in history ! 
Saint Karol Wojtyla , you are one of the greatest men that ever lived . 
May you inspire billions more in your sainthood . 
Signed , a non-Catholic . '' 
ANON said , `` He is one religious leader in the modern history who was and still is loved by the followers of many other religions . 
I 'm a Muslim , and I love him . 
He practiced what he taught -LRB- tolerance , for example -RRB- . '' 
Milton said , `` The entire World used to love him . 
Regardless of religion , caste and country everyone admired him . 
I traveled myself nearly 40 countries and wherever go , people were talking very highly about Pope John II and Mother Teresa . '' 
In this case , `` he '' is Jared Lee Loughner , the suspect in the Arizona shootings . 
Families responded to this story and told us they thought it was a powerful look at what really goes on in a situation like this . 
What if , indeed ? 
We heard lots of personal stories about battles with mental illness and lots of takes on what a concerned loved one should do and what hurdles the health care system may create . 
Check out this opinion piece from Joshua Coleman , and you 'll find passionate responses , like from Blue2054 : `` Even if he is mentally ill , the parents of an adult can not have 100 % control over him . 
They might be scared that he would harm himself but would never imagine -LRB- or want to imagine -RRB- him becoming a murderer . 
That 's just how parents are . 
Love compels them to see the positive things in their child . 
They knew that he had drug problems , they knew that something was wrong with him . 
That was why the dad decided to inquire Jared about what was in the bag and cared enough to follow him . 
He was suspicious but I am sure he never thought that Jared was going to kill someone . 
I am probably too young to judge the parents but I wish they atleast took him to a psychiatrist or sent him to rehab after he was suspended . 
It 's an unfortunate incident . 
What 's even sadder is that the alleged main target is recovering but the 6 others around her had to die for no fault of theirs . '' 
Belldandy112 said , `` Easy answer . 
I would tell my child that his living in the family home was contingent on him remaining on medication ; otherwise , he 'd have to find another place to live . 
And , knowing his history , I would not give him the money to purchase drugs , a Glock , ammo , etc. . 
Worked like a charm for a friend in the same popsition as this family . '' 
sashlina liked the article : `` It 's amazing how many of us can point fingers and act like we have a doctorate in Know-it-allism when in fact the writer is clearly writing to the blinded society and NOT justifying what happened . 
Kudos to Coleman for sharing the lenses of we - the finger pointers . 
I can say that because my initial reaction was the same . 
In the end , it 's not always possible to recognize the signs and\/or stop evil from happening . '' 
Starting to regret that dancing fish tattoo ? 
`` When -LRB- astrologers -RRB- say that the sun is in Pisces , it 's really not in Pisces , '' Parke Kunkle , a board member of the Minnesota Planetarium Society , told the Minneapolis Star Tribune . 
WHAT ?! Well , wait a minute , Westerners generally adhere to the tropical zodiac , so maybe nothing 's changed at all . 
That brings up the whole question of tropical and sidereal zodiacs , or whether this whole thing matters at all . 
Commenters went at it . 
Some were astrological devotees , some got lost in an endless sea of references to the very-similar-sounding astrology or astronomy , and quite a few simply thought the whole thing was a bunch of bunk . 
There were a lot of astrology skeptics on our comment boards , and a few of them said they were determined to prove that free will trumps the stars any day . 
Among the seeming optimists were Jonathan , who wrote , `` What a relief , I was worried there for a second that I was n't who I thought I was all these years . 
I was afraid I 'd have to learn a whole new personality . 
Which is really bad , because the signs on either side of me do n't fit me at all . '' 
Julia was also relieved . 
I 'm not a goal-setting , hard-working Capricorn and I knew it . 
I 'm an aloof and eccentric Aquarius . 
Long live the Aquarians ! '' 
Some thought perhaps the astrological system could be further refined . 
Aunt Linda took the time to pen a detailed explanation of the concepts at hand -LRB- omitted here -RRB- and concluded on this note : `` The Babylonians designed a system of astrology that was as accurate as possible for their day . 
Would n't it make sense for modern astrologers to do the same ? '' 
Joshua said , '' ` Fun and harmless . ' 
Is that why there 's people that wo n't leave their homes on days when their horoscope gives a bad outlook ? 
Is that why people spend all their money going to astrologers to get their fortunes read ? 
Astrology , tarot , etc , is all stupid B.S. that should be expunged from society , especially those astrologers that lie to their customers and tell them its real , when they know it to be fake . '' 
Neerav replied , `` I agree , Joshua . 
The reality is , unless you believe in the idea of predestination , that you are in control of your destiny , and not what is told by the position of the stars and planets in an artificially -LRB- and arbitrarily -RRB- divided up sky . 
This year , I am challenging each and every yearly astrology forecast for my zodiac sign -LRB- Ariers -RRB- in order to prove once and for all that they are useless and have no relevance to how we live our lives or determine our destiny . '' 
A fairly cynical hobart said , `` I think someone should do a study with 1,000 subjects and three treatment groups : 1 . 
tropical zodiac , 2 . 
sidereal zodiac , and 3 . 
a postmodern random essay generator . 
Each treatment group writes a horoscope for each subject , and at the end o of the day , we see which one wins . 
I bet it 's a three-way tie . '' 
this sucks said , `` So can I continue to blast the soundtrack for HAIR from my car or do I need to buy a new CD because of all of this ? '' 
Bob replied , `` You should get a new CD because the music in Hair sucks , not because its inaccurate . '' 
In a follow-up story , we received even more heated comments : RabiaDiluvio said , `` Breaking news : we just discovered that the Easter Bunny might be brown instead of white and Santa wears yellow and black sweaters on the weekend . '' 
Doomguy said , `` What a pile of crap . 
The fact that your sign can shift over the centuries is just more proof that astrology is a fantasy . 
In fact , some of the stars in the actual constellations themselves have moved since astrology was dreamed up . 
Please people ... this is the 21st century . 
Can we move past invisible boogey men , fiery pits and pitchforks and the layout of stars in the sky somehow controlling your life ? '' 
neptuneguy said , `` If you are that concerned about your zodiac sign , then this may actually change your identity . 
For the rest of the world , you might as well worry about changing your underwear . '' 
LastLegUp said , `` A quarter of a million Americans believe in astrology ? 
That 's really depressing . '' 
YOUR TURN : Now that you 've read what other people are saying , do you find that your views align with theirs ? 
Think of this as a wishing well in need of your 2 cents . 
Post a comment below or sound off on video . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Thanks to everyone who participated . 
Be sure to check out the map of snow across the U.S. -- it 's fun to see the wintery images from iReporters all over the country . 
And , Oregon , if you re out there , send us your photos ! 
CHHoosier said , `` In most people 's eyes , this guy 's life was out of control , but now he is a star in the media and is being run by the people . 
Who has control of his life now ? 
I hope the best for him . '' 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Comments will open at 3 p.m. ET and we 'll talk with you then . 
Our hearts go out to those affected , and we re hoping for a speedy recovery . 
If you 're in one of the flooded areas , we 'd like to know how you are faring . 
Please share photos and videos if it is safe to do so . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
After reading all this , what do you think about these ideas and predictions ? 
What devices drive you crazy , and what trends would you like to see unfold ? 
Share your vision for the gadget-crazy future in the comments area below . 
But BrisEcho relayed , As someone in Brisbane right now , I 'd like to say a few things . 
Infrastructure is still in place and functioning . 
Military search and rescue is being performed by Australian and New Zealand troops . 
International aid has been offered by the USA , but also by many countries in the Asia Pacific including China , East Timor , Indonesia and even Sri Lanka . 
We are warm , safe and well . 
Many people have been safely evacuated and a lot of us are feeling very hopeful in spite of everything . 
There are families grieving and worried tonight , but we 're taking care of each other . 
Some CNN readers had a problem with the 9\/11 connection while others supported it . 
CAL08 said , The fact that she was born on 9\/11 should n't be part of this story . 
Thousands of people were born that day all around the world . 
When they pass on , we do n't need to use that fact to remind us of the tragedies that have occurred in the past . 
This one was sad enough . 
We do n't need to tie them together . 
Karenforyou said , This child s birthday on 9\/11 with her story in a book called , Faces of Hope based on the babies born during the 9\/11 terrorist attack and her death by this monster in Tucson brought chills down my spine . 
Love to the Gifford 's family and the victim s families . 
I am so sorry . 
Finally , how 's the weather near you ? 
Ever had to deal with snowflakes en masse ? 
Most of us are relatively new to this , and we think it 'd be interesting to hear any tips or thoughts you have to share on how to stay warm and make it through cold days like this without getting cabin fever . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Have you ever been to the South Pole ? 
Would you ever go somewhere that cold ? 
Bundle up and tell us in the comments below . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Sadly , none of the iReporters won this time -LRB- as far as we know -RRB- . 
But you can still help the world . 
Check out CNN 's Impact Your World for ideas on making difference . 
We 'll open the comments at 3 p.m. ET and will talk with you then . 
Comment of the day : `` Wow ! 
What a great story . 
From homeless to superstar . '' 
-- JRR The viral story of Ted Williams , a homeless man with an amazing radio voice , captivated our readers . 
An outpouring of support came for this man , who was given a job with the Cleveland Cavaliers basketball team as a result of the publicity . 
Check out what CNN.com readers had to say about this and other stories on CNN.com . 
Most of the responses , like from Elliot , were in support . 
He wrote , `` I am pleased to say that I 'm from Columbus as well . 
This is truly remarkable and to watch this man this morning break down and cry because of the offers and gestures of kindness , it was amazing . 
I really wish him the best and want to thank everyone that has seen the same opportunity to ` HELP ' as we here locally saw . '' 
Kevin Kunkel said , `` Big pat on the back to the Cleveland Cavaliers for being in a position and willing to give this guy a new chance in life . '' 
Veritas was among those who hoped this news would encourage more people to look at the homeless in a different light . 
`` God bless you William . 
Homeless does not mean hopeless . 
Many wonderful , talented , intelligent people are homeless due to the state of the economy . 
Once someone is homeless even for a short time , opportunities dissipate for jobs . 
No phone , no address , no transportation , no shower , no soap , and it goes on . 
We should all thank God for the little things we often take for granted , and show our appreciation by helping those less fortunate . 
No matter how little we have it is without a doubt more than someone else . 
Believe me it will come back to you tenfold . '' 
gman asked , `` What the heck is wrong with people ? 
He had a radio job and got into drugs . 
Many homeless people were skilled that ran into mental or drug problems , etc. . 
Why is it such a shock that a homeless guy has a skill ? 
It is insulting . '' 
Cleareye was wary of the story , `` This is a little too perfect . 
Nevertheless , if this guy cooked up this as publicity for himself , then cool . 
He has a great look to go with the voice . 
Hollywood here he comes ! '' 
But most of the respondents were very supportive , and we heard from many in the radio industry . 
Dan Brand-Levitan was in awe : `` Dude . 
I 'd love to have pipes like that . 
I 'm a former radio guy . 
Had to get out of the biz because the poor job markets and my debt load made it impossible . 
If I had pipes like that , I 'd be in big with the money . '' 
Mark Gunn said , `` I 've been in radio for 33 years and it 's stories like this that continue to make this a worthwhile career option . 
I am so very proud of this business right now . 
I listened to Ted this morning and the people that stepped up to offer him a second chance made for some really compelling radio . '' 
The emotional scene of veteran Rep. John Boehner of Ohio inheriting the speaker 's gavel and shaking hands with Rep. Nancy Pelosi got commenters going . 
Boehner appeared to shed tears as he took the gavel , sparking a passionate debate about the future of Congress , and the true nature of the sobs . 
44mlm wrote , `` America , our long national nightmare is half over . 
In 2012 we will finish the job . '' 
A commenter using the nickname BlubberingB and an avatar of an emotional Boehner wrote , `` Please call me Mr. Boehner . 
Do you have a Kleenex ? '' 
JPatcher responded , `` It shows they really do have emotions . '' 
Several commenters referencing the moment in question said the oversized gavel reminded them of the mallet used in the arcade game Whack-a-Mole . 
ohcynicalone wrote , `` Boehner , dude , you ca n't look away like that when you play Whack-a-Mole . 
Look , there is a mole in a blue dress with pearls popping up beside you ! '' 
But JonJon20 said that it 's `` hard to hit anything when you ca n't see through your own tears . '' 
Finally , 10001NYC echoed what still others were feeling : `` I love it when one group of lying , cheating , self-aggrandizing thieves turns power over to another group of lying , cheating , self-aggrandizing thieves . '' 
Readers had a strong connection to Rafferty 's work and shared personal stories about what his songs mean to them . 
Many commenters also talked about the still-undetermined cause of death and speculation that the crooner was abusing alcohol . 
From there , many commenters shared stories and opinions on alcoholism in society . 
depeche68 wrote , `` I used ` Right Down The Line ' at our wedding going on three years ago , and it made me cry that night as I looked at my beautiful wife . 
His music will be close to me forever . 
I am sorry it ended the way it did for Gerry . 
Maybe a few people will see the light before it is too late . '' 
epdm said , `` I 'd give my right arm to be able to write a song as great as ` Baker Street , ' and that was just one of many from this huge talent . 
... So sorry to learn of his painful last years . 
Rest now , Gerry . '' 
westTN said , `` His story reminds me why I stay sober . 
I did n't want to go out the way he did . 
I ` gave up the booze and the one night stands . ' 
Sounds as if he could n't . 
I hope he found some peace before he died . 
Thanks for the great tunes . '' 
This was easily the most-commented story of the day . 
Just about every reader was outraged about something . 
twirler wrote , `` No question the African slave trade , the Holocaust and the treatment of American Indians are gigantic horrors of human behavior . 
Can we learn from these events and go forward ? 
Can the generations of all races and religions in the 21st century be free of the blame and guilt and hate that belongs to perpetrators centuries ago ? 
Will the hatred of blacks toward whites ever end ? '' 
And mastmom said , `` Consider 205 years of slave ` trading . ' 
It is a clean word -- trade . 
Much cleaner than kidnapping . 
Eight generations of people : children , women and men subjected to horrific lifelong physical abuse and suffering until their death . 
Nothing in history compares to that misery . 
everything99 replied , `` If humankind is 1 million years old as they say , I am sure they have produced situations pretty much like this many times . '' 
Several readers took issue with the article and the responses it got , and much debate ensued . 
amidiots wrote , `` My problem is people 's assumption that because Africans are involved in the slave trade , that Black Americans are to forgive modern racism or take credit for part of the problem . 
... White people asserted that the position of Blacks were less than human to justify the act and position themselves as the dominant race ... that is the beginning of modern racism . 
Not slavery but the idea that certain races are inherently stupid or less capable . '' 
YOUR TURN : Now that you 've read what other people are saying , do you find that your views align with theirs ? 
Think of this as a wishing well in need of your 2 cents . 
Post a comment below or sound off on video . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
We re looking to hear from people on all sides of this issue -- home owners in debt , home owners who have paid off their mortgage , builders , realtors , and those who have personal stories to share . 
Join the conversation and share your story in the comments below or you can put your thoughts on video . 
Some of the best responses could be used in a story for CNN . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
Did you catch the eclipse ? 
Join the stargazers and share your images with iReport ! 
Follow the Twitter account and you 'll get the instructions there . 
Be sure to comment below and let us know what you think about the future devices , and CES itself . 
If you 're going , send us an iReport . 
Compiled by the CNN.com moderation staff . 
Some comments edited for length or clarity . 
The latest and greatest on CNN iReport , brought to you by Team iReport . 
Enter your e-mail address below and we will send you an e-mail with a link and reset code to reset your password . 
Sign Up Be sure to fill in everything with an \* Providing your contact information helps us verify your stories to include in CNN coverage . 
By clicking on `` sign up '' you agree with CNN 's Terms of Service , CNN iReport 's Terms of Service , and CNN 's Privacy Policy and consent to the collection , storage and use of this information in the U.S. subject to U.S. laws and regulations . 
-LRB- learn more -RRB- For our international users , please be aware that the information you submit when registering for our services is collected in the United States of America . 
In addition to being subject to our Privacy Policy , the collection , storage , and use of your data will be subject to U.S. laws and regulations , which may be different from the laws and regulations of your home country . 
By registering for this service , you are consenting to this collection , storage , and use . 
Please create a screen name . 
This screen name will be associated with your iReport stories and comments on this site . 
It can not be changed once you make a selection . 
Select one with 3-12 characters , numbers and letters only 
