You 've selected the U.S. Edition . 
Would you like to make this your default edition ? 
YES | NO Radsch , who is writing her dissertation on cyberactivism in Egypt , wrote on her blog that her fingers are crossed that Check his facts and refute them if you can , otherwise , stay out and do n't reduce the collective IQ of this thread . 
The fact is these people need to be given a chance to decide their own destiny . 
I believe the ideal of Democracy which we have basically in America . . 
and I hope that Egyptians are given a chance at real democracy . 
I doubt there is anyone out there who is does n't want change . 
It 's just a matter of how much a price we have to pay for it , and quiet a price it may be . 
I was on the verge of tears seeing people not only turning against each other but pulling out the pavement stones to throw at each other . 
Watching the flames only a few meters away from the Egyptian museum , all I could think of was that the worst was going to happen . 
Keep in mind that against the many thousands , maybe millions , protesting on the streets there are many many more that are not . 
Some of them torn between wanting him to leave now , in 6 months or never . 
Many do n't even have the luxury of caring . 
They just want this to end one way or the other so they can get paid , buy food and move on . 
These people voices are not loud enough to break through the bubble the protesters live in . 
They have made such an incredible achievement . 
The brought upon changes that 10 days ago would have seemed like a dream . 
There were actually many jokes after the uprising in Tunisia about what would it take for something like that to happen here . 
They would all end with the fact that any one of the disasters we had to go through would have been enough in any other country . 
But here , all we could do was joke about it . 
They have made an incredible achievement . 
We all appreciate that , but after 30 years of having no voice ; they seem to not get enough of their own . 
I am not pro Mubarak by any means . 
I think his career may have started decently enough but he has 30 years of mistakes to account for . 
Omar Suliman is a decent man . 
Ahmed Shafeek is a decent man with a vision . 
They both deserve a chance . 
In Egypt we are political toddlers . 
For many years we have only known one president , one political party . 
We coexisted with all the corruption and we were silent about it . 
We need time for a proper political life to develop . 
From now till September is a good enough time as ever . 
I am not pro Mubarak but I want my country back before more damage is done . 
If it means I have to take him for 6 more months then so be it ! 
To the powers that be ! 
There is little to be gained from letting the country fall . 
There are only a few things that could change the outcome the Egyptians are headed for , and here are a few things that could be done ! 
Every military has the ability to assist in humanitarian aid ! 
Have the military set up first aid and medical facility s on the side of the places where the clashes are taking place , one for each side , then set up kitchens or M.A.S.H units on both sides provide food and beverage for all that hunger ! 
Set up a place on both sides there as well , for the protesters to speak there grievances , allow them to air their problems with out censorship on the government tv ! 
Assure them they have won their freedom , explain this is as important as any catastrophe , the devastation to the Egyptian people is as important and the change in the government , as any major natural disaster ! 
How the government changes will be up to the people , but the military can help to defuse the violence , with humanitarian help ! 
You must be logged in to post a comment . 
The latest and greatest on CNN iReport , brought to you by Team iReport . 
Enter your e-mail address below and we will send you an e-mail with a link and reset code to reset your password . 
Sign Up Be sure to fill in everything with an \* Providing your contact information helps us verify your stories to include in CNN coverage . 
By clicking on `` sign up '' you agree with CNN 's Terms of Service , CNN iReport 's Terms of Service , and CNN 's Privacy Policy and consent to the collection , storage and use of this information in the U.S. subject to U.S. laws and regulations . 
-LRB- learn more -RRB- For our international users , please be aware that the information you submit when registering for our services is collected in the United States of America . 
In addition to being subject to our Privacy Policy , the collection , storage , and use of your data will be subject to U.S. laws and regulations , which may be different from the laws and regulations of your home country . 
By registering for this service , you are consenting to this collection , storage , and use . 
Please create a screen name . 
This screen name will be associated with your iReport stories and comments on this site . 
It can not be changed once you make a selection . 
Select one with 3-12 characters , numbers and letters only 
