Egypt 's Mubarak opens door to talks with rival political parties After 30 years of mostly unchallenged rule , Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak opened the door Sunday to talks with rival political parties while calling out those who , he claimed , used religion to `` spread fear '' through rampant hooliganism . 
According to a transcript of his comments to leaders of his new government read on state-run Nile TV , Mubarak acknowledged what he called `` peaceful demonstrations '' as well as grievances about the economy . 
Thousands of protesters have hit the streets of Cairo , Alexandria and beyond calling for the president 's ouster as well as substantial reforms . 
`` The current stage requires us to reorganize the country 's priorities in a way that acknowledges the legitimate demands of the people , '' he said . 
The president , again recognizing the depth of the unrest , urged those charged with shaping the new Cabinet -- specifically , his newly appointed Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq -- to pursue `` a wide range of dialogue with all the -LRB- political -RRB- parties . '' 
Such discussions , he said , `` will achieve the democratic process . '' 
Mubarak called on new government leaders to `` stand against anyone committing any forms of corruption '' and stressed `` the necessity to continue with fair , serious and effective new steps for more political , constitutional and legislative reforms . '' 
As he did in a nationally televised early Saturday , Mubarak referenced the unsettled security situation across the country , in part due to a void created after police largely abandoned their posts . 
He called on new government leaders to `` stop all the violence by whoever commits it , '' while appearing to criticize the Muslim Brotherhood , the country 's largest opposition party . 
`` The citizens and the young people of Egypt have gone out to the streets in peaceful demonstration asking for their right for the freedom of speech , '' Mubarak said . 
`` However , their demonstrations have been infiltrated by a group of people who use the name of religion who do n't take into consideration the constitution rights and citizenship values . '' 
The president claimed that such people of `` giving the chance for criminal groups to loot and confiscate public and private property , spread fires and spread fear . '' 
Mubarak commanded the new leaders `` to take care of the people , '' so that they again felt safe from looters and other criminal elements . 
Mubarak expressed hope that the military could succeed in protecting Egypt and its institutions and soon go back to its original goal , `` which is to defend the country and its sovereignty . '' 
