January 31 , 2011 | By Ashley Hayes , CNN Army soldiers stand guard outside the Egyptian Museum in Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Monday , January 31 . 
Egypt 's major archaeological sites , monuments and museums were under the protection of the country 's army on Monday , according to the nation 's Supreme Council of Antiquities . 
However , unease persisted among Egyptologists and archaeologists , who fear some of the nation 's priceless treasures may fall victim to looters or vandals , amid unrest and uprisings fueled by what protesters see as a lack of economic opportunity , widespread poverty and pervasive corruption . 
Egypt is `` the greatest open-air museum in the world , '' said Peter Der Manuelian , the Philip J. King professor of Egyptology at Harvard University . 
He said he and his colleagues are `` trying to stay on top of -LRB- the situation -RRB- as best we can , '' given spotty internet service in Egypt . 
Friday night , a group of `` criminals '' entered the Cairo Museum using a fire department staircase , Zahi Hawass , secretary-general of the Supreme Council of Antiquities , told CNN early Sunday . 
Once inside the museum , they went to the Late Period gallery , Hawass wrote . 
`` When they found no gold , they broke 13 vitrines -LRB- glass showcases -RRB- and threw the antiquities on the floor . '' 
The intruders then went back to the gallery housing artifacts from King Tutankhamun 's tomb , where they opened one showcase , broke a statue of King Tut on a panther and threw it to the ground , he wrote . 
A group also entered the museum gift shop and stole jewelry , Hawass wrote in a blog post Sunday . 
A group of `` tourist police officers '' had stayed at the museum overnight , as they were unable to leave after the curfew took effect . 
`` These officers , and many young Egyptians who were also there , helped to stop more people from entering the museum '' during the protests , Hawass wrote in the blog post -- which he faxed to Italy so colleagues there could post it on his website in the absence of internet in Egypt . 
Hawass told CNN early Sunday there were nine suspects , but in the blog post he said there were 10 . 
One of them asked the people guarding the museum for water , he said , but `` they took his hands and tied him to the door that led to the gift shop so he could not escape , '' according to the post . 
Hawass told CNN that when the suspects were apprehended , authorities found the remains of two mummies and some small artifacts with them . 
However , he said Sunday , everything that had been damaged can be restored . 
