2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
While Americans were waking up Monday , thousands in Cairo defied a midafternoon government curfew despite a greater military presence on the street . 
Many in the city 's Tahrir Square said they spent the night there . 
In Alexandria , 2,000 to 3,000 people gathered , and an armored personnel carrier fired warning shots in an apparent effort to intimidate protesters near a hotel . 
Meanwhile , the U.S. State Department said 42 Americans have been evacuated from Egypt and more will be transported . 
Read about their journey . 
The recent Tunisian uprising helped inspire the Egyptian unrest following the buildup of years of social , political and economic grievances . 
The lack of opportunities , corruption and poverty have coalesced into a push to oust Mubarak from power . 
The negative effect protests have had on U.S. stocks may be waning , but world markets are not doing as well . 
So what 's next ? 
Are you in Egypt ? 
Send your story to CNN 's iReport . 
To read all of CNN 's Egypt coverage in Arabic , click here . 
Snow and more snow -- A major winter storm likely will begin near Oklahoma City late Monday and then move east . 
Chicago and St. Louis may get record snow . 
`` Combined snow totals from Monday afternoon through Wednesday may exceed a foot and a half across much of northern Illinois and far northwest Indiana , '' the National Weather Service said . 
`` Snowfall rates up to 3 inches per hour will be probable at the height of the storm Tuesday night . '' 
The storm is expected to hit the East Coast on Thursday . 
Dietary guidelines to target salt -- The U.S. government is trying to get people to eat healthier . 
New guidelines will be released Monday . 
The main message : Eat less salt . 
Other recommendations include telling people to consume less sugar and solid fats and eat more seafood , fruits , vegetables and whole grains . 
SAG Awards -- The Screen Actors Guild Awards are considered to be an indicator of who will take home Oscar . 
If that 's true , it 's good news for `` The King 's Speech , '' which took home honors for star Colin Firth and best movie ensemble . 
Everyone is talking about Betty White , who looked stunned to win the best female actor in a TV comedy series for `` Hot in Cleveland . '' 
Here is a full list of Sunday night 's winners . 
And where is tomcat , banasy , and ThomasD ? 
Where 'd they go ? 
And I hope you are ok buddy . 
-LRB- tomcat -RRB- Hello Philip ... doing ok here ... seeing progress . 
Now about eating healthier . 
If you take the time to read labels , you would be amazed at the amount of sodium in frozen and canned foods . 
Take Healthy Choice for example . 
It may be low fat but high salt . 
Fast food is another prime example . 
Salt , sugar and fats all lead to a vast array of medical issues . 
It does cost more to eat healthy , but what cost can be put on your health and well being ? 
That 's right on , Tomcat . 
I feel that time and health are two priceless commodities as well People of the United States of America . 
Helloooooooo ... I missed all of you .1 st. thank God Keith Olbermann 's was fired from MSNBC , 1 down 2 to go . 
Next , as I was watching the Egypt coverage on CNN yesterday , I saw Pictures of M1A1 Tanks rolling down the streets and F16 Fighters flying across Cairo . 
I said to myself , self , did the United States invade Egypt and I missed it ? 
But no. they were just part of the Billions in AID we have been supplying to Eygpt over the last 30 years . 
Then I said to myself , self , is the United States out of it 's mind and which Rocket Scientist in which Administion thought supplying Tanks and Fighter Jets to an Arab Counrty that basically hates the United States Guts ? 
and Coincidental ?? In most recent issue of the Marine Corps Associatio0n publication for profesional arine an article on Egypt - befor the ruckus began ! 
and how Egypt is Keystone to realtions in the Midle East . 
I think that it would be difficult to get any active military to say anything about USA troops , particularly thse to the shores of Tripoli , Marines , I think the article was written by a Lt Col Reuda-now , it said re the author on duty in Afghanistan ! 
Marine sometimes get along ways from the beaches and waters ?? Huhikey self in Krea where the career I loved was ended due to 200 % Disabled from bullet wounds through my head and brain -LRB- a good lobotomy I got ! 
I feel too and know somethings about Rep Giffords ! 
The pressure against her brain had an exit place ! 
I was fortunate my head had no bone so the edema that came daily was the size of a big football , and was outside of my skull where doctors could asperate each evening so I could sleep some ! 
Enough now ut I think USMarines may well fit in and be of help in Egypt now ! 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
