2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
`` You need to start building confidence with the people and not with the people who are smothering the people , '' he said , addressing the president . 
-LRB- Update 4:08 a.m. Tuesday in Cairo , 9:08 p.m. ET Monday -RRB- Google said on its blog late Monday night that it had set up a `` speak-to-tweet '' service to help people in Egypt stay connected . 
The service allows people without an internet connection to leave a voice-mail message , which will automatically be turned into a tweet . 
-LRB- Update 3:11 a.m. Tuesday in Cairo , 8:11 p.m. ET Monday -RRB- CNN 's Fareed Zakaria , host of Fareed Zakaria GPS , discusses the chances that Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak will step down and the possibility that unrest will spread to nearby nations . 
-LRB- Update 1:24 a.m. Tuesday in Cairo , 6:24 p.m. ET Monday -RRB- Egypt 's roiling political unrest is causing the United States to fine-tune a foreign policy equation that for 30 years has valued strategic partnership with President Hosni Mubarak over democratic ideals , experts tell CNN 's Tom Cohen . 
Even hawkish conservatives generally opposed to Obama administration policies have backed the U.S. response , citing the over-arching need to prevent an unpredictable power vacuum if Mubarak were to be quickly forced out of power . 
-LRB- Update 1:12 a.m. Tuesday in Cairo , 6:12 p.m. ET Monday -RRB- Egypt 's information ministry told CNN Tuesday that the Noor Group , an Internet service provider , has been shut down . 
The move essentially takes the country offline . 
Minnutes earlier , Egypt 's information ministry that mobile phone networks will be shut down in Egypt during the next few hours ahead of demonstrators ' planned `` march of millions . '' 
-LRB- Update 1:10 a.m. Tuesday in Cairo , 6:10 p.m. ET Monday -RRB- CNN 's Arwa Damon reports on armed children helping to guard their Cairo neighborhoods , people standing in long lines for bread amid fears of a food shortage , a few people expressing support for Mubarak , and hostility toward journalists . 
-LRB- Update 12:41 a.m. Tuesday in Cairo , 5:41 p.m. ET Monday -RRB- Mobile phone networks will be shut down in Egypt during the next few hours ahead of demonstrators ' planned `` march of millions , '' Egypt 's information ministry told CNN Tuesday . 
Protesters who were gathered in Cairo 's Tahrir Square said Monday that they were organizing a `` million man march '' around Cairo for Tuesday . 
Egyptian security forces have been laying down concrete barriers in front of strategic locations in central Cairo in preparation for the event . 
Demonstrators also told CNN on Monday that they were organizing a similar march in Alexandria for Tuesday . 
-LRB- Update 12:31 a.m. Tuesday in Cairo , 5:31 p.m. ET Monday -RRB- A Google executive is missing in Egypt , having not contacted anyone since Friday morning - three days after major protests in Egypt began - CNNMoney reports . 
Wael Ghonim , Google 's head of marketing for Middle East and North Africa , had traveled to Cairo for a conference , according to a tech entrepreneur who knows Ghonim . 
-LRB- Update 12:19 a.m. Tuesday in Cairo , 5:19 p.m. ET Monday -RRB- A few hundred demonstrators have gathered in front of Egypt 's mission to the United Nations in New York , wielding signs and chanting pro-democracy and political slogans about the unfolding events in Egypt , according to CNN correspondent Allan Chernoff . 
The protesters chanted `` Free , free Egypt . 
Down , down Mubarak , '' he said . 
-LRB- Update 11:51 p.m. Cairo , 4:51 p.m. ET -RRB- The U.S. men 's national soccer team says it has canceled its Feb. 9 friendly match with Egypt in Cairo because of the political instability in Egypt . 
-LRB- Update 11:36 p.m. Cairo , 4:36 p.m. ET -RRB- Talks between opposition parties and Egyptian Vice President Omar Suleiman are already under way , Suleiman 's office said . 
Earlier , Suleiman said on state television that President Hosni Mubarak asked him to start working on `` constitutional reform and legislation '' in collaboration with the various political parties . 
Suleiman , the longtime intelligence chief Mubarak picked as his vice president over the weekend , said a reform package should be drawn up `` expeditiously '' in conjunction with the country 's parliament . 
`` The other parties will also have a role to play , which will lead to real political reform , '' Suleiman said . 
-LRB- Update 11:16 p.m. Cairo , 4:16 p.m. ET -RRB- Amre Moussa , head of the Arab League , called Monday for a peaceful transition in Egypt , `` from an era to the other , '' the AFP news agency reported . 
Moussa is a veteran diplomat who was Mubarak 's foreign minister until 2001 . 
-LRB- Update 10:44 p.m. Cairo , 3:44 p.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian Vice President Omar Suleiman said on state television that President Hosni Mubarak has asked him to start working on `` constitutional reform and legislation '' in collaboration with the various political parties . 
The five most popular stories on CNN.com in the past 24 hours , according to NewsPulse : ` Dangerous storm ' to rip through Midwest : Several major Midwest metropolitan areas are bracing for a massive winter storm system that threatened to dump a foot or more of snow and bring potentially debilitating winds . 
Why Nicole Kidman kept baby Faith a secret : Actress Nicole Kidman says keeping quiet about her new daughter Faith Margaret was one of the toughest things she 's ever had to do . 
Prison officer in Washington found dead : A female correctional officer at a Washington state prison was strangled and an inmate who told officers he had planned to escape is under investigation , authorities said Sunday . 
As Mubarak cuts communications , major demonstrations expected : Egypt braced for a `` march of millions '' in anti-government protests Tuesday as embattled President Hosni Mubarak tried to throw up literal and figurative roadblocks in the way of demonstrators calling for his ouster . 
Jonathan Knight : I was never in the closet : It 's no surprise Jonathan Knight was n't offended when fellow '80s teen idol Tiffany accidentally `` outed '' him during a recent TV appearance the New Kids on the Block star says he was never in the closet to begin with . 
Energy shares led the Dow higher , led by Exxon Mobil , which reported a large jump in fourth-quarter earnings . 
Stocks post gains despite Egypt unrest U.S. stocks posted solid gains Monday as investors focused on the positive earnings news out of Exxon Mobil and rising commodity prices , while continuing to monitor the ongoing political unrest in Egypt . 
At the final close on Monday , the Dow Jones industrial average rose 68 points , or 0.6 % , to 11,892 the S&P 500 index added 9.8 points , or 0.8 % , to 1,286 and the Nasdaq Composite was up 13.2 points , or 0.5 % , to 2,700 . 
Investors are keeping an eye on the protests in Cairo and elsewhere in Egypt . 
Egypt shows that risk is alive and well : So far , it looks like the worst-case scenario for oil -- the slowing or blocking shipments of oil through the Suez Canal - is not being realized . 
But it 's not as if Egypt is the only geopolitical ticking time bomb that could rattle investors . 
Meanwhile , oil prices continue to spike amid all the turmoil . 
But the pay stinks : Employers have n't added enough jobs . 
And those they have added are n't particularly good ones . 
A big worry is whether the trend toward low-wage jobs will continue . 
Experts say it 's too soon to tell . 
The embattled Egyptian government early Tuesday restricted communications and travel ahead of what protesters are calling a `` march of millions . '' 
Here 's what the government has done so far : Noor Group , an Internet service provider , has been shut down , according to the information ministry . 
The move essentially takes the country offline . 
The government is also planning to shut down mobile phone networks before the march , the ministry said . 
Security forces have been laying concrete barriers in front of strategic locations in central Cairo . 
President Hosni Mubarak has ordered an indefinite train shutdown . 
`` Will help prevent protests from reaching Tahrir Tuesday , plus further cripple economy , '' CNN 's Ben Wedeman wrote in a message on Twitter . 
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak -LRB- pictured -RRB- is likely thinking more about restoring order than leaving , a former U.S. ambassador to Egypt says . 
Street demonstrations in Egypt show no signs of letting up . 
Calls for President Hosni Mubarak to leave office persist . 
So far , Mubarak shows no signs of heeding the call . 
Is he considering an exit from office or does he believe he can manage his way out of this crisis ? 
Daniel Kurtzer believes Mubarak is n't going anywhere anytime soon . 
Kurtzer was the U.S. ambassador to Egypt from 1997 to 2001 , the U.S. ambassador to Israel from 2001 to 2005 and an adviser on Middle East policy to the Obama campaign during the 2008 presidential election . 
Today , he 's a professor of Middle Eastern Policy Studies at Princeton University 's Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs . 
He knows Mubarak well . 
`` Mubarak , as the ultimate guarantor of stability in Egypt as far as he sees it , is only thinking about how to restore calm and law and order , '' Kurtzer said . 
`` In the back of his mind is the idea that maybe the demonstrators have an issue and something needs to be done . 
But his major concern now is to restore law and order . '' 
It would take a dramatic turn of events for Mubarak to leave office , according to Kurtzer . 
`` I believe the only thing that will change Mubarak 's mind is a sit down with top military and security leaders who basically say to him , ` Your presence is putting the system in jeopardy . ' 
There 's no evidence yet to suggest that that kind of attitude has grown in the military , '' Kurtzer said . 
To listen to the full interview with Kurtzer , click the audio link below : Despite new hires in the automotive industry , autoworkers are not quite ready to celebrate . 
Autoworkers are not celebrating yet . 
Second-generation GM autoworker Leonard Smith says the last time he checked , there were still some 6,000 workers laid off . 
The plant I m working at now at Marion , Indiana , has 70 original hires out of 1,400 employees , Smith said . 
Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com 's news blog This Just In will feature the stories of the missing . 
This is the 11th case , and it will air at 9 p.m. ET Monday on HLN . 
For two years , police have been looking for Brittanee Drexel , a teenage girl who disappeared during a spring break trip to Myrtle Beach , South Carolina . 
Drexel , of Rochester , New York , was last seen in Myrtle Beach on April 25 , 2009 , disappearing after going for a walk about 8 p.m. . 
She was 17 at the time . 
This past weekend , the second-largest search for Drexel was launched with the help of 200 trained volunteers from the Center for Missing Persons . 
Volunteers covered heavily wooded areas on foot and with the help of ATVs , horses and dogs . 
Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com 's news blog This Just In will feature the stories of the missing . 
This was the 10th case , and it aired Friday night on HLN . 
Phylicia Barnes , a 17-year-old honors student from Charlotte , North Carolina , disappeared in Baltimore , Maryland , on December 28 while visiting her sister . 
She told an acquaintance that she was hungry and might have left her sister 's apartment to get something to eat . 
Barnes ' coat and purse were gone , but her credit card was left behind . 
Police are focusing on a dozen people who saw the teenager shortly before she vanished . 
No one has been identified as a suspect or person of interest in the case . 
-LRB- Updated at 10:28 p.m. -RRB- The fight over the health care reform law ruled unconstitutional by a federal judge on Monday will eventually be decided by the Supreme Court , said CNN senior legal analyst Jeff Toobin . 
`` This Supreme Court is very evenly divided between liberals and conservatives . 
Anthony Kennedy tends to be the swing vote . 
I would not be at all surprised that he would be the swing vote in this case as well , '' Toobin said . 
`` When you consider that this is the signature achievement of the Obama administration , and that it is hanging by a legal thread right now , it 's a cause of great concern to supporters of the law . '' 
Because the Florida judge ruled that the individual mandate , the part of the law that says everyone has to buy health insurance , is unconstitutional , he says the whole law has to go out the window , Toobin said . 
Toobin said it is important to note that several federal judges have found the law constitutional . 
`` This is why we have a United States Supreme Court , to settle when judges disagree with each other , '' Toobin said . 
The nine justices `` have the last word , '' Toobin said . 
`` Nobody can tell them what to do or when to do it . '' 
-LRB- Updated at 5:37 p.m. -RRB- The U.S. Department of Justice says it plans to appeal the ruling of a federal judge in Florida , who earlier today struck down as unconstitutional key parts of the sweeping health care reform bill championed by President Obama . 
-LRB- Updated at 3:47 p.m. -RRB- A federal judge in Florida has ruled unconstitutional the sweeping health care reform law championed by President Barack Obama , setting up what is likely to be a contentious Supreme Court challenge in coming months over the legislation . 
Monday 's ruling came in the most closely watched of the two dozen challenges to the law . 
Florida along with 25 states had filed a lawsuit last spring , seeking to dismiss a law critics had labeled `` Obamacare . '' 
Judge Roger Vinson , in a 78-page ruling , dismissed the key provision of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act - the so-called `` individual mandate '' requiring most Americans to purchase health insurance by 2014 or face `` I must reluctantly conclude that Congress exceeded the bounds of its authority in passing the Act with the individual mandate . 
That is not to say , of course , that Congress is without power to address the problems and Inequities in our health care system , '' Vinson wrote . 
`` Because the individual mandate is unconstitutional and not severable , the entire Act must be declared void . 
This has been a difficult decision to reach , and I am aware that it will have indeterminable implications . 
At a time when there is virtually unanimous agreement that health care reform is needed in this country , it is hard to invalidate and strike down a statute titled ` The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act . ' '' 
On the heels of anti-government demonstrations in Tunisia , thousands of protesters spilled into the streets of Egypt in a rare display of anti-government outcry . 
CNN reporters on the scene witnessed throngs of people in Cairo march from Tahrir Square to the parliament building . 
Demonstrators threw rocks at police , who threw them back and shot tear gas at the protesters , who also reciprocated . 
While Egypt estimated that there were 5,000 to 10,000 protesters , CNN estimated that the demonstration peaked at 15,000 to 20,000 protesters . 
The protest 's organizers said they wanted to mirror the uprising in Tunisia , which 10 days prior had precipitated the end of President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali 's 23-year rule . 
Before the protests in Cairo , several Egyptians set themselves or tried to set themselves on fire earlier in the month , which also was reminiscent of Tunisia , where a man 's self-immolation spurred the uprising . 
The Egyptian protesters - who included young and old , Christians and Muslims , students , workers and businesspeople - said they were angry over the cost of living , failed economic policies and corruption . 
They demanded that President Hosni Mubarak , in power for three decades , follow the lead of Tunisia 's president . 
`` We breathe corruption in the air , '' said one demonstrator . 
Tens of millions of people are bracing for a major storm system poised to sweep through the central United States and beyond this week , according to weather forecasters . 
Chicago , where a blizzard watch already has been issued , is expecting a snowstorm of historic proportions . 
`` This storm could be one of the top 10 biggest snowstorms ever in the city , '' said CNN meteorologist Sean Morris . 
The same system is expected to coat large sections of the country 's midsection in a thick blanket of snow , he said . 
The Navy commander fired for making racy videos and broadcasting them on a ship says that the movies had the `` tacit approval '' of senior Navy leadership , the Navy Times reports . 
Owen Honors ' statement to investigators , obtained by the Navy Times , marks the first time his side of the story has been made public . 
Honors made headlines for days in early January when the videos were published on the Virginian-Pilot newspaper site . 
The films included a simulated rectal exam , anti-gay slurs and sailors pretending to shower with each other aboard ship . 
In early January , Honors was removed from his post commanding the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise . 
An official 15-page statement that Honors gave to Navy investigators states that two commanding officers , two strike group admirals `` and myriad other senior military and civilian distinguished visitors '' were aware of the videos , according to the Navy Times . 
Honors made the videos in 2006 and 2007 when he was executive officer of the Enterprise , and they were discussed during meetings with the ship 's commanding officer and other leadership , the Navy Times reports . 
During these conversations , Honors received encouraging feedback about the content of the movies and was never told to stop making them , according to the report . 
Honors ' superiors did not respond to Navy Times ' requests for comment . 
A strong cyclone thrashed flood-ravaged Queensland , Australia , this week , but another storm is about to hit the highly populated north coast -- and it is much bigger . 
Forecasters say Cyclone Yasi could reach 149 miles per hour , according to the Sydney Morning Herald . 
Many are concerned that Yasi could mean setbacks for the coal-mining sector of the region , which was socked by recent massive flooding , the paper reports . 
Yasi is expected hit overnight Wednesday , according to The Australian , and will come ashore between Innisfail and Proserpine , directly hitting Queensland 's capital , Townsville . 
Yasi follows Cyclone Anthony , which hit this week with winds reaching 80 miles an hour , according to the Courier-Mail . 
The newspaper also had extensive coverage of the recent flooding , which affected 3 million people in one of the country 's most costly disasters . 
Last week , Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard proposed a tax to help cover flood damage , estimated at $ 5.6 billion . 
Egyptians protest against President Hosni Mubarak during a demonstration Monday at Cairo 's Tahrir Square . 
Egypt , Day 7 -- Demonstrators continue to demand that Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak step down , and CNN.com 's `` This Just In '' is live , blogging developments as they happen . 
While Americans were waking up Monday , thousands in Cairo defied a midafternoon government curfew despite a greater military presence on the street . 
Many in the city 's Tahrir Square said they spent the night there . 
In Alexandria , 2,000 to 3,000 people gathered , and an armored personnel carrier fired warning shots in an apparent effort to intimidate protesters near a hotel . 
Meanwhile , the U.S. State Department said 42 Americans have been evacuated from Egypt and more will be transported . 
Read about their journey . 
The recent Tunisian uprising helped inspire the Egyptian unrest following the buildup of years of social , political and economic grievances . 
The lack of opportunities , corruption and poverty have coalesced into a push to oust Mubarak from power . 
The negative effect protests have had on U.S. stocks may be waning , but world markets are not doing as well . 
So what 's next ? 
Are you in Egypt ? 
Send your story to CNN 's iReport . 
To read all of CNN 's Egypt coverage in Arabic , click here . 
Snow and more snow -- A major winter storm likely will begin near Oklahoma City late Monday and then move east . 
Chicago and St. Louis may get record snow . 
`` Combined snow totals from Monday afternoon through Wednesday may exceed a foot and a half across much of northern Illinois and far northwest Indiana , '' the National Weather Service said . 
`` Snowfall rates up to 3 inches per hour will be probable at the height of the storm Tuesday night . '' 
The storm is expected to hit the East Coast on Thursday . 
Dietary guidelines to target salt -- The U.S. government is trying to get people to eat healthier . 
New guidelines will be released Monday . 
The main message : Eat less salt . 
Other recommendations include telling people to consume less sugar and solid fats and eat more seafood , fruits , vegetables and whole grains . 
SAG Awards -- The Screen Actors Guild Awards are considered to be an indicator of who will take home Oscar . 
If that 's true , it 's good news for `` The King 's Speech , '' which took home honors for star Colin Firth and best movie ensemble . 
Everyone is talking about Betty White , who looked stunned to win the best female actor in a TV comedy series for `` Hot in Cleveland . '' 
Here is a full list of Sunday night 's winners . 
Syria 's president told The Wall Street Journal that the riots in Egypt and Tunisia mark a new era in Arab countries and that he will push for more political reforms in his own country . 
Ongoing coverage - Crisis in Egypt 11:00 am ET - ` Start-up America ' initiative launched - During last week 's State of the Union address , President Obama discussed ways to encourage U.S. business development and research . 
Today , Obama administration officials and others discuss efforts at encouraging private sector investment of such business development and research . 
Week after week , the U.S. has been pummeled by severe winter weather since December and this week will be no exception . 
Some of the coldest air of the season will plummet southward and combine with another storm developing over the southern Plains . 
An intense surface low will develop over north Texas and pull abundant warm , moist air from the Gulf of Mexico into the frigid Arctic air diving southward into the Plains . 
The result : blizzard conditions , heavy snow , ice storms and tornadoes . 
This storm appears to be another one for the record books . 
Very heavy snow will fall from Oklahoma northeastward through Kansas , Missouri and Illinois . 
Snow accumulations here will be measured in feet , not in inches . 
With massive protests against Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak entering their seventh day and a major opposition leader addressing demonstrators in Cairo , this week is shaping up to be a pivotal one for the country 's future . 
The unrest is starting to affect Egyptians ' food supplies and the United States is calling for a peaceful transition in Egypt to democracy . 
Governments of countries near Egypt are no doubt concerned about to what extent the unrest will spread to them -LRB- after all , Egypt 's protests came days after Tunisia 's president fled protests there -RRB- or how it will affect their long-term security . 
What will Mubarak do , and on what side will the Egyptian army fall ? 
Here 's a look at this and some of the other stories we plan to follow this week : Will Mubarak cling to power in Egypt ? 
Thousands of demonstrators took to the streets of Egypt 's major cities last week to demand an end to Mubarak 's 30-year rule , prompting the government to deploy the army to deal with civil unrest for the first time in a generation . 
The protests came after similar disturbances in Tunisia forced then-President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to flee the country . 
Both Egypt and Tunisia have seen dramatic rises in the cost of living in recent years and accusations of corruption among the ruling elite . 
Demonstrations also have taken place in recent weeks Algeria , Yemen and Jordan . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
