This article about BP stopping the flow of oil from the broken well in the Gulf of Mexico and beginning an `` integrity test '' misspelled the last name of the mayor of Gulf Shores , Ala. . 
He is Robert Craft , not Robert Kraft . 
Oil leak is stopped for first time since April 20 blowout The gusher is gone . 
The plume is off the well . 
BP 's Macondo well is n't dead yet , and it may be back in a flash , but at 3:25 p.m. Eastern time Thursday it ceased to spew oil into the Gulf of Mexico . 
As part of what BP calls an `` integrity test , '' a robotic submersible slowly closed a valve on the well 's new sealing cap . 
That choked the flow until the plume , a fixture of cable TV and many a nightmare , disappeared . 
The technological breakthrough came 87 days into the crisis , which began with the April 20 blowout that killed 11 workers and sent the burning rig Deepwater Horizon to the bottom of the gulf . 
BP could nix the test at any moment and reopen the well . 
Whether the well remains `` shut in , '' to use the industry term , depends on the analysis of pressures in the well . 
Engineers and scientists hope to see high pressure hold steady during the 48-hour period allotted for the test . 
That would suggest that the well bore is physically intact . 
Lower pressure would hint of breaches in the casing and leakage into the surrounding rock . 
The initial pressure readings are in an ambiguous range , and officials will have to make a difficult judgment call on whether to keep the well shut in or reopen it , according to Tom Hunter , retired director of the Sandia National Laboratories and a member of the federal government 's scientific team overseeing the test . 
`` If it were a lot higher , it would be an easier decision to make , '' Hunter said . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , the national incident commander , has said that a pressure reading of 8,000 or 9,000 pounds per square inch would be ideal , while below 6,000 psi might indicate leakage . 
Hunter , who witnessed the test from BP 's war room in Houston , told The Washington Post that the pressure rose to about 6,700 psi and appeared likely to level out `` closer to 7,000 . '' 
He said one possibility is that the reservoir has lost pressure as it has depleted itself the past three months . 
`` It 's just premature to tell . 
We just do n't know whether something is leaking or not , '' Hunter said . 
Seismic and sonar surveys will scout for evidence of oil and gas moving through the geological formations . 
Robotic submersibles are scrutinizing the muddy gulf floor and the base of the well 's blowout preventer , looking for signs of rising hydrocarbons . 
Allen issued a statement late in the day saying that , although he is encouraged by the latest developments , a return to the containment strategy `` remains likely . '' 
Reopening the well would not be a sign of failure , Hunter said , because , with the new cap -- the `` 3 ram capping stack '' -- on top of the well since Monday night , BP has more options for capturing the hydrocarbons . 
As many as four ships could soon give BP the capacity to collect between 60,000 and 80,000 barrels a day , which exceeds even the highest government estimate for what 's coming out of the well . 
`` No matter what comes out of this entire operation , we 're going to be in a much better position than we were before , '' Allen said . 
The successful start to the pressure test incited clapping , handshakes and back slaps in the war room , Hunter reported . 
But given past mishaps , BP engineers and government officials muted their celebration . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
