At his confirmation hearings last week , Tim Geithner branded China a currency manipulator . 
This is a designation that the Bush Treasury Department never formally affixed to the Chinese . 
It may signal a nerve-racking shift in how the United States manages its most pivotal relationship . 
Geithner is correct that China manipulates its currency . 
What 's more , this manipulation is arguably the most important cause of the financial crisis . 
Starting around the middle of this decade , China 's cheap currency led it to run a massive trade surplus . 
The earnings from that surplus poured into the United States . 
The result was the mortgage bubble . 
China 's leaders protest that they are being unfairly scapegoated . 
Yet while there are rival accounts of the origins of the crisis , neither has the explanatory force of the blame-China narrative . 
The first rival account is that the crisis reflected failings of U.S. financial regulation . 
Such failings exist , but most have been around for years . 
The mortgage bubble reached its craziest extremes in 2005-07 , when China was flooding the world with cheap capital . 
Moreover , regulatory failings exist not just at one regulator but many . 
The Securities and Exchange Commission failed to check risks at broker-dealers such as Bear Stearns . 
State insurance regulators failed to prevent the collapse of AIG . 
The Federal Reserve failed to see that banks were pouring capital into toxic securities that they then held off their balance sheets . 
European regulators were no better , even though they had adopted a supposedly more up-to-date set of capital standards . 
The lesson : Faced with a deluge of cheap money , no regulatory regime can be expected to prevent bubbles . 
The second rival account of the crisis accepts that its origins lie less in regulatory failings than in economic pressures . 
But it blames the bubble on two mistakes at home rather than on the glut of capital from China . 
Americans should have controlled the urge to splurge , the thinking goes , and borrowed less Chinese money . 
And the Fed should have shut down the easy-money party by raising interest rates . 
If Americans ' insatiable appetite for loans explained the flood of Chinese capital into the United States , we would have seen the evidence in a rising price for those loans -- that is , higher interest rates in the bond market . 
But bond rates were strikingly low at mid-decade . 
This strongly suggests that it was the supply of lending that went up , not the demand for it . 
Chinese money flooded into the United States because of the push factor from China , not the pull factor from Americans . 
Could the Fed have raised interest rates to avert the bubble ? 
The Fed 's monetary policy was indeed too loose . 
But as Martin Wolf argues in his recent book , `` Fixing Global Finance , '' it 's not clear that higher interest rates could have prevented the trouble . 
Once China decides to export vast quantities of capital , that capital has to go somewhere . 
Higher interest rates in the United States might have encouraged the world 's savers to park even more of their capital in this country . 
So there is no getting around China 's culpability . 
The country relies on the sort of export-focused growth strategy that other Asian Tigers have pursued , with the difference that China is too big to go this route without destabilizing the world economy . 
The real question is whether it is diplomatically fruitful to push China to change . 
The Bush administration tried and failed . 
Why would the new team fare better ? 
The wrong answer is to say that Barack Obama 's guys will be tougher . 
However egregious China 's currency policy may be , it 's counterproductive to punish Beijing with sanctions . 
For one thing , a trade war is the last thing the world economy needs . 
For another , as Geithner explained , the immediate priority is to get global growth going , so it 's more important to persuade China to extend its fiscal stimulus than to revalue its currency . 
Besides , reforming China 's exchange-rate policy is not the only way to wean the country off its high-savings , high-export model . 
The savings rate partly reflects China 's lack of social safety nets . 
If the Chinese spend some of their stimulus on pensions and health care , they will be heading in the right direction . 
Still , there is an opportunity to nudge China toward currency reform , and the Obama team should take it . 
China 's leaders are not fools : They can see the effects of their policy not only in collapsing Wall Street banks but also in their own collapsing exports . 
The bubble that China inflated has brought China 's foreign customers to their knees . 
Because China pushed its export model too aggressively , its export markets have cratered . 
Think of it this way : China 's position is akin to that of OPEC in the early 1980s . 
Two oil shocks taught oil producers the limits to their power : When they jammed prices up , the world economy sputtered and motorists bought smaller cars -- and oil prices fell precipitously . 
OPEC learned to balance its lust for higher oil prices with the fear that customers might revolt . 
China 's leaders may be ready for the same lesson -- and Geithner 's words may encourage them to learn it . 
