CAIRO | Sat Sep 10 , 2011 10:21 pm BST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Egypt 's army rulers vowed on Saturday to try those behind the violence that pushed Israel to evacuate its ambassador from Cairo , as they struggled to contain public fury against the Jewish state while fending off U.S. criticism . 
Washington , which has poured billions of dollars in military aid into Egypt since it made peace with Israel in 1979 , urged Cairo to protect the mission after protesters hurled embassy documents from the windows of the building and removed and burnt the Israeli flag . 
Three people died and 1,049 were wounded in the clashes that began Friday and raged on into the early hours of Saturday around the Cairo tower block housing the embassy , the Health Ministry said . 
Police and soldiers fired shots in the air and tear gas to disperse the crowd , which replied with stones . 
Egypt 's army , under pressure to hand power back to civilians after taking over from toppled president Hosni Mubarak , must balance public calls for a more assertive policy towards Israel with maintaining ties that bring it cash and U.S. military hardware . 
`` Egypt witnessed a harsh day that inflicted pain and worry on all Egyptians . 
It is clear that the behavior of some threatens the Egyptian revolution , '' Information Minister Osama Hassan Heikal said in a televised statement . 
Egypt would transfer those in custody or `` involved in inciting or participating in -LRB- Friday 's -RRB- events to the emergency state security court , '' the minister said . 
Justice Minister Mohamed Abdel Aziz el-Guindy told state television the government had decided to apply emergency laws still in place `` forcefully '' and that trials would be swift . 
Protesters burnt tyres in the street and at least two police vehicles were set alight near the embassy . 
Many had come from a demonstration in central Cairo organised to push the army to end emergency law and speed up political reforms . 
`` Our dignity has been restored , '' said Mohi Alaa , 24 , a protester near the site of the overnight clashes . 
Bits of concrete and bullet casings were strewn over the street . 
`` We do n't want the Americans ' money , '' he said , reflecting the greater readiness of many Egyptians to express resentment of Israel and the United States after decades of pragmatic official relations . 
Some 500 protesters stayed after dawn and a few threw stones at police , who gradually pushed them away and secured the area around the embassy , located on the upper floors of a residential block overlooking the Nile . 
It was the second big eruption of violence at the embassy since five Egyptian border guards were killed last month when Israel repelled cross-border raiders it said were Palestinians . 
Egypt then briefly threatened to withdraw its envoy to Israel . 
Israel has stopped short of apologising , saying it is still investigating the Egyptian deaths , which occurred during an operation against gunmen who had killed eight Israelis . 
Israeli ambassador Yitzhak Levanon , staff and family members arrived home Saturday , but one diplomat stayed in Egypt to maintain the embassy , an Israeli official said . 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Israel would preserve its 1979 peace with Egypt despite the incident . 
`` We are working together with the Egyptian government to return our ambassador to Cairo soon , '' he said in televised remarks . 
`` I would like to ensure that the security arrangements necessary for him and for our staff will be steadfast . '' 
The Egyptian information minister 's statement followed a crisis meeting of his key cabinet members and talks with Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi , who heads the military council that has ruled Egypt since Mubarak stepped down on February 11 . 
State television said the military council rejected an offer by Prime Minister Essam Sharaf to resign . 
Israel is finding itself increasingly at odds with formerly sympathetic states in the region . 
It is embroiled in a feud with Turkey , once the closest of its few Muslim allies , over an Israeli raid last year that killed nine Turks on a flotilla bound for Gaza . 
Egypt 's ties with Israel , though never warm , were a pillar of Mubarak 's foreign policy and buttressed his claim to be a regional mediator . 
Under Mubarak , displays of hostility to Israel were crushed by force . 
U.S. President Barack Obama called on Egypt to `` honor its international obligations '' and protect the Israeli mission . 
He told Israel 's Netanyahu that Washington was taking steps to resolve the situation . 
The State Department said Washington had been in contact with Egyptian and Israeli officials over the violence . 
`` Israel and Egypt are key partners and allies of the United States , and both states have made clear their continuing commitment to maintain their bilateral relationship and the peace treaty between them , which remains a cornerstone of regional stability , '' Spokeswoman Victoria Nuland said . 
Egyptian Foreign Minister Mohamed Kamel Amr said Cairo was committed to `` fully respect all its international obligations regarding protecting and safeguarding international diplomatic missions on its soil , '' the state MENA news agency said . 
An Israeli official said the ambassador , staff and family members had left in one plane and a second one had brought home six Israeli security personnel who had been left guarding the embassy , protected from the crowd only by a reinforced door until Egyptian troops extracted them . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron condemned the embassy attack and urged Egypt to protect diplomatic property . 
Some Egyptian politicians and activists criticised the violence , even if they backed the anti-Israel demonstration . 
Presidential candidate Hamdeen Sabahy called for the army to take a `` serious stance matching the public anger '' towards Israel but said violence sullied the image of Egypt 's uprising . 
Last month , a man scaled the embassy building , took down Israel 's flag and replaced it with Egypt 's . 
Protests continued daily but did not turn violent until the latest flare-up . 
In response to the protests , the authorities had erected a wall around the building , which was quickly defaced with anti-Israel slogans and then painted in Egypt 's national colors . 
Friday , the wall was torn down . 
-LRB- Reporting by Yasmine Saleh , Mohamed Abdellah , Seham Eloraby , Ahmed Tolba and Sami Aboudi in Cairo , Dan Williams in Jerusalem , and Christopher Wilson and Timothy Gardner in Washington ; Writing by Edmund Blair ; Editing by Janet Lawrence -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It is still intact only for so long as the American Israel lobby can demand its government continues to pay Egypt US$ 2 billion and Israel US$ 3 billion annually . 
When that greasing money in the form of American tax dollars stops , then we can all start running for the fallout shelters . 
There is no state in the M E that will voluntarily deal with Israel unless it is paid huge amounts of US money to do so . 
It s political prostitution but who is the pimp that profits ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
