A firefighter extinguishes a fire set by unknown rioters during a violent demonstration against austerity in Thessaloniki September 10 , 2011 . 
THESSALONIKI , Greece | Sat Sep 10 , 2011 10:24 pm BST THESSALONIKI , Greece -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou said on Saturday he would do whatever it takes to rescue his country from bankruptcy and stay in the euro zone , as doubts in Europe grew over its membership in the bloc . 
Sending a message to international lenders increasingly frustrated with delays in reforms and missed fiscal targets , Papandreou said his government was determined to take the difficult decisions and make the sacrifices needed . 
`` We decided to fight the battle to avoid a disaster for the country and its people and to stay in the euro , '' he said in his annual economic speech at a trade fair in the northern city of Thessaloniki . 
`` Any delay and wavering is dangerous for the country . '' 
Anger at the country 's failure to meet fiscal targets under its EU\/IMF bailout has reached boiling point , prompting senior euro zone policymakers to cast doubt on its ability to avoid default or even its membership in the single currency . 
The embattled premier , who was heckled by angry labor unions on Friday , said he would redouble efforts to fight endemic tax evasion , a main hurdle in achieving fiscal targets . 
His Finance Minister Evangelos Venizelos said earlier Greece may even take additional fiscal measures in 2011 to make up for budget deficit slippage that threatens the disbursement of an 8 billion euro EU\/IMF loan tranche . 
Venizelos pledged to further cut the civil service payroll , push privatisations and deepen labor market reforms . 
Civil servants , who have seen about a fifth of their wages slashed , will suffer more after the government decided to put thousands of them in a so-called `` Labor Reserve , '' in which they will draw 60 percent of their salary and possibly face dismissal if they find no other public sector job within a year . 
But austerity measures are throwing the economy into an ever deeper recession . 
GDP will shrink by more than 5 percent this year , Venizelos said , topping earlier projections in its third straight year of contraction . 
More than 20,000 protesters gathered in the northern city to mark Papandreou 's speech . 
Police fired tear gas at youths smashing shop windows and setting fires on the main shopping streets . 
Police said 106 people were detained . 
Demonstrations were organised by civil servants , students , taxi drivers and even football fans . 
Some restaurants in the city shut down to protest a VAT hike that took effect earlier this month . 
`` We are suffering an unprecedented tax raid ... we deeply worry about tomorrow , '' George Kasimatis , chairman of Greece 's Chamber of Commerce Federation , told Venizelos during the conference . 
About 7,000 police were patrolling the city 's streets , cordoning off the fairgrounds . 
Ministers canceled plans for their usual walkabouts in the city and Papandreou avoided touring the fair in the morning , as prime ministers traditionally do on the event 's first day . 
While vowing to keep its side of the bargain , the Greek government sharply criticised its EU partners for delaying ratification of a second , 109-billion-euro bailout for the country , agreed by euro zone leaders on July 21 . 
`` Europe must rise to the challenge and move towards implementing the July 21 decisions , to put an end to the Sisyphean ordeal the Greek people is going through , '' said Development Minister Mihalis Chrysohoidis . 
`` Doing nothing is disastrous for all of us , '' he added . 
A G7 source said the troika -LRB- EU\/IMF\/ECB -RRB- , which suspended talks with Athens last week in frustration at Greece 's struggle to stick to its deficit reduction plan , would probably come up with a form of words in its next report to allow the next tranche of bailout funds to be paid . 
But the working assumption is that Greece will not avoid default indefinitely . 
However , a bond swap plan for private bondholders , which is part of the second bailout plan and is supposed to ease Greece 's debt payments was progressing well , Venizelos said . 
`` The private sector is responding very well to the PSI -LRB- private sector involvement -RRB- , '' he said , without elaborating , one day after an initial deadline for banks to express interest in the scheme expired . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
