Syria unrest : Assad defiant despite growing pressure Ahmet Davutoglu -LRB- right -RRB- said he hoped for a peaceful transition in Bashar al-Assad 's Syria Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has said he will not relent in pursuing `` terrorist groups '' in the country . 
He was speaking after talks with Turkish FM Ahmet Davutoglu , who had urged Syria to end military operations against civilian demonstrators . 
Security forces meanwhile continued the crackdown , and reports say nearly 30 more people were killed . 
More than 1,700 civilians are believed to have been killed since the uprising began in mid-March . 
Tens of thousands of people have reportedly been arrested . 
Meanwhile , the United States is reported to be preparing to impose new sanctions on the Assad regime . 
The US would target `` major elements of Syria 's financial and commercial infrastructure that are providing critical support to the regime , '' a US official said . 
Mr Assad 's comments came after the meeting with Mr Davutoglu in Damascus on Tuesday . 
The official Syrian account of their talks quoted Mr Assad as saying security forces would `` not relent in pursuing terrorist groups '' to ensure the stability of the nation and the safety of its citizens . 
Jonathan Head BBC News , Istanbul This visit was probably Turkey 's last chance to revive a relationship which has been the foundation of its ambitious new foreign policy . 
Mr Davutoglu clearly had a lot to say . 
The talks lasted for three-and-a-half hours and the exchanges were probably pretty blunt . 
Mr Davutoglu described the methods used by the Syrian security forces as unacceptable , and said he outlined actions Syria must take to stop the bloodshed - the developments of the coming days will be critical , he said . 
But there is no indication that Mr Assad will act on Turkey 's pleas . 
The warm , personal ties between him and the Turkish PM are now in the past . 
Other aspects of the relationship , like trade and tourism , which have flourished in recent years , are at risk . 
Tellingly , Turkey has co-ordinated closely with the US over its response to Syria ; it may now be willing to back tougher action at the UN Security Council . 
Iran , another neighbor wooed by Turkey in recent years , is still backing President Assad . 
Mr Davutoglu used to describe his new foreign policy as one based on zero problems with Turkey 's neighbors . 
He does not use that term any more . 
The president also insisted he was serious about a proposed reform program . 
The Syrians quoted Mr Davutoglu as saying he was not carrying a message from anyone , and that Syria would be an example to the whole region once Mr Assad 's reforms were enacted . 
In his turn , Mr Davutoglu , who had helped improve ties between Ankara and Damascus , said the pair discussed `` concrete steps '' for Damascus to halt the killing of civilians . 
Speaking to reporters on his return to Ankara , he described the methods used by the Syrian security forces as `` unacceptable '' and outlined actions that Syria had to take to stop the bloodshed . 
`` We discussed ways to prevent confrontation between the army and the people , and tensions like those in -LRB- the central city of -RRB- Hama , in the most open and clear way , '' he said . 
`` The coming days will be important to see if the expectations are being met . 
We hope that internal peace and calm is achieved and steps for reform are taken . '' 
Ahead of his visit , Turkey 's top diplomat had been told by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan to pass on a `` tough '' message , demanding an end to Syria 's military operations against civilian demonstrators . 
Over the weekend , Mr Erdogan said not only that he had `` run out of patience '' , but also that from Turkey 's point of view the Syrian crisis was almost an internal problem - their shared border is more than 800km -LRB- 500 miles -RRB- long , says the BBC 's Jonathan Head in Istanbul . 
The army has been deployed to crush dissent in the restive cities of Hama , Homs and Deir al-Zour Many Turks sympathise with anti-government protesters in Syria and there is burning anger at what is happening , our correspondent says . 
Since Saturday , Saudi Arabia , Bahrain and Kuwait have recalled their ambassadors and demanded an immediate end to the use of military force against civilians . 
Envoys from India , Brazil and South Africa are also due in Damascus this week to appeal for an end to the killing of protesters . 
Efforts to persuade Syria 's government to halt the crackdown have had little effect in the past week , during which more than 300 civilians are believed to have been killed , including at least 14 on Monday . 
On Tuesday , at least seven people were killed when troops backed by tanks and armored vehicles overran towns and villages outside Hama , including Soran , Halfaya and Taybat al-Imam , where snipers have been deployed on roofs . 
Two sisters aged six and 11 were reportedly among the five dead brought to a hospital in Taybat al-Imam , while the Syrian National Organisation for Human Rights told Reuters news agency that at least 26 people had died . 
Despite concerted and ruthless efforts , the regime has not been able to stamp out the flames of defiance '' Two people were also killed in the center of Hama , activists said . 
At least three others were reportedly killed in the town of Binnish , in Idlib governorate , about 30km -LRB- 19 miles -RRB- from the border with Turkey , in a similar attack . 
Asked why Binnish was stormed , a resident who had fled told Reuters : `` The whole town has been joining in night rallies after Ramadan prayers . '' 
The army also continued its operation to crush dissent in the eastern city of Deir al-Zour , where more than 60 civilians are said to have been killed since Sunday . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees , an activist group that organises and documents the protests , said that more than 200 tanks had been deployed in the center , and that security forces were carrying out raids and detaining residents . 
Deaths were also reported in Homs and the Damascus suburb of Irbin . 
Access to Syria has been severely restricted for international journalists , and it is rarely possible to verify accounts by witnesses and activists . 
Syria 's anti-government protests , inspired by events in Tunisia and Egypt , first erupted in mid-March after the arrest of a group of teenagers who spray-painted a revolutionary slogan on a wall . 
The protests soon spread , and the UN says 3,500 people have died in the turmoil - mainly protestors but also members of Syria 's security forces - while thousands more have been injured . 
Although the arrest of the teenagers in the southern city of Deraa first prompted people to take to the streets , unrest has since spread to other areas , including Hama , Homs , Latakia , Jisr al-Shughour and Baniyas . 
Demonstrators are demanding greater freedom , an end to corruption , and , increasingly , the ousting of President Bashar al-Assad . 
The government has responded to the protests with overwhelming military force , sending tanks and troops into towns and cities . 
Amateur video footage shows tanks and snipers firing on unarmed protesters . 
There may have been an armed element to the uprising from its early days and army deserters have formed the Free Syrian Army . 
Some of the bloodiest events have taken place in the northern town of Jisr al-Shughour . 
In early June , officials claimed 120 security personnel were killed by armed gangs , however protesters said the dead were shot by troops for refusing to kill demonstrators . 
As the military moved to take control of the town , thousands fled to neighbouring Turkey , taking refuge in camps . 
Although the major cities of Damascus and Aleppo have seen pockets of unrest and some protests , it has not been widespread - due partly to a heavy security presence . 
There have been rallies in the capital - one with an enormous Syrian flag - in support of President Assad , who still receives the backing of many in Syria 's middle class , business elite and minority groups . 
The Assad family has been in power for 40 years , with Bashar al-Assad inheriting office in 2000 . 
The president has opened up the economy , but has continued to jail critics and control the media . 
He is from the minority Alawite sect - an offshoot of Shia Islam - but the country 's 20 million people are mainly Sunni . 
The biggest protests have been in Sunni-majority areas . 
The uprising has cost 3,500 lives , according to the UN and Jordan 's King Abdullah says that President Assad should now step down . 
The Arab League has suspended Syria 's membership and voted for sanctions . 
The EU has frozen the assets of Syrian officials , placed an arms embargo on Syria and banned imports of its oil . 
But fears remain of Syria collapsing into civil war . 
BACK -LCB- current -RCB- of -LCB- total -RCB- NEXT Are you in Syria ? 
What is the situation like where you are ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
