Sun Apr 26 , 2009 10:12 pm BST -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The U.N. World Health Organization and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have been collecting samples of the new H1N1 swine flu virus to make a new vaccine in case it is needed . 
Following are some facts about influenza vaccines . 
\* The WHO and CDC prepare samples of virus to give to industrial makers . 
\* These samples must be grown in specially produced chicken eggs . 
The virus is then purified and made into vaccines , a process that takes months . 
\* At least 20 companies make flu vaccines including Sanofi Pasteur , Australia 's CSL Ltd , GlaxoSmithKline Plc , Novartis AG , Baxter and nasal spray maker MedImmune , acquired by AstraZeneca Plc. \* Experts agree the current process for making vaccines is clumsy and outdated , but new and more efficient technologies are still a few years away . 
\* WHO and CDC experts are trying to decide if a new vaccine for the H1N1 swine flu strain is needed , or perhaps if a fourth element could be added to the seasonal flu vaccine mix for next September . 
\* The health agencies also had been considering adding some vaccines against H5N1 avian influenza , which occasionally infects people and is also considered a major pandemic threat . 
\* Tests show the H1N1 component of the current seasonal flu vaccine does not protect against the new strain . 
\* Consulting firm Oliver Wyman found that drug companies would need four years to meet global demand for vaccines if a pandemic broke out today , but new technology could significantly boost production by 2014 . 
\* Currently , drug makers could make up to 2.5 billion doses of pandemic vaccines in one year , meaning it would take four years to meet global demand , Oliver Wyman found . 
In a best-case scenario , they could make 7.7 billion doses in 1.5 years . 
\* Compounds called adjuvants can be used to boost a vaccine 's effectiveness , so it could be diluted and used in more people . 
\* Current global demand for seasonal influenza vaccine is about 500 million doses a year . 
\* The CDC recommends that 261 million Americans -- 85 percent of the population -- should be vaccinated against flu . 
A RAND Corp. study in December showed that only about a third of those who should have did get the vaccine . 
-LRB- Reporting by Maggie Fox ; Editing by Will Dunham -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
