By Lisa Rein and Ed O'Keefe BP has reimbursed the federal government $ 518 million for clean-up costs for the April oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , a sum that has hit $ 581 million and keeps growing , congressional auditors said . 
The Government Accountability Office , in a report on the spill released Friday , reviewed the financial risks facing a trust fund Congress authorized in 1990 after the Exxon Valdez incident to pay clean-up expenses incurred by federal agencies . 
The pot of money , called the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund , is financed by an 8-cents-per-barrel tax on petroleum . 
Auditors said there was about $ 1.6 billion in the fund as of the end of September . 
But to limit the government 's exposure , the law caps at $ 1 billion what agencies can draw from it for cleanup costs -- even if the oil company responsible for a spill pledges to reimburse the government for all costs . 
The fund is at risk in the near future of reaching the limit of what the government can spend , the GAO said . 
Congress is considering legislation to lift the $ 1 billion cap . 
Auditors urged Congress to not only lift it but consider changing the rules so that money already reimbursed by BP is not counted against the limit . 
The oil-spill fund is separate from $ 20 billion set aside by BP to reimburse businesses and residents of the Gulf region whose livelihoods were hurt by the blowout on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig . 
BP also has pledged to pay the potentially massive costs of restoring the Gulf region to health . 
But that assessment has only just begun and its costs are far from being tallied . 
Auditors concluded that the lingering uncertainty over the cost of the cleanup - even though BP has pledged to foot the bill -- still poses financial risks to the government . 
`` The full extent of such costs and the extent to which they will ultimately be paid by the responsible parties or federal , state and local governments is unknown at this time , '' auditors wrote . 
`` Financial risks to the federal government exist if circumstances occur that adversely impact BP or other responsible parties ' financial condition or ability to pay such claims . '' 
Auditors concluded that `` it remains unclear '' whether the government will ultimately have to cover any spill-related costs and how big they could get . 
The GAO report was requested by several senators serving on committees addressing federal financial management . 
Senator Thomas E. Carper -LRB- D-Del . -RRB- 
, chairman of such a panel on the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee , said in a statement : `` Although the BP\/Deepwater Horizon well has been sealed and the oil clean-up process continues to progress , the federal government must continue to be vigilant in ensuring that every dime spent by taxpayers is reimbursed by those responsible . 
The GAO did not assess the effectiveness of the government 's cleanup effort , its oversight over the claims process or how well its is working . 
That 's the subject of another audit that should be released this spring , said Susan Ragland , who is in charge of the agency 's financial management reports . 
Leave your thoughts in the comments section below Cabinet and Staff News : President Obama shift tack in foreign relations while his aides are '' soul-searching '' after big midterm losses . 
Former president George W. Bush misses `` being pampered '' as president . 
Former President Bill Clinton to make a cameo in `` The Hangover II '' -LRB- and he 's apparently '' still a little sore '' with one-time commerce secretary nominee Bill Richardson -RRB- . 
The gloves are coming off in the Chicago mayoral race . 
David Axelrod confirms he 's going back to Chicago by next spring . 
U.S. and NATO allies to announce ` transition ' strategy in Afghanistan war : Even as it announces the `` transition '' process NATO will also state its intention to keep combat troops in Afghanistan until 2014 . 
Federal agencies still play favorites with brand names in bid requests : They continue to exhibit loyalty to particular brands in bid requests , despite a clear rule that all products meeting the defined requirements should be considered . 
Feds revving up electric car fleet : The agency is seeking 100 electric vehicles and could decide on its purchases before the end of December . 
Contenders include the Chevrolet Volt , Nissan Leaf and the Wheego LiFe , all of which are just beginning production . 
IRS has new requirements for tax preparers who charge you : The agency for the first time is requiring paid preparers to obtain a preparer tax-identification number and uphold certain competency standards before they can work on returns . 
Nazis were given ` safe haven ' in U.S. , report says : The 600-page report , which the Justice Department has tried to keep secret for four years , provides new evidence about more than two dozen of the most notorious Nazi cases of the last three decades . 
OFPP calls for Fed to contractor ratio analysis : Agencies have until June to figure out if their ratio of contractors to employees is most appropriate . 
Airport body-scan radiation under scrutiny : Are body scanners at security checkpoints dangerous ? 
By Lisa Rein and Ed O'Keefe | November 15 , 2010 ; 6:00 AM ET The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund On October 18 , 2010 , The Donovan Law Group sent a letter to the Honorable Janet Napolitano , Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security , asking the Secretary to immediately request the Attorney General , pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 2715 , to commence an action against BP on behalf of the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund -LRB- the Fund -RRB- to recover any compensation paid by the Fund to any claimant pursuant to OPA . 
The full text of the letter is available at : Posted by : brianjdonovan | November 15 , 2010 6:13 AM | Report abuse Any chance we could settle out of court for say ... ... $ 25 trillion . 
It would really help our national budget problems and you know there are terrific profits in oil so they will make it up in no time ! 
Free enterprise at its best ! 
We should apologize to BP , like that Republican imbecile did , and pretend notjing happened . 
What a `` shakedown '' ! 
User reviews and comments that include profanity or personal attacks or other inappropriate comments or material will be removed from the site . 
Additionally , entries that are unsigned or contain `` signatures '' by someone other than the actual author will be removed . 
Finally , we will take steps to block users who violate any of our posting standards , terms of use or privacy policies or any other policies governing this site . 
Please review the full rules governing commentaries and discussions . 
