Kuwait , not Syria , to run for U.N. rights body : envoys UNITED NATIONS | Tue May 10 , 2011 1:18 pm EDT UNITED NATIONS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Under pressure from fellow U.N. member states , Syria dropped plans to run for a seat on the top U.N. human rights body and allowed Kuwait to replace it as a candidate , U.N. diplomats said on Tuesday . 
Several U.N. diplomats told Reuters on condition of anonymity that Kuwait had confirmed to Western officials that it would enter the race for a spot on the 47-nation Human Rights Council in the Asian category . 
They said that Syria planned to drop out of the race for four spots available to Asian countries . 
Other candidates in the category are India , Indonesia and the Philippines . 
There was no immediate confirmation from Syrian officials . 
One diplomat told Reuters that an `` Asian group meeting will have to be called to confirm these changes . '' 
Another Western diplomat told Reuters that Syria 's withdrawal and Kuwait 's candidacy is `` great news . '' 
The 192-nation U.N. General Assembly will hold its annual elections for one third of the seats on the Geneva-based Human Rights Council on May 20 . 
The council is the main U.N. body charged with monitoring member states ' compliance with international human rights norms . 
Critics say it spends too much time bashing Israel while ignoring violations by countries like Sri Lanka , Bahrain , China , Russia and others . 
The original slate of Syria , India , Indonesia and the Philippines had been endorsed by Asia 's U.N. voting group and the Arab League . 
But Syria 's violent crackdown against anti-government protesters prompted some Western , Arab and Asian U.N. member states to suggest that Damascus should not be on the rights body when it was facing accusations of gross violations , Western envoys said . 
`` It is not really the time for Syria to become a member of the council of human rights , '' French U.N. Ambassador Gerard Araud told reporters on Monday . 
The United States under President George W. Bush had shunned the rights council , considering it a tool of anti-Israeli forces at the United Nations . 
President Barack Obama reversed that policy two years ago , saying the United States could improve the rights council from within . 
The United States ran for and secured a seat . 
Had Syria won a seat on the council , it would have followed other states accused of human rights abuses by rights watchdog groups including China , Russia and Saudi Arabia . 
Muammar Gaddafi 's Libya is a member of the rights council , but the General Assembly suspended its membership rights in response to its violent crackdown this year against anti-government demonstrators that sparked a civil war . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Absolute hypocrisy and an offense to our intelligence . 
Much better , and that 's not saying much . 
May 10 , 2011 7:09 pm EDT -- Report as abuse This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
