A looming financial crisis in Eastern Europe is fast depleting International Monetary Fund reserves , fueling tensions between the wealthy but cash-strapped countries that have traditionally controlled it and emerging economies that have the resources to shore it up . 
The faltering economies of Eastern Europe were on the minds of European leaders as they met in Berlin over the weekend . 
They called for doubling the IMF 's resources , to $ 500 billion , to cope with crises spawned by the worldwide recession . 
Since last fall , the IMF has lent more than $ 30 billion to Hungary , Belarus , Latvia , Serbia and Ukraine . 
All have been hurt by collapsing demand for exports ; foreign investors who have pulled back sharply , partly to cover losses at home ; and falling currency values . 
And some may be coming back for more . 
World Bank officials warned last week that if wealthier countries in Europe fail to help Eastern Europe , economic and political gains made in the region since the fall of the Soviet Union could be erased . 
Economic distress has already led to the collapse of the government in Latvia , where riots broke out last month . 
Riots also have taken place in Bulgaria and Lithuania . 
Additional countries are expected to turn to the IMF for help as the crisis deepens , raising concerns about the fund 's adequacy . 
IMF officials said there is n't reason to worry -- yet . 
At this stage , IMF officials said , doubling the fund 's lending capacity , which stood at $ 250 billion before the crisis , to $ 500 billion is sufficient to ensure confidence in the adequacy of the Fund 's resources . 
Including the Eastern European loans , along with loans to Iceland and Pakistan , the IMF has lent about $ 50 billion , bringing its lending capacity down to $ 200 billion . 
Recently , Japan committed an additional $ 100 billion . 
But several analysts doubted that that would be enough if the global downturn lasts well into 2010 , as expected . 
`` What we 're now talking about is a global crisis , many countries in many parts of the world . 
And larger economies , '' said Fredrik Erixon , director of the European Centre for International Political Economy in Brussels . 
`` There 's no chance at all the IMF could be part of a bigger bailout of several big economies at same time . '' 
While some leaders have said they would be willing to help bail out Eastern European neighbors , by calling for other countries to help the IMF bulk up its reserves , they acknowledged that they might not be able to raise the necessary funds for economic and political reasons , analysts said . 
Countries such as Germany and France , along with the United States , already are spending at least tens of billions of dollars to turn around their own economies . 
`` I think politically , it would go down easier for German public opinion to channel the money to Central and Eastern Europe through the IMF , rather than giving money directly to country XYZ , '' said Lars Christensen , chief emerging markets analyst at Danske Bank . 
But coming up with additional money for the IMF poses challenges . 
Countries such as China and the oil-rich Gulf states , which have the resources to contribute , have been reluctant to do so because they have little decision-making power under rules that favor Europe and the United States , which set up the IMF in 1945 . 
They have long complained about the disparity between their voting power within the IMF and growing economic clout . 
In a position paper released earlier this month in preparation for the G-20 summit in April , Chinese officials said developing countries should have more voting power . 
