Gulf oil spill : the web 's top killer lines BP 's green rebranding has been much lampooned , while the fake Twitter account BPGlobalPR has drawn 70,000 followers Second City 's spoof BP advert As outrage grows over BP 's handling of the oil spill so far , much of the criticism of the company has been fuelled by the internet . 
The Second City , a US `` improv-based sketch comedy '' troupe , has contributed the YouTube video BP - Bringing People together , which is heavily based on BP 's television adverts featuring people responding to the question : `` What would you ask an oil company ? '' 
In BP 's version men and women on the street ask questions such as `` What alternative forms of fuel are out there ? '' 
and `` How do we head towards what 's next ? '' 
In Second City 's pastiche the same sort of people ask the same sort of questions , but there is much more crude oil involved . 
The video ends with a stream of thick brown liquid being poured over one of the questioners ' heads as he says `` I think they 're doing a great job '' and the slogan `` Brown is the new green '' flashes across the screen . 
Greenpeace UK has launched a campaign to reinvent BP 's logo , which it then intends to use `` in innovative and exciting ways as part of our international campaign against the oil company '' . 
BP sought to rebrand itself as an environmentally aware company in 2000 when it replaced its old green shield with the sunburst label and slogan of Beyond Petroleum . 
It may not be happy with the contributions to Greenpeace 's campaign , which have been posted to the charity 's Flickr photostream . 
Elswhere , the -LRB- false -RRB- Twitter account @BPGlobalPR has been particularly diligent in its mocking of the British company 's response to the crisis . 
Since the anonymous poster behind the account began tweeting on 19 May the account has attracted more than 70,000 followers , enjoying such irreverence as : '' The good news : Mermaids are real . 
The bad news : They are now extinct '' ; `` Can we just start calling it the oilcean and move on please ? '' 
; and `` The ocean looks just a bit slimmer today . 
Dressing it in black really did the trick ! '' 
with the hashtag #bpcares . 
Over the past three days in particular the Twitter account has begun lampooning an equally fictional BP executive called Terry , who has recently created his own account @bpTerry . . 
Here 's a selection of posts from @BPGlobalPR documenting Terry 's ups and downs as he attempts to plug the oil leak . 
A version appeared on p6 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 17.02 BST on Friday 28 May 2010 Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
