cents Pollution could do lasting damage to locals ' health cents BP 's ` top kill ' attempt to stop flow enters third day Barack Obama speaks to LaFourche Parish president Charlotte Randolf at Port Fourchon Beach , Louisiana . 
Photograph : Jim Watson\/AFP\/Getty Images Prolonged exposure to crude oil and chemical dispersants is a public health danger , environmental scientists warned yesterday as BP spent a third day trying to initiate a `` top kill '' operation to cap the ruptured well on the sea bed . 
The oil firm moved to a second stage of the procedure by injecting material such as golf balls , shredded tyres and rope into the well . 
But John Pack , a spokesman for BP , said it would not be clear until tomorrow if it would work . 
`` We have never said there is a deadline or a schedule , '' he said . 
`` We need to take this pretty slowly , but everything is going according to plan . '' 
BP 's beleaguered chief executive , Tony Hayward , yesterday drastically scaled upwards his assessment of the spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` This is clearly an environmental catastrophe . 
There is no two ways about it , '' he told CNN . 
`` It 's clear that we are dealing with a very significant environmental crisis and catastrophe . '' 
In an interview with the Guardian two weeks ago , he had described the oil spill as `` tiny '' relative to the size of the gulf . 
`` The amount of volume of oil and dispersant we are putting into it is tiny in relation to the total water volume , '' he said then . 
However he was optimistic that the `` top kill '' stood a good chance of success , which he put at 60-70 % . 
`` We have wrestled it to the ground , but we have n't put a bullet in its head yet , '' Hayward said . 
With no immediate end in sight , there were growing concerns over the effects on public health of a prolonged exposure to the oil as well as to the more than 3,640,000 litres -LRB- 800,000 gallons -RRB- of chemical dispersants sprayed on the slick . 
Environmentalists and fishing groups in Louisiana say prolonged exposure to the oil , in the form of tiny airborne particles as well as dispersants , could be wreaking devastating damage on public health . 
They also accuse BP of threatening to sack workers who try to turn up for clean-up duty wearing protective respirators , and the Obama administration of refusing to release results of air and water quality tests that would show the impact of crude oil and dispersants on the environment . 
Wilma Subra , a chemist who has served as a consultant to the Environmental Protection Agency , said there was growing anecdotal evidence that locals were falling ill after exposure to tiny airborne particles of crude . 
Air quality data released earlier by the EPA suggested the presence of chemicals that while still within legal limits could be dangerous . 
But Subra complained that the EPA was not releasing all data it had gathered from BP . 
`` Every time the wind blows from the south-east to the shore , people are being made sick , '' she said . 
`` It causes severe headaches , nausea , respiratory problems , burning eyes and sore throats . '' 
Long-term health effects include neurological disorders and cancer . 
Subra said there was even greater concern for those recruited to lay booms and skim crude off the water , since they were in closer proximity to the oil and the chemical dispersants . 
Clint Guidry , of the Louisiana Shrimp Association , has accused BP of threatening to sack workers who turn up wearing respirators . 
The oil firm said it was not aware of any workers being turned away , but noted that it was the responsibility of the Obama administration to decide whether such protective gear was warranted . 
Hugh Kaufman , chief investigator for the EPA 's ombudsman , said he encountered similar worker safety policies after 9\/11 . 
`` If people are wearing respirators , it scares people because they realize how toxic it is , '' he said `` The administration is down-playing the problem because it saves them money down the line . 
It was the same at Ground Zero . '' 
EPA tests indicate that the combined effect of dispersants and crude oil are even more toxic than individually . 
`` There are dispersants being applied by aeroplane and by boat , and these people on the water are being sprayed over and over again , '' Subra said . 
Five offshore rigs have been shut down since the spill after workers fell ill . 
Seven workers on a boat trying to scrub the oil from Breton Sound were taken to hospital on Wednesday , complaining of burning eyes , headaches , nausea , dizziness and chest pains . 
Five were treated and released . 
Administration officials suggested in a conference call with reporters that the workers could be suffering from sunstroke in the hot Louisiana temperatures . 
They also said the workers recruited for the clean-up fishermen and shrimpers put out of work because of the spill had received training and wore protective gear . 
However , the protective clothing does not include respirators , which environmental activists say violates safety regulations for workers exposed to dangerous chemicals . 
None of the workers pictured raking up oil from the beaches of Grand Isle Louisiana in photographs released by the Deepwater command center today was wearing a mask or respirator . 
A version appeared on p6 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 02.03 BST on Saturday 29 May 2010 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off stuartmillar159 : I stand corrected RT @flashboy : @stuartmillar159 NO STUART THAT IS WHAT RAIN ACTUALLY IS 
