View from the open rear of a cargo plane looking down on ships gathered round the Discover Enterprise rig in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : John Moore\/Getty Images A delicate `` top kill '' operation by BP appears to have halted the gush of oil and gas from its ruptured Macondo well in the Gulf of Mexico , although experts warned that the underwater leak was still far from being permanently fixed . 
Engineers were due last night to begin a second round of pumping thick drilling mud at high speed into the ocean floor , which lies 5,000 feet -LRB- 1,500 metres -RRB- under the surface of the sea about 50 miles off Louisiana . 
Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer , insisted that the operation was going to plan , but admitted : `` What we do know is that we have not yet stopped the flow . '' 
He said BP engineers would soon use additional materials to try to plug the well , suggesting heavy mud deployed so far would not work on its own . 
`` It 's quite a roller coaster , '' he told a reporters ' conference call , adding that the disaster had cost BP $ 850m so far . 
The modest signs of progress came amid dismal news on the sheer extent of the environmental damage caused by the accident , which began when BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
New government estimates of a leak of 12,000 to 19,000 barrels of oil a day indicated that after 37 days , the slick could be twice as large as the fallout from the tanker Exxon Valdez , which hit a reef off Alaska in 1989 . 
`` This will be felt for generations to come , '' said Regan Nelson , senior oceans advocate at the Natural Resources Defense Council in Washington . 
`` It 's an unprecedented disaster . '' 
Environmental scientists who have toured the marshes off Louisiana by boat described a vast expanse of crude half an inch thick , with no visible sign of the BP or government clean-up efforts . 
`` We could n't see into the water at all , one engine quit working , '' said Larry Schweiger of the National Wildlife Federation . 
`` We are talking about really heavy oil spill out there , and no one is out there cleaning it . 
No one is out there measuring the scope of the oil mass . '' 
Doug Inkley , a wildlife biologist with the National Wildlife Federation , described seeing dead jellyfish and sharks affected by the slick . 
`` It 's impossible to me to know how any living organism could survive in that , '' he said . 
At least seven oil clean-up workers were taken to hospital yesterday after reporting nausea and headaches as a result of contact with chemical dispersants used to break up the slick . 
Administration officials said the cause of the illness was unclear . 
Offshore , marine scientists from a University of South Florida research ship reported the discovery of a new underwater plume of oil extending 22 miles from the ruptured well towards Mobile Bay , Alabama , raising new fears about deep water toxicity . 
After failing earlier in the month to halt the leak with a top hat-shaped dome , BP began pumping bargeloads of sludge into the well on Wednesday afternoon . 
Seven hours later , the company was able to drop the pressure at which it was pumping , a development considered positive by experts who said it meant the well contained a column of mud , rather than a plume of oil . 
`` That means they had enough pressure to displace the oil from the well into the rock formation , '' said David Summers , a professor of mining engineering at Missouri University of Science & Technology . 
However , he said the job was not complete yet : `` They have n't been able to totally balance the pressure . 
The column of mud in there should be stable enough to stand there by itself . 
But they 're still having to apply a little bit of pressure to keep the column stable . 
That means they may not have got the mud all the way down the well yet . '' 
There is still a risk that the pipe leading into the well could rupture . 
If the effort fails , BP has mooted trying a `` junk shot '' to block the leak by firing golf balls , tyres and other debris into the ocean floor . 
Meanwhile , the company is drilling two `` relief wells '' to suck up oil in a controlled way , although these are unlikely to be ready until August . 
Scientists warned there was potential for even greater damage , with a forecast of an unusually hazardous hurricane season . 
The national weather service in its yearly forecast for the hurricane season starting on 1 June predicted between eight to 14 hurricanes across the Atlantic . 
Of those , three to seven could be major hurricanes , category three storms or higher . 
Hurricane Katrina was a category three . 
`` If this outlook holds true , this season could be one of the more active on record , '' said Jane Lubchenco , the head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , the government agency that oversees the forecast . 
The pace of congressional investigations into the oil disaster also intensified with BP ordered to produce documents by June 3 into what was described as `` questionable '' decisions on well casing in the hours before the explosion . 
In a letter to BP , Henry Waxman , the head of the energy and commerce committee , said he was concerned by omissions in BP 's 48-page briefing to Congress on the events leading up to the explosion . 
`` This raises the possibility that BP 's internal investigation is not examining the consequences of BP 's own decisions and conduct , '' he said . 
Severe weather could accelerate the movement of the slick , which is threatening to stretch beyond Louisiana 's coastline to the beaches of Florida and could spread as far as Cuba . 
This article appeared on p22 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 00.54 BST on Friday 28 May 2010 . 
