Gulf oil spill : BP resumes ` top kill ' Company says operation pumping thick mud into ocean floor to plug oil leak could continue for two more days Friday 28 May 2010 10.27 BST This still image from a video released by BP shows drilling mud escaping from the broken pipe on the gushing oil well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : BP\/AP BP has resumed its high-risk `` top kill '' operation to stem the oil and gas leak from the ruptured Macondo well in the Gulf of Mexico , signalling that the operation could continue for two more days . 
Engineers last night began a second round of the procedure , pumping thick mud at high speed into the well , which lies 1,500 metres -LRB- 5,000 ft -RRB- down on the ocean floor , about 50 miles off Louisiana . 
Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer , insisted the operation was going to plan but admitted : `` What we do know is that we have not yet stopped the flow . '' 
He said BP engineers would soon use additional materials to try to plug the well , suggesting the heavy mud would not work on its own . 
Hopes for a quick fix were further dampened today , when the company 's chief executive said it would not be clear for another 48 hours whether the operation had succeeded . 
Tony Hayward told CBS television 's Early Show that he was 60-70 % confident of success . 
Barack Obama is due to visit the Gulf later today as he continues to rebut criticism that his administration has not done enough to tackle the disaster . 
Yesterday , the president told a news conference that his daughter Malia was asking awkward questions about the operation . 
`` You know , when I woke up this morning and I 'm shaving , and Malia knocks on my bathroom door and she peeks in her head and she says , ` Did you plug the hole yet , Daddy ? ' '' 
`` Those who think we were either slow on the response or lacked urgency do n't know the facts . 
This has been our highest priority . '' 
The modest signs of progress came amid dismal news on the extent of environmental damage caused by the accident , which began when BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
New government estimates of a leak of 12,000 to 19,000 barrels of oil a day indicated that after 37 days the slick could be twice as large as the fallout from the tanker Exxon Valdez , which hit a reef off Alaska in 1989 . 
`` This will be felt for generations to come , '' said Regan Nelson , senior oceans advocate at the Natural Resources Defense Council in Washington . 
`` It 's an unprecedented disaster . '' 
Environmental scientists who have toured the marshes off Louisiana by boat described a vast expanse of crude oil half an inch thick , with no visible sign of the BP or government clean-up efforts . 
`` We could n't see into the water at all , one engine quit working , '' said Larry Schweiger of the National Wildlife Federation . 
`` We are talking about really heavy oil spill out there and no one is out there cleaning it . 
No one is out there measuring the scope of the oil mass . '' 
Doug Inkley , a wildlife biologist with the National Wildlife Federation , described seeing dead jellyfish and sharks affected by the slick . 
`` It 's impossible to me to know how any living organism could survive in that , '' he said . 
At least seven oil clean-up workers were taken to hospital yesterday after reporting nausea and headaches following contact with chemical dispersants used to break up the slick . 
Administration officials said the cause of the illness was unclear . 
Offshore , marine scientists from a University of South Florida research ship reported the discovery of a new underwater plume of oil extending 22 miles from the ruptured well towards Mobile Bay , Alabama , raising new fears about deepwater toxicity . 
After failing earlier in the month to halt the leak with a top hat-shaped dome , BP began pumping bargeloads of sludge into the well on Wednesday afternoon . 
Seven hours later the company was able to drop the pressure at which it was pumping , a development considered positive by experts who said it meant the well contained a column of mud , rather than a plume of oil . 
`` That means they had enough pressure to displace the oil from the well into the rock formation , '' said David Summers , a professor of mining engineering at Missouri University of Science and Technology . 
However , he said the job was not complete yet . 
`` They have n't been able to totally balance the pressure . 
The column of mud in there should be stable enough to stand there by itself . 
But they 're still having to apply a little bit of pressure to keep the column stable . 
That means they may not have got the mud all the way down the well yet . '' 
There is still a risk that the pipe leading into the well could rupture . 
If the effort fails BP has talked about trying a `` junk shot '' to block the leak by firing golf balls , tyres and other debris into the ocean floor . 
The company is drilling two `` relief wells '' to suck up oil in a controlled way , although these are unlikely to be ready until August . 
Scientists warned there was potential for even greater damage , with a forecast of an unusually hazardous hurricane season . 
The national weather service in its annual forecast for the hurricane season starting on 1 June predicted between eight to 14 hurricanes across the Atlantic . 
Of those , three to seven could be major hurricanes , category 3 storms or higher . 
Hurricane Katrina was a category 3 . 
Find out more and buy the ebook on Kindle from Amazon UK and US or iTunes UK or US The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off moorehn : Huh ! 
RT @BrianSozzi : Within food , white bread had one of the strongest price increases in December . 
