A New Set of Smart Investing Rules for the Post-Crisis Era Traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange . 
Many investors have become uncomfortably familiar with their risk tolerance . 
-LRB- By Jin Lee -- Bloomberg News -RRB- Do the old rules of investing still apply ? 
`` Buy and hold '' has proved a good method for cutting your wealth in half . 
Regularly rebalancing a portfolio has sent money straight to sectors , such as financial-company stocks , that plunged steeply . 
And , though it 's said that no one can successfully time the market , those who cashed out early now look like sages . 
While it 's anybody 's guess when the post-crisis era will begin , financial planners offer some investing principles that reflect some of the lessons investors have learned the hard way . 
Pat Meadows , a recent retiree who lives in Haymarket , said she and her friends in a small investment club have been changed . 
`` We 're not as trusting as we were , '' she said . 
Her club account represents only about 5 percent of her investments , the bulk of her retirement money is in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . 
The club stayed with stocks far longer than she did with her retirement money . 
In October 2007 , to prepare for retirement , she moved some money out of stock investments and into less-volatile instruments such bonds , bond mutual funds and certificates of deposit . 
`` That kind of saved me a little , '' she said . 
Going forward , she said she will trust her instincts more , and ask more questions before investing . 
Among the post-crisis principles that advisers say should guide your investing are the following : The stock market 's plunge may have revealed that your risk tolerance is not as high as you thought . 
Age is not the only thing that should determine your tolerance for the risk of losses . 
The label `` market timer '' should not deter you from keeping extra cash on the sidelines when the market is hostile . 
And the worthy technique of dollar-cost averaging does n't translate well when you have a lump sum to invest . 
People do n't really understand their own feelings about risk , said Vern C. Hayden , a certified financial planner in Westport , Conn. `` When the market is going up 30 percent , they say they can lose 10 or 20 percent with no problem . 
All of a sudden the market goes down , and now it 's ' I do n't want to lose 10 or 15 percent . ' '' 
