A previous version of this edited transcript omitted part of John Williamson 's answer to the question of whether he voted for British Prime Minister Gordon Brown . 
His full answer was `` No , I 've not voted for him . 
I 've always voted for the other party -- the Liberal Democrats . '' 
A Conversation With John Williamson , Economist Poor countries have decried it . 
Anti-globalization protesters have rallied against it . 
And at the G20 summit in London , British Prime Minister Gordon Brown declared it dead . 
But is the `` Washington Consensus '' really gone ? 
Not if you ask John Williamson , the soft-spoken British economist who coined the term 20 years ago -- and has been under fire ever since . 
How did a wonky paper outlining 10 recommendations on fiscal discipline and open markets become such a lightning rod ? 
Williamson , a senior fellow at the Peter G. Peterson Institute for International Economics , spoke last week with Outlook 's Carlos Lozada about what caused the financial crisis and how , whatever Brown says , the Washington Consensus is alive and well -- just check out the G20 communique . 
Excerpts : Where were you when Gordon Brown declared that your `` old Washington Consensus is over '' ? 
Did you watch it on TV ? 
I was in the Galapagos . 
I did not watch it on TV ; I did have Internet access in the Galapagos so I was able to read about it . 
People have been saying the Washington Consensus is dead for about twenty years now , ever since it was first created . 
My reaction was more amusement than anger , but it was a combination of the two . 
It depends on what one means by the Washington Consensus . 
If one means the ten points that I tried to outline , then clearly it 's not right . 
If one uses the interpretation that a number of people -- including Joe Stiglitz , most prominently -- have foisted on it , that it is a neoliberal tract , then I think it is right . 
How would you summarize it ? 
-LRB- It -RRB- involved macroeconomic discipline , including fiscal discipline , which was a particular problem in Latin America . 
And then it involved using the market economy , not setting it up on a totem pole as some ideal that must never be interfered with , but recognizing that there were serious limitations on the market economy . 
And third was globalization , free trade , absorbing oneself into the global economy . 
Is the Washington Consensus in any way to blame for the global financial crisis ? 
I think that would be pushing it . 
If you read the communique following the London summit , you 'll find that three of the things they agreed on were very much the things I have used to summarize the Washington Consensus . 
It starts off with globalization , it also mentions the market economy . 
Fiscal discipline comes later ; it 's in paragraphs 10 and 11 rather than right at the beginning , because that 's not the immediate problem . 
If the Washington Consensus is n't to blame , what is ? 
