Just a few minutes into his comments about the damage from the gulf oil leak to the House Energy Committee on Thursday , Louisiana congressman Charlie Melancon was overcome . 
`` Our culture is threatened , our coastal economy is threatened , and everything that I know and love is at risk , '' he said . 
He sighed deeply and paused to gather himself . 
`` Even though this marsh lies along coastal Louisiana , these are America 's wetlands , '' he continued , before he had to stop and abruptly leave the room . 
Right after the spill , Jeremy Symons , a senior vice president at the National Wildlife Federation , toured the gulf and saw dolphins playing in the boat 's wake . 
Now he 's haunted by that image as he hears reports of dead dolphins washing ashore . 
At his press conference Thursday , President Obama talked about how his 11-year-old daughter , Malia , had knocked on the bathroom door as he was shaving to ask , `` Did you plug the hole yet , Daddy ? '' 
The oil leak is a slow-motion tragedy , and the sorrow and fears that have been building with it now seem to be spilling over . 
Washington is full of activists , environmentalists and thinkers dedicated to the planet , and with oil still spewing and every effort to stop it a failure , there 's a gallon-by-gallon awareness : Heartbreak , disbelief and powerlessness are giving way to fury . 
But there 's also a clear resolve to fight . 
Regan Nelson , a senior oceans advocate with the Natural Resources Defense Council , lobbies Congress . 
She had been working on clean energy and climate , but since the explosion , she said , `` I put away all the work I was doing on fisheries issues , ocean acidification issues , to focus exclusively on the gulf oil disaster . '' 
She spent 10 days driving the Gulf Coast , trying to assess damage to both wildlife and ways of life . 
She wrote about it on her blog : Today as I sat in a boat in the Gulf , surrounded on all sides by oil-tainted seas , it 's hard to say what hit me the hardest . 
Was it the graceful and enigmatic dolphins surfacing through the slick ? 
Or Captain O'Neill pointing out the spots where he fishes for speckled trout , redfish , flounder , crab and shrimp , and hearing the desperation in his voice . 
Was it seeing first-hand the soup of oil droplets , dispersed but thick as Louisiana bean soup , as far down in the water column as one could see ? 
Or was it the overwhelming odor of petroleum that left me feeling slightly nauseous ? 
It 's hard to say . 
But the cumulative impact was heartbreak . 
Heartbreak because standing there on the boat , all I could feel was helplessness . 
`` Heartbreak , '' Nelson says , has `` turned into anger . 
How could we have allowed this to occur ? '' 
She cited the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil-spill disaster , which , by some estimates , took four years and $ 2.2 billion for Exxon to clean up , with some effects permanent . 
She monitors the live feed of BP 's `` top kill '' efforts to plug the oil , and puts in 10-plus-hour days on the newly formed `` swat team '' of nearly two dozen NRDC staffers now devoted to the disaster . 
Her anger sustains her through the long days . 
`` It has really spoken to the activist in me , '' she said . 
`` People have these watershed moments in life where your mission in life becomes crystallized and this was one of those crystallizing moments ... This is why I chose to become an environmentalist . '' 
What 's fueled the uncertainty is the singular nature of this oil leak , said Morgan Gopnik , a former vice president for the Ocean Conservancy . 
When a tanker splits in half , she said , vast amounts of oil spill at once . 
`` There are terrible , immediate effects . 
It washes up on shore . 
This is oil pumping out from a mile down , mixing with water , being pulled around by all the currents , breaking up into little tiny droplets . 
We do n't have any experience with this sort of spill . 
We have no idea what the long-term consequences are going to be . '' 
Darron Collins of the World Wildlife Fund on the Reports from the Gulf blog : Last week , I talked a lot about the overwhelming sense of anxiety that seemed to blanket the Gulf from Dauphin Island , Alabama , to Venice , Louisiana . 
The tenor has shifted dramatically over the weekend . 
Although it 's an obvious generalization , people are n't worried anymore . 
