Oprah Winfrey interviewed Katherine and Joe Jackson , with Prince , Paris and `` Blanket '' Michael Jackson 's eldest children - Prince Michael , 13 , and Paris , 12 - have spoken about their `` normal dad '' in a rare TV interview with Oprah Winfrey . 
`` I kind of felt like no-one understood what a good father he was , '' Paris said . 
Prince Michael reminisced about walking on the beach in Bahrain with Jackson . 
Jackson 's mother , Katherine , speaking at their Los Angeles home , said the singer was addicted to plastic surgery . 
She said his nose became so small it looked `` like a toothpick '' . 
Paris , who said her father was `` the best cook ever '' , told Winfrey he was `` just a normal dad except for he was , like , the best dad ever '' . 
She said the veils their father made them wear in public were uncomfortable but that they wore them `` because then when we did go out without our dad nobody would really recognize us '' . 
She said she wanted to be an actress adding : `` I sometimes do improv . 
I used to do it with my dad . '' 
Prince said he wanted to produce and direct movies . 
The children were filmed with their grandmother and guardian , Katherine , and her husband Joe in the back yard of the Jackson home . 
Michael Jackson died in 2009 Katherine said Jackson 's `` shy '' youngest child Prince Michael II , eight - also known as Blanket - was educated at home but was looking forward to going to school next year . 
She said the three children spoke a lot about their father , who died in June 2009 . 
`` Paris , she 's very emotional , '' she said . 
`` She talks about him all the time and she 's a strong one - all the pictures on her wall in her bedroom are Michael . '' 
She said she had tried to stop what she described as her son 's addiction to painkillers and plastic surgery . 
Speaking about plastic surgery , she said she had told him : '' ` That 's enough , why do you keep going ? '' 
Joe Jackson , meanwhile , admitted that he had whipped his sons with a strap to try to instil discipline . 
In a 1993 interview , Michael Jackson told Winfrey his father had beaten him . 
Jackson 's personal doctor , Dr Conrad Murray , has been charged with involuntary manslaughter and is awaiting trial . 
He has admitted giving Jackson what was , ultimately , a fatal dose of the powerful anesthetic Propofol to try to help the singer to sleep . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
