If you have solid tips , news or documents on potential ethical violations or abuses of power , we want to know . 
Send us your suggestions . 
in-depth and investigative reports from across the nation . 
Unfortunately I believe that we are limited in what we can focus on . 
I think that if we proceed with the partisan sideshow of prosecuting Bush admin . 
officials , healthcare will get lost in the brouhaha . 
The Washington Post 's permanent investigative unit was set up in 1982 under Bob Woodward . 
Send us information on ethics violations or abuses of power . 
The nation 's financial crisis has become a bookend to President Bush 's two terms . 
When Bush leaves office next Tuesday , he will hand over an economy struggling to recover from the collapse of the housing market and a Wall Street shake-up that led to the disappearance of banking giant Lehman Brothers , the fire sale of Merrill Lynch and the creation of a $ 700 billion federal bailout fund to stem the tide . 
The infusion of government money was pushed by Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke but Bush has pledged that the government will be able to '' recoup much , if not all , of the original expenditure . '' 
It 's unclear what impact the government bailout will have on the fledgling economy , with experts warning that it could take months or years for the financial cloud to lift . 
Bob Woodward , the investigative reporter who authored four books on the Bush presidency , recounted an off-the-record dinner last year . 
Vice President Dick Cheney was one of the attendees and one of `` Wall Street 's barons '' turned to Cheney and said , `` We are going into the soup . 
We are in and on the edge of a real crisis . '' 
Cheney `` just kind of sat there and smiled , '' Woodward said . 
In a 13-minute speech last night to the nation on the eve of President-elect Barack Obama 's inauguration , Bush defended many of his policies , adding that , `` These are very tough times for hardworking families , but the toll would be far worse if we had not acted , '' he said . 
`` All Americans are in this together . 
And together , with determination and hard work , we will restore our economy to the path of growth . '' 
Please email us to report offensive comments . 
Bush Legacy : Financial Crises ??? that 's not the legacy , just the bookend , as you so aptly pointed out . 
The real Legacy is the Bush Legacy Deficit which comes from the Republican Administration and Republican Congress going on The World 's Largest Spending Spree ... and they worked tirelessly to create it . 
Bush never vetoed a spending bill , even the porked up ones -- unless they were Democrat Sponsored . 
Then he mumbled something -LRB- every time -RRB- about those ` tax and spend Democrats . 
If Republicans can call Democrats ` tax-and-spend-democrats ' , then let us label Republicans with a description , not of their words , of their own actions : 8 years of `` Spend and Borrow Republicans '' . 
Republicans used to call themselves the party of fiscal responsibility , but their actions are the actions of fiscal wastrels . 
Over $ 10 trillion in debt , not counting the Clinton surplus . 
I learned early that borrowing should be only for capital necessities and improvements . 
And for all that money spent , there 's almost nothing we can show to our kids and grandkids with pride , except the Bush Legacy Deficit . 
That , Mr Woodard is the investigation for you to pursue . 
We desperately need a handle on that Bush Legacy Deficit . 
It is so big that none of us can conceive its ' size or import , nor quite how it got put together . 
Will you do That for us , please ???? Posted by : thetravelingmasseur | January 16 , 2009 8:56 PM Crashing the economy twice is just one of the wonderful achievments of dubya . 
In only 8 years he destroyed the reputation of the United States , started an unecessary war based on lies , and then because he did no planning or homework almost crashed the world energy infrastructure as a result . 
He increased world terrorism by a magnitude of 3 according to our own government records . 
He twiddled his thumbs for the better part of a decade as global warming threatened the survival of our species . 
He denigrated the US moral reputation by using methods devised by the insidious Spanish Inquisition . 
He tried to break down the wall separating church and state that our Founding Fathers so carefully erected to protect the integroity of both . 
He allowed private contractors , billionaires , and fossil fuel companies to rape the nation . 
He claimed powers that do n't exist . 
The list is so relentless it gets tiresome just jotting down all the disasters that one can name off the top of the head . 
The bush legacy is one of relentless failure and disasterous wrongheaded decisions based on the obdurate clinging to a fallacious ideology . 
And for those who try to be kind by saying bush was `` a good man '' - look at the record and get real . 
This guy is a first class spoiled rich arse fardle who throws tantrums when he does n't get his way and treats anyone who disagrees with him worse than dirt . 
Petulant , childish , vindictive , intellectually challenged , half-cocked , stubborn , ill mannered , ill tempered jerk is closer to the description that fits . 
He deserved far more than just one set of shoes thrown his way . 
Their idea of a hot babe , Anne Coulter wanted to kill Democrats . 
Cheney smiled when told the country was going in the toilet . 
He and his disgusting friends made billions in war profiteering . 
They can smile while we lose our homes . 
And they called Sadam a `` madman '' . 
But , the Iraq war has killed ` only ' a few thousand Americans -LRB- albeit many more Iraqis -RRB- , and the number of people held at Guantanamo is in the hundreds . 
But how about the Bush admin . 
's embrace of the beleaguered tobacco industry , which kills tens of thousands of people in the U.S. every year , and many more in the rest of the world ? 
And his heroic defense of the gun industry , whose products also kill tens of thousands of people in the U.S. , and many more overseas ? 
One could also mention the oil , coal and lots of others I do n't know about . 
Bush 's less-observed policies look the most destructive to me . 
Blind adherence to ideology is at the root of it all . 
Anti-government , anti-dissent , anti-environment , pro-unfettered corporate management , pro-religion intrusion , the list is long . 
Extreme right wing reactionaries willing to use the power of the government to serve the few . 
He was a Tyrant in every sense of the word . 
May your souls rot in hell for the destruction you have wrought . 
But you are not alone . 
Those who followed your ideology , who believed your lies and deceptions , you are all responsible . 
You made it possible for thieves and cowards to profit at the expense of honest hard working people . 
You stole our future , you sent men to die to satisfy your despicable egos . 
You have brought shame and hatred upon our once great nation . 
You talk about our brave troops sacrificing them selves for liberty . 
No , Bush , YOU `` SACRIFICED '' THEM . 
Over four thousand good service men and women have died to satisfy your pride . 
You did not bring democracy to Iraq , you brought death and destruction , the division of cities into zones of hatred between religious factions , the ascent of the ignorant and venal . 
You allowed superstition and ideology to undermine science and knowledge . 
You have not spread democracy , you have spread hate and destruction . 
These and many more things are yo legacy . 
When history is written , you will live in shame and dishonor . 
User reviews and comments that include profanity or personal attacks or other inappropriate comments or material will be removed from the site . 
Additionally , entries that are unsigned or contain `` signatures '' by someone other than the actual author will be removed . 
Finally , we will take steps to block users who violate any of our posting standards , terms of use or privacy policies or any other policies governing this site . 
Please review the full rules governing commentaries and discussions . 
