Possible oil-spill solutions pour in , seemingly unheeded , from around the world A constituent of Sen. Mike Enzi 's makes a product from beetle-killed pine trees that soaks up oil like crazy , but the man ca n't get BP to listen to his ideas . 
What 's happened to his suggestions ? 
`` They 've been lost , '' the Wyoming Republican complained at a hearing two weeks ago . 
The pine tree product was one of about 120,000 ideas BP says it has received in recent weeks . 
Its proponent is one of many to express frustration by the company 's apparent lack of response . 
John Rexholm , a 57-year-old Swedish naval architect living in Germany , has an idea for hooding the blown-out Gulf well and directing the oil up to the surface . 
He sent it to BP . 
A month later , he got three e-mail replies in a day : One asked for more information , another said a similar idea was being considered and a third advised that `` your idea can not be applied under the very challenging ... conditions we face . '' 
Donald LaFond , a 48-year-old contractor in Sudbury , Ontario , is sure that the device he invented eight years ago to crack rock without dynamite could seal the Deepwater Horizon well . 
He 's spent six weeks trying to get someone to listen . 
Dwayne Spradlin , head of the Internet-based problem-solving network InnoCentive , put out a call for ideas April 30 . 
About 2,500 people have answered . 
On June 19 , BP said it would not proceed with any of their suggestions because an agreement with InnoCentive would be `` too complex and burdensome . '' 
`` Our network is incredibly disenchanted in BP 's lack of interest in outside solutions , '' Spradlin said . 
That pretty much summarizes the view of thousands of other people . 
Thanks to the crowd-sourcing potential of the Internet , sea-floor-to-Gulf-shore video and the water-torture failure of BP to stop the leak , the Deepwater Horizon disaster has become a personal challenge to numberless scientists , engineers and basement inventors . 
As of Friday , 119,611 technological suggestions had been sent or routed to BP 's offices in Houston , coming in at a rate of about 4,000 a day . 
The Coast Guard 's Research and Development Center had gotten about 3,000 submittals . 
Most from both sources proposed ways to stop the leak or clean up the oil . 
BP says it is looking at all ideas , which range from two-sentence e-mails to fully engineered proposals . 
They include digital photos of drawings on whiteboards and a crayoned idea from a 9-year-old boy in Virginia . 
`` The passion is just extraordinary , '' said Michael J. Cortez , a petroleum engineer who manages the Alternative Response Technology team at BP . 
But the reality is that nearly all are impossible , impractical , obvious or likely to make things worse . 
`` There are not a lot of novel ideas that we do n't already have a lot of minds thinking of at the same time , '' Cortez said . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
