HOUSTON -- The ROV room is the closest thing to Mission Control . 
It 's dark , cool , hushed . 
Engineers with headsets face a wall showing the live video feeds from the remotely operated vehicles , the submarines patrolling the depths of the Gulf of Mexico , roughly 420 miles to the east of this nondescript building in a BP office park in the sprawling Houston suburbs . 
`` I to this day still get fooled , '' said Kent Wells . 
He 's one of BP 's top engineers , and the most visible -- the guy who gives the technical updates in videos posted on the company 's Web site . 
He said he sometimes convinces himself that the well is losing steam . 
But no : The blown-out well named Macondo , drilled by the ill-fated rig Deepwater Horizon , is as tireless as ever . 
So he and his colleagues must kill it . 
They will , too -- knock on wood , throw salt over shoulder , cross fingers , make ritual sacrifice to the gods , etc. . 
Almost lost in the crush of bad news , failed technical efforts , dire warnings and ominous weather reports is that the engineers in this room , and their colleagues at other command centers and out in the gulf , have a good shot at ending this nightmare in a matter of weeks . 
The first relief well is already within 15 feet , laterally , of Macondo , and has only about 600 vertical feet to go before it will intersect the well . 
The last stretch is slow going . 
This is precision work . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen would n't budge Friday from the standard prediction of a mid-August completion , but he said the relief well is seven or eight days ahead of schedule . 
`` There 's no guarantee , '' Wells said . 
`` What we do have is the best people from all over the world , we have a lot of experience , and with time we 've become a lot smarter understanding this . 
Could it throw us another curve ball ? 
That 's always a possibility . '' 
The war room is not exactly a place where people are eager to be interrupted by reporters . 
This is where engineers devise plans for what is known as the `` sub-sea '' response . 
It 's mostly a BP operation , but there are engineers from other oil companies , plus a smattering of federal employees . 
-LRB- Of 569 people on duty Friday , 221 were contractors and 18 were federal workers , according to BP . -RRB- 
Decisions have to be reviewed and approved by government officials , but those officials , all the way up to the president of the United States , have made clear that killing oil wells is not a government specialty . 
BP is the responsible party for the spill , and this is the responsible war room for fixing the problem at its source . 
The engineers here do n't worry about beach cleanup , claims from sidelined fishermen or Washington politics . 
They just figure out how they 're going to kill the well , capture the oil , flare the gas , keep the ships and rigs from colliding , prepare for hurricanes , evacuate in an emergency , bring in new tankers and drillships , find customized hardware , conjure backup plans to their backup plans , etc. . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
