Cabin crew member in hospital after flight from swine flu-struck Mexico World Health Organisation has warned countries to be on alert for any unusual flu outbreaks Saturday 25 April 2009 22.09 BST A member of cabin crew was taken to hospital with '' flu - like symptoms '' today after falling ill on a British Airways flight from Mexico City to Heathrow . 
The World Health Organisation has warned countries to be on alert for any unusual flu outbreaks after a swine flu virus was implicated in possibly dozens of human deaths in Mexico . 
The BA employee , who has not been named , has been taken to Northwick Park hospital in Harrow , a hospital spokesman said . 
He added : `` He has flu-like symptoms and is responding well to treatment . 
The patient was admitted directly to a side room and the hospital is scrupulously following infection control procedures to ensure there is no risk to any other individual in the hospital . '' 
The man was taken from flight BA242 which landed at 2pm today , a BA spokesman said . 
A Health Protection Agency spokesman said : `` We are aware of a patient admitted to a London hospital with reported travel history to Mexico . 
`` As a precautionary measure the patient is being tested for a range of respiratory and other illnesses in line with UK health guidance . 
At present there have been no confirmed cases of human swine flu in the UK or anywhere in Europe . '' 
A spokesman for Hillingdon Council , which is responsible for the health of people passing through the airport , said : `` As the port authority for Heathrow Airport we already have Health Protection Agency doctors in each of the airport 's terminals at all times . 
`` Should we receive instructions from the Department for Health or the Health Protection Agency we will be well placed to respond appropriately . '' 
World Health Organisation director-general Margaret Chan has said the outbreak in Mexico involves `` an animal strain of the H1N1 virus '' . 
The flu virus , which is suspected of killing at least 60 people in Mexico , has the potential to become a pandemic , she said . 
