April 30 : Workers spread oil booms along a railroad trestle that crosses the bay in Bay St. Louis , Miss. , as preparations continue to head off damage from an inpending oil spill along the Gulf coast . 
AP WASHINGTON -- What makes an oil spill really bad ? 
Most of the ingredients for it are now blending in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Experts tick off the essentials : A relentless flow of oil from under the sea ; a type of crude that mixes easily with water ; a resultant gooey mixture that is hard to burn and even harder to clean ; water that 's home to vulnerable spawning grounds for new life ; and a coastline with difficult-to-scrub marshlands . 
Gulf Coast experts have always talked about `` the potential for a bad one , '' said Wes Tunnell , coastal ecology and oil spill expert at Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi . 
`` And this is the bad one . 
This is just a biggie that finally happened . '' 
It has n't quite become a total disaster yet . 
But it 's hard to imagine it not being devastating , said Ed Overton , who heads a federal chemical hazard assessment team for oil spills . 
The Louisiana State University professor has been testing samples of the spilled crude . 
He compared what 's brewing to another all-too-familiar Gulf Coast threat : `` This has got all the characteristics of a Category 5 hurricane . '' 
If conditions do n't change quickly , devastation of the highest magnitude is headed for somewhere along the coast , said Overton , who works with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 
More than 200,000 gallons of oil a day are spewing from the blown-out well at the site of BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig , which exploded April 20 and sank two days later . 
Crews are using at least six remotely operated vehicles to try to shut off an underwater valve , but so far they 've been unsuccessful . 
Meanwhile , high winds and waves are pushing oily water over the booms meant to contain it . 
Besides BP , a slew of federal and state agencies are scrambling to minimize the onslaught of damage . 
Experts in oil spills have drills every few years to practice their response for spills of `` national significance . '' 
One of those practice runs took place just last month in Maine . 
The Gulf of Mexico leak is a `` combination of all the bad things happening '' and makes it far worse than any disaster imagined in the drills , said Nancy Kinner , director of the Coastal Response Research Center at the University of New Hampshire . 
`` This is relentless , '' Kinner said . 
Most Americans think of Exxon Valdez when it comes to spills . 
But the potential and likelihood here `` is well beyond that , '' said University of Rhode Island ocean engineering professor Malcolm Spaulding . 
Because the Deepwater Horizon well has not been capped and may flow for months more , it should be compared to a bigger more dangerous one from a well explosion in 1979 , said Tunnell . 
That was Ixtoc 1 , off the coast of Mexico . 
It was the worst peacetime oil spill on record . 
The current spill `` is kind of a worst case scenario , '' Tunnell said . 
What makes this spill relentless and most similar to Ixtoc 1 is that it 's an active well that keeps flowing . 
The Exxon Valdez was a tanker with a limited supply of oil . 
The rig 40 miles from the Gulf Coast may leak for months before a relief well can be drilled to stop the flow , Kinner said . 
And LSU 's Overton said : `` I 'm not very optimistic that they 'll be drilling a relief well in three months . '' 
The type of oil involved is also a major problem . 
While most of the oil drilled off Louisiana is a lighter crude , this is n't . 
It 's a heavier blend because it comes from deep under the ocean surface , Overton said . 
`` If I had to pick a bad oil , I 'd put this right up there . 
The only thing that 's not bad about this is that it does n't have a lot of sulfur in it and the high sulfur really smells bad . '' 
The first analysis of oil spill samples showed it contains asphalt-like substances that make a major sticky mess , he said . 
This is because the oil is older than most oil in the region and is very dense . 
This oil also emulsifies well , Overton said . 
Emulsification is when oil and water mix thoroughly together , like a shampoo , which is mostly water , said Penn State engineering professor Anil Kulkarni . 
It `` makes a thick gooey chocolate mousse type of mix , '' Kulkarni said . 
And once it becomes that kind of mix , it no longer evaporates as quickly as regular oil , does n't rinse off as easily , ca n't be eaten by oil-munching microbes as easily , and does n't burn as well , experts said . 
That type of mixture essentially removes all the best oil clean-up weapons , Overton and others said . 
Under better circumstances , with calmer winds and water , the oil might have a chance of rising without immediately emulsifying , but that 's not happening here , Kulkarni said . 
It 's pretty much mixed by the time it gets to the surface . 
The wind and waves are also pushing the oil directly toward some of the most sensitive coastal areas : the marshlands of Louisiana and surrounding states . 
And there are three types of beaches : sandy , rocky and marshy . 
Sandy beaches , like those in Florida , are the easiest to clean , Overton said . 
By far the hardest are marshlands and that 's where the oil is heading first . 
Marshes are so delicate that just trying to clean them causes damage , Kinner said . 
Once the oily mess penetrates , grasses must be cut . 
But it also penetrates the soil and that is extremely difficult to get out , she said . 
The normal bacteria that eats oil needs oxygen to work , and in the soils of the marsh , there 's not enough oxygen for that process , she said . 
It 's also the time of year in the Gulf of Mexico when fish spawn , plankton bloom and the delicate ecosystem is at a vulnerable stage . 
Hurricane season is fast approaching in June and experts are sure the oil will still be flowing by then . 
Though it might seem counterintuitive , a big storm could help by dispersing and diluting the worst of the oil , Overton said . 
`` A hurricane is Mother Nature 's vacuum cleaner , '' Overton said . 
Normally it cleans things up . 
But that 's not a solution with a continuing spill . 
