Libyans attend a rally to support rebel fighters and Libyan National Council -LRB- CNT -RRB- , near the courthouse in Benghazi , May 19 , 2011 . 
BENGHAZI , Libya | Thu Jun 9 , 2011 7:16 am EDT BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - To get an idea of who might wield influence in post-civil war Libya , take a look at the flags flying in the rebel-held east of the country . 
Outside the courthouse in Benghazi -- rebel headquarters and symbolic heart of the uprising against the 41-year rule of leader Muammar Gaddafi -- fly the flags of France , Great Britain , the United States , the European Union , NATO . 
There 's one other flag , too : Qatar 's . 
`` Qatar , really , it 's time to convey our gratitude to them , '' Abdulla Shamia , rebel economy chief , told Reuters . 
`` They really helped us a lot . 
It 's a channel for transportation , for help , for everything . '' 
It has a population of just 1.7 million people , but the wealthy Gulf monarchy has long sought a major voice in political affairs in the region . 
It has brokered peace talks in Sudan and Lebanon , owns the influential pan-Arab news network Al Jazeera , and recently won the right to host the 2022 soccer World Cup . 
Now the gas-rich nation has placed a big geopolitical bet in Libya , splashing out hundreds of millions of dollars on fuel , food and cash transfers for the rebels . 
A representative from the Emir 's palace declined to comment on what products Qatar has delivered to Libya , and on the ruling family 's motivations behind its Libyan engagement . 
It 's certainly a gamble . 
If the rebels win , Qatar is likely to pick up energy deals and new influence in North Africa . 
But if they lose , Qatar 's ambitions may further alienate it among its neighbors . 
`` I guess ever since the late 1990s , Qatar has been trying to break the Saudi-dominated status quo and carve out a niche position , '' said Saket Vemprala from the London-based Business Monitor International consultancy . 
`` At the moment I think it 's more geopolitical , they want to broaden their -LRB- influence in the -RRB- region and become a more significant player ... And it certainly makes it easy for them to portray themselves as being on the right side of history , '' he said . 
That sentiment is on display on a huge billboard in front of the courthouse . 
Over a picture of Qatari ruler Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani reads the promise : `` Qatar , history will always remember your support for our cause . '' 
Being on the right side of history does n't come cheap . 
Qatar was the first Arab country to contribute planes to police the U.N.-backed no-fly zone over Libya . 
Simultaneously , hundreds of millions of dollars began to flow from the Qatari capital Doha to Benghazi from early March . 
While international oil traders pondered whether to brave the bombs and international sanctions to start buying oil from the rebels , Qatar was quick to throw a lifeline and help eastern Libya meet its most pressing needs including fuel , food , medicines and telecommunications equipment . 
Qatar 's foreign ministry has confirmed that it has shipped four tankers full of gasoline , diesel and other refined fuels to Benghazi , which specialists estimate is enough to feed the large Benghazi power plant for one or two weeks . 
But people on the ground in Benghazi say they believe Qatar is behind much of the continuing delivery of fuel supplies , as well as food , medicine and cash payments . 
Given that oil production in the east has stalled and the economy generates no cash , they ask , where else are all the supplies coming from ? 
Overall , the Qatari shipments have covered 100 percent of eastern Libya energy needs for a month and a half , Salah Fouad , a rebel oil engineer based in the eastern coastal city of Tobruk , said in May . 
`` We are receiving a huge help from Qatar . 
Its role in unforgettable . 
Even the little child knows Qatar 's role and assistance to us , '' he said . 
A western consultant who worked in Benghazi in March and April supported this view . 
`` You ask port workers how are they doing today and they say , ` Oh , we are fine . 
We just received aid from Qatar , ' '' he said , declining to be named because of the sensitivity of his mission . 
`` You ask the council what 's the situation with diesel and they say , ` Oh we are just fine , we 've got new deliveries from Qatar . ' 
You tell Libyan officials to let you know if something goes wrong with power facilities and they tell you , ` Oh we are just fine , Qatar is helping us . ' '' 
A Gulf-based oil trader with knowledge of Qatari gasoline deliveries estimated monthly requirements at 10 gasoline and 5-6 diesel cargoes a month to help run vehicles and Benghazi 's huge power plant . 
As shipments are being settled on a government-to-government basis , they are usually not followed by satellite tracking systems , which monitor mostly commercial shipments . 
Those commercial shipments have included a test-case export cargo from the rebel-held east , shipped out in early May by trading house Vitol . 
Some traders say Qatar has gone further . 
`` Everyone gets excited about one Vitol cargo and does n't see a fleet of Qatari tankers , '' said another London-based trader . 
Other countries are helping the rebels as well , of course . 
An anti-Gaddafi coalition called the Libya contact group , including the United States , France , Britain and Italy -- as well as Kuwait and Jordan -- agreed in May to set up a fund to help them ; Washington pledged to unlock some of the $ 30 billion -LRB- 18.3 billion pounds -RRB- of Libyan state funds frozen in the United States . 
What makes Qatar different is the breadth and depth of its aid . 
Rebel officials in Doha say Qatari banks are helping facilitate international money transfers in rebel-held areas to recapitalise the paralysed banking system , though they wo n't say which banks . 
Qatar is also believed by diplomatic sources in Doha to have granted some Libyans working for Qatari companies leave of absence so they can contribute to the war effort . 
Several western and Doha-based diplomatic sources say Qatar is even supplying the rebels arms , including possibly Milan anti-tank missiles . 
The Gulf state declined to comment on whether it has supplied the rebels with arms , or in what quantity . 
In May , the rebels estimated they urgently needed $ 2-3 billion in cash . 
When the anti-Gaddafi coalition set up its fund , Qatar immediately pledged the largest sum of $ 400 - $ 500 million . 
What 's behind Qatar 's generosity ? 
It helps that it is so rich . 
Qatar 's copious gas reserves have made it one of the world 's wealthiest countries , with a sky-high gross domestic product per person of $ 88,000 according to the International Monetary Fund . 
Its $ 60-billion plus sovereign wealth fund owns stakes in banks Credit Suisse and Barclays , as well as London 's iconic department store Harrods . 
`` Qatar will soon -- literally -- have more money than it knows what to do with , '' according to a 2008 U.S. diplomatic cable , obtained by WikiLeaks and reviewed by Reuters . 
The largesse in Libya is part investment , part strategic . 
`` They are looking to park investments around the world . 
They helped the Lebanon peace process , Yemen , they got the World Cup , Doha talks , Al Jazeera -- these are all parts of a very big diplomatic game and a fight for influence , '' says a London-based British diplomat . 
The big prize is energy . 
Libya produced 1.6 million barrels of oil per day before the war , or almost 2 percent of world output , and has enough reserves to sustain that level of production for 77 years , according to BP . 
Qatar would like to control a chunk of that oil supply as well as potentially large Libyan gas exports to Europe which otherwise would effectively rival Qatar 's own deliveries . 
Although gas markets have faced a severe glut in the past few years , the outlook is improving fast , especially in the aftermath of Japan 's Fukushima disaster and the decision by Germany to phase out nuclear power . 
`` Qatar is putting energy at the forefront of its diplomacy . 
Libya brings them closer to Europe and to their future markets . 
They will be right on the Mediterranean , '' said the British diplomat . 
With direct access to Europe , Qatar would be in a position to carve up the gas markets between itself and Russia , with which Doha enjoys increasingly friendly ties . 
There 's also Libya 's sovereign wealth fund -LRB- LIA -RRB- , which has some $ 70 billion worth of assets frozen around the world . 
The LIA owns stakes in Italian bank UniCredit , defense company Finmeccanica , British publisher Pearson which owns the Financial Times , and Belgian financial group Fortis , now known as Ageas . 
If the rebels win , Qatar would have a say in what the LIA does with its investments . 
`` Libya is not Iraq . 
You are unlikely to have a protracted civil war once it is over , '' said the western risk consultant who worked in Benghazi . 
`` So those investments are not like putting money at the bottom of a pit . 
It should pay back and also possibly give Qatar influence on what the LIA can invest money in . 
If we use takeover terminology , Qatar is exploring unrealised value . '' 
The Qataris see such rich pickings they have recently turned down opportunities elsewhere , according to a source close to the Qatar Investment Authority -LRB- QIA -RRB- , the country 's sovereign wealth fund . 
`` Qatar 's leaders are intensely focussed on sorting out the crisis in Libya , to the extent that they have passed on a few items over the past few months . '' 
A popular joke in Benghazi illustrates Qatari ambitions in Libya perfectly . 
What 's the new nickname of Qatari ruler Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani ? 
The Emir of Qatar and Libya . 
So why is an absolute monarchy , with little time for democracy at home , mixed up with a democratic rebellion ? 
Qatar 's foreign ministry has cited the U.N. resolution and the emir 's desire to alleviate the suffering of the Libyan people . 
`` The reasons as laid out as to why Qatar is acting do not quite seem to account for the huge risks and extraordinarily bold actions that Qatar is taking , '' said David Roberts , deputy director of the Royal United Services Institute based in Doha . 
`` I can only account for this apparent discrepancy by suggesting that this policy is being heavily pushed by Qatar 's elite . '' 
Rumours abound in Doha that the real reason for Qatar 's interest in Libya is that al-Thani 's wife Sheikha Mozah has close personal ties there , although her representatives declined to comment . 
`` Most of Qatar 's leadership , the al-Thanis and the sheikhs , know Libya very well , because they went to school with Libyans in the U.S. and the UK in the 70s and 80s , '' said Mahmoud Shammam , Doha-based spokesman for the rebels . 
`` So they know the situation there very well . 
They know the ugliness of the regime . '' 
Could Qatar also be working for Washington ? 
Before the war , U.S. companies had large investments in Libya , with majors ConocoPhillips and Marathon involved in direct production deals with Gaddafi 's Libyan National Oil Co. . 
Now consultants and deal-brokers in Benghazi are struck by the low numbers of American fixers relative to their European peers . 
`` To some extent they may be acting as a U.S. proxy . 
Washington wants to achieve things but does n't want to do it with its own hands , '' said a London-based risk consultant who has European firms as clients . 
Qatar hosts a large U.S. military base ; its decision to contribute planes to police the no-fly zone over Libya helped Washington argue that the western-led air strikes had Arab support . 
Its importance there was underscored by its ruler 's visit to Washington in April . 
`` We would not have been able , I think , to shape the kind of broad-based international coalition that includes not only our NATO members but also includes Arab states , without the emir 's leadership , '' U.S. President Barack Obama told reporters that month after meeting the emir in the Oval office . 
Diplomats also point to strains in U.S.-Saudi relations as proof of -- or perhaps even reason for -- improved ties between Washington and Qatar , pointing to events in Bahrain where U.S. calls for negotiation to end a recent uprising stood in stark contrast to Saudi Arabia 's decision to send in troops . 
Qatar 's stand is certainly appreciated by European countries , whose diplomats argue that the emirate is playing a smart multi-polar game . 
`` The Qataris are replacing the Saudis on certain agendas , '' said a French diplomat based in Europe . 
Qatar 's emir has twice been guest of honor at France 's annual Bastille Day parade since 2007 and the emirate has stakes in Airbus parent EADS , energy group EDF and construction firm Vinci . 
In 2008 , France also passed a law granting special tax exemptions to the emir and other Qatari investors who had bought property in Paris . 
BLOW TO QATARI RISK PROFILE Despite wide-ranging support in the West , Qatar 's actions in Libya have created unease among its neighbors . 
Qatar has long played the role of intermediary in the region . 
Though it is close to Washington and Saudi Arabia , it also has ties to Iran . 
Foreign firms , including almost all the world 's major oil companies , have invested tens of billions of dollars in projects with Qatar even though they know its gas reserves are , in effect , shared with Iran . 
The Iranian part is the South Pars field while the Qatari part is known as the North Field . 
The country 's Libya adventure increases the hazards again . 
`` The Qatari risk profile is changing significantly now due to Libya , whereas before they had been simply viewed as a stable and wealthy partner , '' the London-based British diplomat said . 
`` No doubt that foreign majors are taking notice of that . '' 
-LRB- Dmitry Zhdannikov reported from London , Regan E. Doherty from Doha and Mohammed Abbas from Benghazi ; Additional reporting by Emma Farge in London , Sherine El Madany in Benghazi and Humeyra Pamuk in Dubai ; editing by Simon Robinson and Sara Ledwith -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
