MISRATA | Thu Jun 9 , 2011 12:39 am BST MISRATA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Western and Arab nations meet in Abu Dhabi on Thursday to focus on what one U.S. official called the `` end-game '' for Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi as NATO once again stepped up the intensity of its air raids on Tripoli . 
NATO air strikes resumed in Tripoli on Wednesday night after a lull that followed the heaviest day of bombings since March . 
Thousands of Gaddafi troops advanced on Misrata on Wednesday , shelling it from three sides and killing at least 12 rebels . 
Ministers from the so-called Libya contact group , including the United States , France and Britain , as well as Arab allies Qatar , Kuwait and Jordan , agreed in May to set up a fund to help the rebels in the civil war . 
They are expected to firm up this commitment in the United Arab Emirates capital and press the rebels to give a detailed plan on how they would run the country if Gaddafi stood down as leader of the oil producing North African desert state . 
`` The international community is beginning to talk about what could constitute end-game to this , '' one senior U.S. official told reporters aboard U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton 's plane which landed in Abu Dhabi on Wednesday night . 
`` That would obviously include some kind of cease-fire arrangement and some kind of political process ... and of course the question of Gaddafi and perhaps his family is also a key part of that , '' the U.S. official said . 
Both Libya 's rebel Transitional National Council -LRB- TNC -RRB- and its Western allies have rejected Libyan government cease-fire offers that do not include Gaddafi 's departure , saying he and his family must relinquish power before any talks can begin . 
The U.S. official said there have been general discussions about what might happen to Gaddafi but nothing specific on `` where he should go , or whether he should remain in Libya for that matter . '' 
U.S. officials on Wednesday announced delivery of the TNC 's first U.S. oil sale , part of a broader strategy they hope will get money flowing to the cash starved group . 
U.S. oil refiner Tesoro announced in May it had purchased the 1.2 million barrel cargo , which U.S. officials said was due to arrive in Hawaii on Wednesday aboard a tanker chartered by Swiss oil trader Vitol . 
British Foreign Office Minister Alistair Burt , who will be at the Abu Dhabi talks , said the group would be briefed by the International Stabilisation Response Team which is helping the rebel council plan for post-conflict rebuilding . 
`` The contact group will also reiterate the unequivocal message ... that Gaddafi , his family and his regime have lost all legitimacy and must go so that the Libyan people can determine their own future , '' Burt said . 
`` Until Gaddafi does so , the pressure will increase across the board : economically , politically and militarily . '' 
NATO defense ministers met in Brussels on Wednesday , but there were few signs of willingness to intensify their Libya mission , which after four months has failed to oust Gaddafi . 
The alliance says the bombing aims to protect civilians from the Libyan leader 's military , which crushed popular protests against his rule in February , leaving many dead . 
The conflict has now become a civil war . 
Gaddafi says the rebels are a minority of Islamist militants and the NATO campaign is an attempt to grab Libya 's oil . 
On the battlefront , forces loyal to Gaddafi were staging a big push on Misrata . 
`` He has sent thousands of troops from all sides and they are trying to enter the city . 
They are still outside , though , '' rebel spokesman Hassan al-Misrati told Reuters from inside the besieged town . 
Another rebel spokesman in Misrata , called Mohammed , told Reuters late on Wednesday they were still in control of the city despite the assault . 
Spain joined other Western and Arab governments in recognizing the Benghazi-based council as the sole representative of the Libyan people . 
Gaddafi troops and the rebels have been deadlocked for weeks , with neither side able to hold territory on a road between Ajdabiyah in the east , which Gaddafi forces shelled on Monday , and the Gaddafi-held oil town of Brega further west . 
Rebels control the east of Libya , the western city of Misrata and the range of western mountains near the border with Tunisia . 
They have been unable to advance on the capital against Gaddafi 's better-equipped forces . 
