Gulf oil spill was abated by bacteria that feed on hydrocarbons , report says Tuesday , January 11 , 2011 ; 12:31 AM The Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was , by far , the biggest environmental story of 2010 . 
We 've turned our minds and diaries to 2011 , but nature does n't abide by the Gregorian calendar . 
What 's going on with the nearly 5 million barrels , or 207 million gallons , of oil that leaked ? 
Will the gulf ever be oil-free again ? 
No , but the vast majority of the oil from the Deepwater Horizon spill is already gone , according to a final government report released last month . 
That report , along with several experts contacted by the Lantern , provides a detailed picture of the oil spill and its aftermath . 
Trying to remove all oil from the gulf would be a Sisyphean task . 
Every year , oil tankers , drilling platforms and boats spill more than 310,000 gallons of oil into the gulf . 
But even if we halted human activity in the gulf , natural seeps from the sea floor would still send 42 million gallons of oil into gulf waters each year . 
These seeps actually prevented the BP spill from being an even worse disaster . 
The gulf has more natural seeps than any other body of water in or around North America . 
Because of this constant supply of hydrocarbons , there is always a healthy population of bacteria floating around the gulf looking for more food . 
When BP 's well blew out , these tiny creatures went into a feeding frenzy . 
-LRB- The lack of natural seeps , and oil-eating bacteria , is one of the reasons that Alaska 's Prince William Sound has been slow to bounce back from the Exxon Valdez disaster of 1989 . -RRB- 
Bacteria are far more reproductively agile -LRB- so to speak -RRB- than mammals , which take years to adjust their population size to changes in food supply . 
Within 24 hours of the spill , the number of oil-eating bacteria around the wellhead had grown tenfold . 
Under the right conditions , bacteria can degrade spilled oil remarkably quickly . 
Fortunately , conditions in the Gulf of Mexico are quite friendly to oil-gobbling bacteria , and the overwhelming majority of the BP oil was recaptured , burned off , evaporated , flushed out by ocean currents or eaten by bacteria by the end of July , just two weeks after BP managed to seal off the well . 
Because the bacteria and cleanup crews worked so quickly and the spill is now so diluted , it 's impossible to say exactly what percentage of the original oil is still around , but it 's a small fraction . 
When will every drop of the spilled oil be gone ? 
It 's hard to say . 
A gallon of oil contains a wide variety of compounds . 
Even hydrocarbons , the basic building blocks of oil , come in thousands of varieties . 
Different types of bacteria feed on different kinds of hydrocarbons , and some work faster than others . 
In addition , a single bacterial cell does n't take in a drop of hydrocarbon , fully digest it and excrete carbon dioxide and water . 
It 's more of a team effort , with several intermediate compounds being passed between hungry microbes . 
Bioremediation experts talk about half-life , by which they mean the time it takes for the bacteria to break down half of the oil . 
If you can keep cutting the amounts in half , you 'll never get to zero , but you 'll quickly get to inconsequential concentrations . 
Those last few molecules of hydrocarbons - the chemical compounds in oil that cause most of its health risks - are n't particularly important when they 're diluted in the gulf 's 643 quadrillion gallons of water . 
Researchers have used a bunch of fascinating strategies to measure biodegradation rates , both in the open water and in the laboratory . 
For example , they have set so-called bug traps - saturated beads of oil that attract bacteria - in the gulf . 
They watch which bacteria make their way to the oil and how long it takes them to break it down . 
By most estimations , the right colony of bacteria can break down oil so quickly that within six days the hydrocarbons are undetectable using the best available instruments . 
Between July and August , researchers from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory took 170 samples of gulf water , starting at the wellhead and following the oil 's likely path away from it . 
They could n't find any spilled BP oil , which means the concentration was less than two parts per billion . 
-LRB- These researchers and others have developed techniques to `` fingerprint '' oil , so they can tell fairly accurately whether oil found in the gulf came from the BP well or elsewhere . -RRB- 
Another team of researchers , from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution , reported that underwater plumes of oil - that is , oil that had n't reached the surface - may be breaking down at a slower rate . 
But these researchers have n't found many plumes in the last six months , suggesting that they probably are n't having a significant ecological impact at this point . 
It 's too soon to declare a happy , green ending to this story . 
We do n't really know how the chemicals that bacteria release after eating oil will affect human and animal health . 
Some of them are known to mimic testosterone and estrogen . 
It 's possible , although somewhat unlikely , that these compounds hamper endocrine functions at exceedingly low concentrations . 
Another concern is oil that has been trapped in sediment . 
Bacteria in open water work much more efficiently than their mud-based cousins , because the latter have less access to oxygen and nutrients . 
That 's one of the many reasons the spill response was so focused on preventing the muck from making landfall . 
The bacteria in marshlands and other coastal areas are still breaking down oil . 
Recovery workers are experimenting with techniques to help them along , for example by using aeration tubes to pump in oxygen and nutrients . 
And although the oil mostly disappeared several months ago , an untold number of fish , aquatic mammals and birds died in the disaster . 
It will probably take generations before their populations return to pre-spill levels . 
If only mammals could reproduce like bacteria . 
The Lantern thanks Terry Hazen of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and Joe Lepo of the University of West Florida for their assistance . 
Is there an environmental quandary that 's been keep you up at night ? 
Send it to ask.the.lantern@gmail.com . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
