Oil spill panel recommends tighter rules , money for Gulf Coast By Steven Mufson and Juliet Eilperin Tuesday , January 11 , 2011 ; 11:00 AM The presidential oil-spill commission said Tuesday that the federal government should require tougher regulation , stiffer fines and a new industry-run safety organization , in its final report released as part of an effort to prevent a repeat of the massive BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico last year Former Sen. Bob Graham -LRB- D-Fla . -RRB- 
, one of the commission 's two co-chairs , said the Deepwater Horizon accident was `` both foreseeable and preventable , '' and reflected a failure on the part of both three individual companies and the federal government . 
`` I am sad to say that part of the answer is the fact that our government helped let it happen , '' Graham said . 
`` Our regulators were consistently outmatched . '' 
The panel proposes several safeguards aimed at strengthening regulators ' control over the oil and gas industry , including establishing an independent safety agency within the Interior Department that would be headed by someone for a fixed term in order to insulate the appointee from political interference . 
Graham said such a person should have `` a background of both science and management . '' 
It also calls for funding the regulatory agencies that oversee offshore drilling with fees from the companies who are tapping into the nation 's petroleum resource , saying in its executive summary , `` Funding sources could include a regulatory fee on new and existing leases or an increase in the inspection feeds already collected by the Department of Interior . '' 
William K. Reilly , the commission 's other co-chairman , emphasized that it would be a mistake to focus just on the three companies involved in last year 's accident . 
`` The solution to the problem has to be industry wide . '' 
The final report also calls for a `` risk-based '' regulatory approach now used by nations such as Norway and the U.K. , in which companies will have to demonstrate they have fully evaluated the risks associated with a particular well rather than deepwater drilling in a general area . 
Borrowing an idea from the nuclear power industry , the oil-spill commission backs the creation of an industry-run organization modeled on the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations that was created after the Three-Mile Island disaster . 
That organization helps establish best practices and technology for reactors . 
The commission also recommends boosting the liability cap on oil spills , which is $ 75 million for environmental and economic damage . 
BP has said that it would disregard the cap . 
The commission 's report says that Interior should also include the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the decision-making process about where and how to conduct oil and gas leasing . 
If Interior officials were to reject NOAA 's recommendations , they would have to say in writing why that would be in the national interest . 
`` Science has not been given a sufficient seat at the table , '' Graham said . 
`` Actually , that is a significant understatement . 
It has been virtually shut out . '' 
