Still the best political coverage . 
Oil spill panel calls for tighter federal rules , new fees for drilling Tuesday , January 11 , 2011 ; 9:16 PM The presidential oil spill commission said Tuesday that the federal government should require tougher regulation , stiffer fines and a new industry-run safety organization , recommendations that face an uncertain future in the new Congress . 
Former senator Bob Graham -LRB- D-Fla . -RRB- 
, one of the commission 's co-chairmen , said that the Deepwater Horizon accident was `` both foreseeable and preventable , '' and that Congress and the administration needed to enact reforms in order to prevent a repeat of the massive BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico last year . 
`` I am sad to say that part of the answer is the fact that our government helped let it happen , '' Graham said . 
`` Our regulators were consistently outmatched . '' 
The panel proposed several safeguards aimed at strengthening regulators ' control over the oil and gas industry , including establishing an independent safety agency within the Interior Department that would be headed by someone for a fixed term in order to insulate the appointee from political interference . 
Graham said such a person should have `` a background of both science and management . '' 
It also called for funding the regulatory agency that oversees offshore drilling , the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement -LRB- BOEMRE -RRB- , with fees from the companies who are tapping into the nation 's petroleum resource . 
William K. Reilly , the commission 's other co-chairman , emphasized that it would be a mistake to focus just on the three companies involved in last year 's accident . 
`` The solution to the problem has to be industry-wide . '' 
Graham , who along with Reilly will testify before both the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the House Natural Resources Committe e on Jan. 26 , said he hoped the `` searing impact '' of the Deepwater Horizon explosion and its aftermath would `` override an ideological preference for less government , less government intrusion and less government cost '' that could impede legislative action . 
Both Louisiana Sens. Mary Landrieu -LRB- D -RRB- and David Vitter -LRB- R -RRB- endorsed the panel 's recommendation that 80 percent of the Clean Water Act fines and penalties linked to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill go to environmental restoration . 
Landrieu said it would give `` added ammunition '' to a proposal that already has White House support . 
But in a sign of how the two parties remain divided on how to regulate drilling , Landrieu said the report found a path forward for deepwater drilling while Vitter criticized it for failing to do so . 
`` The report could have easily said ` end of deepwater drilling , ' but it does n't , '' Landrieu told reporters in a conference call . 
`` I think that 's the really big takeaway - that this commission , having examined a horrible incident that occurred , has basically concluded that deepwater can be done safely . '' 
In an interview , Vitter said he was concerned the report `` did n't make any statement , any observation about the gulf still almost being shut down , nine months after the fact . '' 
He added that although he was open to creating a new safety office within Interior , and did n't object outright to the idea of imposing fees to help regulate offshore energy exploration , he lacked confidence in the administration 's ability to oversee drilling operations . 
