U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Gaddafi 's ex-premier jailed after fleeing Libya TRIPOLI | Thu Sep 22 , 2011 11:38 pm IST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya 's neighbor Tunisia jailed Muammar Gaddafi 's former prime minister on Thursday , and Libya 's new rulers said they were tightening their grip on the desert towns where Gaddafi himself may be hiding . 
In the highest profile detention of a Gaddafi associate to date , a Tunisian court sentenced ex-prime minister Al Baghdadi Ali al-Mahmoudi to six months in jail on charges of illegally entering the country on Wednesday evening . 
`` Al-Mahmoudi was arrested yesterday evening , '' a Tunisian Interior Ministry official , speaking on condition of anonymity , told Reuters . '' 
-LRB- He -RRB- was arrested because he entered Tunisian territory illegally ... He did not have an entry stamp in his passport . '' 
The justice minister in Libya 's new government said Tripoli would request that the former prime minister be extradited to stand trial in Libya . 
`` Baghdadi directly oversaw the operations which had to do with the killings of Libyans , '' the minister , Mohammed al-Alagi , said on Al Arabiya television station . 
The National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- , Libya 's de facto government since Gaddafi was swept from the capital last month , has been anxious to show that it can establish firm control over a country riven by tribal and regional rivalries . 
The new government said it was consolidating its grip on Sabha and other oasis towns in the far south of the country which had sided with Gaddafi . 
`` Our revolutionaries are controlling 100 percent of Sabha city , although there are some pockets of resistance by snipers , '' NTC military spokesman Ahmed Bani told reporters in the capital , Tripoli . 
`` This resistance is hopeless ... They know very well that at the end of the day they will show the white flag or they will die . 
They are fighting for themselves , not for the tyrant , '' he said , referring to Gaddafi . 
Until now some parts of Sabha , the traditional base for Gaddafi 's own tribe about 800 km -LRB- 500 miles -RRB- south of Tripoli , had been occupied by fighters loyal to him . 
The council says its forces have now also taken control of Jufra , to the north-east of Sabha , and the nearby oasis towns of Sokna , Waddan , and Houn . 
The NTC official said the manhunt for Gaddafi , in hiding for weeks though he occasionally issues defiant audio messages , was drawing closer to its target . 
`` There is no whole tribe or city on Gaddafi 's side , '' said Bani . 
`` I 'm asking everyone in the south who has any news about the tyrant or his loyalists ... to notify the legal bodies about them . '' 
`` We are doing our best looking for the tyrant . 
There is some news here and there that he ran away from Sabha to another place but it can not be confirmed . '' 
In Tripoli on Thursday , the U.S. ambassador returned to work after a hiatus caused by the civil war , and predicted a quick end to the fighting . 
`` I think it is a matter of time -LRB- for -RRB- Gaddafi and his remaining loyalists . 
Their resistance is finished , '' Ambassador Gene Cretz told reporters at a ceremony to mark the re-opening of the U.S. mission . 
Libya 's interim government received a diplomatic boost when its neighbor Algeria recognized the NTC as the country 's legitimate representative , according to a report broadcast by Al Arabiya . 
Algeria was the last of Libya 's neighbors to grant recognition , and the two sides have for months been trading allegations . 
The NTC accused Algiers of abetting Gaddafi in the civil war , and Algeria said it was worried the new government was not firm enough on the threat from Islamist militants . 
Western security officials say good relations between Libya and Algeria are vital if they are to keep a lid on al Qaeda 's north African branch , which has kidnapped foreigners and attacked Western targets in the region . 
The country 's new rulers were faring less well on the battlefield , aside from advances in the far south . 
In the two biggest towns where Gaddafi loyalists are still holding out , Sirte and Bani Walid , the NTC 's offensive has been chaotic , raising fresh questions about the council 's ability to run the oil exporting country effectively . 
Despite support from NATO warplanes , government forces have struggled to capture Sirte , Muammar Gaddafi 's hometown and the biggest of the towns still outside their control . 
It is a thorny task because the sympathies of many residents lie with Gaddafi . 
The city typifies the challenges the NTC faces in reconciling the significant parts of the country that have tribal loyalties to Gaddafi or did not support the revolution . 
A spokesman for Gaddafi told Reuters on Thursday that NATO air strikes and interim government forces ' shelling of Sirte were killing civilians . 
`` Between yesterday and this morning , 151 civilians were killed inside their homes as the Grad rockets and other explosives fell upon their heads , '' Moussa Ibrahim said in a satellite phone call to Reuters from an undisclosed location . 
His claims could not be verified as journalists are unable to reach the city . 
NATO comment was not immediately available . 
There was a counter-claim from rebel fighters near Sirte , and from residents fleeting the city , who said that pro-Gaddafi forces had been executing people suspected of sympathising with the NTC forces . 
An NTC commander on the outskirts of Sirte , who gave his name as Saleh , showed Reuters a handwritten list of families whose members were said to have been executed in Sirte . 
`` One man , they cut him like this , '' the commander said , dragging his finger from the ends of his mouth across his cheeks . 
`` Another , they cut his lips . '' 
On the Western outskirts of Sirte on Thursday there was little fighting , and dozens of civilians poured out of the city through anti-Gaddafi checkpoints . 
Over on the eastern side of the city , NTC forces came under heavy artillery fire . 
One fighter there said pro-Gaddafi artillery batteries appeared to have found the range of the NTC tanks , positioned more than 50 km east of Sirte , and were targeting them . 
`` There has been heavy shelling from Gaddafi forces , '' said Adel Al-Tarhouni , an anti-Gaddafi fighter in the village of Sultana , which came under artillery attack . 
`` I was able to see palm trees cut from the top by the shrapnel . '' 
North of Bani Walid , NTC military forces brought forward tanks and Grad rocket launchers in preparation for a renewed attempt to take the town . 
It was not clear when that attack might begin . 
Later in the day , a Reuters reporter near the town said fighting had resumed after a lull , though it did not appear to be an all-out assault . 
Gaddafi loyalists were firing shells at NTC positions on the edge of the town , and plumes of smoke could be seen rising up from within Bani Walid . 
The offensive there has been frustrated by stiff resistance from well-drilled loyalist fighters , and also by a lack of organization among the NTC forces . 
They operate in disparate units based on their home towns , with little overall command . 
On Wednesday , one fighter shot his own head off and killed another fighter while handling a rocket-propelled grenade in full view of a Reuters team . 
In another incident , a fighter wounded himself and another fighter after losing control of his machinegun . 
The nascent NTC national army has tried to bring order . 
If the NTC is unable to swiftly assert its control over the country and its own forces , it could embarrass Western leaders , especially France 's Nicolas Sarkozy and Britain 's David Cameron , who took a gamble by backing the anti-Gaddafi leadership . 
`` We have set up a unified operations room to unite all brigades , '' said brigade commander Omar Kabout . 
`` The purpose is to increase coordination and end all this chaos because many rebels have arrived without commanders . 
We need to put them into brigades and stop all this random shooting . '' 
But the message was not getting through to all the fighters , many of whom go into battle wearing flip-flop sandals , T-shirts and jeans and have no military training . 
`` We do n't take orders from the NTC . 
We listen only to our own commander , '' said Ziyad Al Khemri , a fighter from the town of Zawiyah , just west of Tripoli . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tarek Amara in Tunis , Emma Farge in Tripoli , Maria Golovnian north of Bani Walid , Sherine El Madany east of Sirte , Alexander Dziadosz west of Sirte and Hamid Ould Ahmed in Algiers and Dina Zayed in Cairo ; Writing by Christian Lowe ; Editing by Roger Atwood -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
