Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
The most critical moment in the oil spill crisis in the Gulf of Mexico is at hand , as BP engineers armed with 50,000 barrels of dense mud and a fleet of robotic submarines are poised to attempt a `` top kill '' maneuver to plug the gushing well a mile below the surface . 
It 's far from a sure bet . 
`` It has been done successfully in the past , but it has n't been done at this depth , '' Kent Wells , the oil company 's senior vice president of exploration and production , told reporters in a conference call Tuesday . 
This will be the first stab at shutting down the well since the April 20 blowout and fire that killed 11 workers on the drilling rig Deepwater Horizon . 
Efforts to capture the spewing oil have had limited success . 
The expanding slick has ridden a steady sea breeze onto 70 miles of Louisiana 's shoreline and into shellfish-rich estuaries . 
The sight of oil-soaked brown pelicans is now common . 
Sticky rust-brown oil slathers the grass in the marshlands . 
Federal officials closed more fishing grounds Tuesday , bringing the total to more than 54,000 square miles , nearly a quarter of the federal waters in the gulf . 
Oil company executives will be grilled in federal hearings resuming Wednesday in a hotel in suburban New Orleans . 
Later this week , Interior Secretary Ken Salazar is set to deliver a safety review of offshore drilling to President Obama . 
And then Obama will fly to the gulf on Friday for his second visit to the region since the crisis began . 
`` Like everybody , he 's frustrated , '' Carol Browner , assistant to the president for energy and climate change , told CNN . 
The developments on shore may be overshadowed by what happens in the hours and days ahead in the deep water , where the only light comes from the lamps of the robotic submarines . 
BP 's top-kill plan has been devised over more than a month by what BP calls a dream team of engineers from the oil industry and from such government agencies as the Energy Department , the Minerals Management Service and the U.S. Geological Survey . 
BP has also logged 17,000 suggestions from outsiders , Wells said . 
Huge ships and drilling rigs now crowd the surface 5,000 feet above the blown-out well . 
Two rigs are drilling relief wells but are not expected to complete their work until August . 
Parked in the middle of everything is the command vessel for the top-kill operation , the 312-foot Helix Q4000 . 
Close by will be the 381-foot HOS Centerline , one of the largest supply ships in the world , capable of pumping 50 barrels of mud a minute . 
Two other backup ships carrying mud will be nearby . 
All the work at depth is performed by the remotely operated vehicles -LRB- ROVs -RRB- , numbering 12 by latest count , and operated from the surface ships while BP engineers monitor the process from Houston . 
The ROVs have tinkered with the five-story blowout preventer that sits atop the wellhead . 
They fixed a leaking hydraulic line , for example , using an ordinary wrench pinched by a robotic arm . 
They also removed the `` yellow pod , '' the brain of the blowout preventer , and engineers repaired it at the surface before replacing it at depth . 
On Tuesday , BP engineers began diagnostic tests on the blowout preventer . 
This is a critical phase in which the company will learn how much pressure must be overcome when the drilling mud is injected into the well . 
It could also lead them to abort the maneuver . 
`` We 've got a crack team of experts that are going to pore over the diagnostic data , '' Wells said . 
`` There is a remote possibility that we would get some information that it would n't work . '' 
If all goes as planned , a 30,000-horsepower engine aboard the HOS Centerline will pump mud at 40 to 50 barrels a minute to the Q4000 command vessel , then down a newly installed pipe to the gulf bottom , and then through flexible hoses into multiple portals in the blowout preventer . 
What happens next would be all-important . 
The mud would have to go somewhere . 
The hope is that so much of it would be forced into the preventer that , even as some of it surged up the riser pipe and into the water along with oil and gas , much of it would go to the bottom of the well . 
The well would lose all pressure and would become static . 
Later , BP would inject cement down the wellbore to permanently seal the well . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
