With President Obama under increasing pressure to respond more forcefully to the Gulf Coast oil spill as the environmental devastation mounts , he is expected to order on Thursday strengthened inspections for offshore drilling operations , a U.S. official said Wednesday night . 
Obama will also travel to Louisiana on Friday , the White House said . 
He will get an update on the oil spill response and cleanup and will meet with residents who have been personally affected by the oil gushing from a damaged undersea well head , officials said . 
And he is expected to discuss the disaster Thursday , after the Interior Department reports on the circumstances that led up to the spill . 
Obama had ordered a review , set to arrive later this week . 
The show of greater attentiveness from the president comes five weeks after an April 20 explosion on a rig off the Louisiana shore killed 11 workers and triggered the oil spill . 
It also follows criticism from Republicans , and some Democrats , that the administration has not done enough in the crisis . 
Although senior administration officials have voiced growing disapproval of BP , the company operating the rig and responsible for the cleanup , the mission of the Friday trip is not to declare war on the firm , said one senior administration official , who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal White House deliberations . 
Instead , the official said , the trip will demonstrate that Obama is `` on top of it . '' 
Democrats inside and outside the White House are clamoring for more , though . 
Several Democratic strategists with ties to the White House said there has been concern over how long it took the administration to convey its unhappiness with BP . 
`` It 's not easy to craft an effective message when the disaster is ongoing , '' one Democratic adviser said . 
Obama 's last trip to the Gulf was last-minute , brief and had little lasting effect . 
He flew in and out of New Orleans on May 2 , drove two hours to a Coast Guard station and got a briefing before taking a quick helicopter tour . 
He did not even see the oil slick . 
This time , `` we are not going to have a problem finding it , '' one official said . 
Democratic strategist James Carville , who lives in New Orleans and has been highly critical of the administration 's actions , said he is `` glad '' Obama is coming . 
But he said the president has been too measured overall . 
`` Eleven people are killed because of multinational corporate greed , malfeasance and possibly criminal negligence ? 
I think Franklin Roosevelt would have jumped out of his wheelchair and run down here to be in the middle of this . '' '' 
