For some BP customers , convenience trumps call for protest Marvin Alfaro , 32 , of Woodbridge , fills up his truck at a BP gas station in Columbia Heights . 
`` I do n't want to put blame on BP , '' he says . 
-LRB- Ian Shapira - Washington Post -RRB- Marco Mora , an auto body shop owner , was driving in Columbia Heights when he realized his Mercedes needed some premium love , so he pulled in under the feel-good green sign marked `` BP '' and opted for some $ 3.29-a-gallon Ultimate . 
Despite calls to boycott the company responsible for the massive Gulf of Mexico oil spill , Mora never even considered steering clear of BP 's gas . 
`` Of course you feel bad , but it 's not only the company 's fault , '' he said . 
`` It 's the government 's fault . 
You need to regulate these guys . '' 
At BP stations across the Washington region , customers say the oil spill , now in its second month , is tragic and distressing , but an accident for which they blame other businesses and the federal government as well as BP . 
Many motorists said they end up buying from BP purely out of convenience . 
Besides , they ask : Why complicate a routine fill-up with political or moral questions ? 
But organizers of a BP boycott -- including Public Citizen , the District-based nonprofit organization , and a Facebook group with more than 75,000 members -- say that shopping elsewhere for gas would send the oil company a powerful message . 
Public Citizen , founded in 1971 by consumer advocate Ralph Nader , recently launched an online BP Boycott Pledge that has collected more than 11,000 signatures from people promising to forgo all BP products for three months . 
A Facebook group called Boycott BP -- its insignia features a crossed-out BP logo -- urges people to avoid BP stations and affiliated companies . 
Kasy Tekle , assistant manager of the BP in Columbia Heights , said the gas station has not seen a decline in sales . 
`` We 're okay for now , '' he said . 
`` I do n't know much about the gas spill , but so far we 're doing okay . '' 
A call to a BP spokesman was not returned Monday . 
Trilby Lundberg , a California-based oil industry analyst , said BP boycotts are minimal and probably would not affect the company 's financial performance or retail sales . 
`` The general public may be aware that the spill is not a gas brand issue and that it 's an offshore oil rig problem , '' she said . 
Tyson Slocum , Public Citizen 's energy policy program director , acknowledged that the boycotts have hardly wounded BP 's bottom line but said the effort could help pierce the company 's eco-friendly image . 
Slocum suspects more would turn against BP if the spill directly affected this region . 
`` There are people , no matter what is going on , who will continue to prioritize convenience over taking a moral or political stand , '' Slocum said . 
`` The spill might be something on their minds , but it 's not in their face . '' 
It is too soon to tell whether the BP spill will trigger the sustained level of outrage aimed at Exxon in 1989 , when one of its tankers ran aground near the Alaskan shore , spilling 11 million gallons of crude into the Prince William Sound . 
A few demonstrations have been held outside BP stations in Florida , New Jersey and Ohio ; in London , Greenpeace activists scaled BP 's headquarters in protest . 
Washington motorists said the spill was not on their minds when they wheeled into a BP station . 
`` I was on ` E , ' and I knew I was n't going to make it much further -- and I want to run my air conditioner because it 's really hot , '' said Paulette Washington , an Arlington sales representative who was filling up her Honda at the BP on Wilson Boulevard in Arlington . 
`` It 's not like I was , like , ` Let me find a Shell . ' '' 
Washington did not excuse the oil company 's actions . 
`` I do n't think anyone should come to BP 's aid , '' she said . 
`` It should n't be on taxpayers . '' 
Emily Davies , 37 , filling up next to Washington , disagreed . 
`` I do think the federal government should be involved , '' she said . 
`` I do n't want the environment to suffer . '' 
Davies , who recalled trying to avoid Exxon stations after the 1989 spill , said convenience outweighed politics this time . 
`` I usually go to Texaco , but it was on the wrong side of the road . '' 
Other BP customers sympathized with the company 's predicament . 
`` It was an accident ; things happen , '' said Marvin Alfaro , 32 , a Woodbridge construction worker , at the BP in Columbia Heights . 
`` Maybe it could have been prevented . 
I feel bad for BP . 
They 're losing business . '' 
But some consumers were actively avoiding BP . 
Glenn Tolbert , an office manager , was filling up his rental car at a Hess station on Rhode Island Avenue NW after deliberately passing by the BP up the street . 
`` I honestly did think about '' the spill , he said . 
`` I watch the news . 
We have this spill , and it 's not stopping yet . 
It 's polluting the environment . 
It 's just my small thing to say , ' I do n't like what 's going on . ' '' '' 
