Why does n't Obama ` take charge ' of the BP oil spill ? 
For an Obama administration spokesman on the BP oil spill , Adm. Thad Allen , the Coast Guard commandant and national incident commander , is admirably straightforward . 
Working on behalf of the president who ran a campaign based on the mantra , Yes We Can , Allen awkwardly insists that , in this case , no , the government can t . 
There are very few circumstances where the government does not have the means or national power to influence something this large , Allen said said in an interview with me at the White House on Wednesday . 
I think that s a source of immense frustration to everybody . 
Commentators increasingly lambaste the administration for not taking over the cleanup effort . 
In a politically calculated response , some administration officials have ratcheted up their rhetoric about keeping the federal government s boot on BP s neck ; they have now threatened to push BP out of the way , which just fuels the anger . 
But what many of the critics , inside and outside the administration , don t offer is much sense of what the federal government could really do better if it pushed BP aside , other than symbolic actions of questionable value , such as insisting that President Obama visit the Gulf of Mexico again and , as James Carville put it Wednesday , take control , whatever that means . 
-LRB- For what it s worth , the president will return to the gulf on Friday . -RRB- 
Under the water and on the surface , Allen says , there simply isn t much that the federal government can add to what BP is already doing , beyond providing some supplemental brain power , advanced imaging technologies and review of BP s proposals to plug the leak . 
Things the government has already furnished . 
The private sector owns nearly all the means to deal with this problem and fix the leak and stop the source . 
Why doesn t the Coast Guard bring in its own submersibles ? 
There s too much submersible traffic underwater already , he says . 
A couple of remote operated vehicles even got tangled inserting a tube to collect spewing oil , lengthening the operation . 
Why hasn t the government quickly approved a plan Louisiana officials favor to build sand berms that might protect sensitive wetlands ? 
Because it would take months to execute , anyway . 
Even so , it s undergoing requisite review at the Army Corps of Engineers . 
Perhaps BP is the one with the technological capabilities on and under the water . 
But on land , why isn t the federal government in full control of the cleanup ? 
It essentially is , Allen argues , since Coast Guard officials are the ones making the top-line decisions and coordinating the effort . 
By law , he says , BP is responsible for cleaning the mess and hires contractors created after the Exxon Valdez spill that specialize in doing just that . 
But the federal government is responsible for supervising and ensuring the cleanup is effective . 
So , according to Allen s reckoning , Americans should at least feel free to hold the administration accountable for how well the cleanup proceeds , even if it might be a tad unfair to blame Obama for BP s inability to plug the leak for more than a month . 
There are some problems that simply can not be fixed quickly , no matter who is in charge . 
But on shore , Allen points out , BP and the government have fewer restrictions on how they can react once oil is sighted . 
That implies more responsibility , particularly since the government is , apparently , taking such an active role . 
That will be little comfort to the angry Louisianans who lined up Tuesday at a town hall meeting in Plaquemines Parish to yell at officials about what they perceive as government inaction . 
Nor will it help the administration s press operation , which would surely prefer to have BP as an enemy rather than as a partner . 
But , like it or not , BP is the administration s right hand in this effort , a fact Allen has made clear for days . 
Indeed , part of the reason the administration 's messaging on the oil spill falls flat is that some officials attempt to play political defense by excoriating the company , even while it must admit that BP is its partner of necessity . 
In so doing , the Obama administration legitimizes unfocused and perhaps unfair complaints about the organization of its effort to cap and clean up the oil leak , even though , according to Allen , the White House probably couldn t do much of substance to redress many of those very criticisms . 
The White House is in a hard spot . 
The president will probably take a hit for this , fair or no , no matter what administration spokespeople say . 
All the more reason to be straight with Americans , as Allen seems to be , about what the government can and can t reasonably be expected to do . 
The truth is nobody knows whether or not the administration is not doing all it can . 
But like in any crisis the lack of knowledge does n't stop anyone from having a strong opinion . 
The smartest thing this administration has done is to STAY OUT OF THIS with regard to management ! 
With all due respect to the severity of this situation , even the EXPERTS in oil extraction and exploration are at odds as to what to do . 
Do you seriously want the government to take the reigns -LRB- and therefore the responsibility -RRB- away from areas those industries that have spend decades becoming familiar with ? 
We all want this thing to end , but to panic and grab the wheel away from the driver is THE WRONG thing to do . 
Perhaps the government should make itself available to these industries with regard to equipment and manpower , but certainly NOT direction ! 
Where 's the White House on that ? 
Oh , that 's right , a number of states on the Gulf have REPUBLICAN governors . 
That is too cute on the White House 's part to allow the states to beg for help . 
-LRB- Bobby Jindal of Louisiana is in such a spot . -RRB- 
Rather crude and unprofessional for this White House . 
We are as mad as hell ! 
Clean this mess up ! 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar appeared May 18 , 2010 , for several Senate hearings . 
Many lawmakers examined the leadership of the Minerals Management Service . 
The Interior Department is charged with enforcing environmental and safety rules for energy exploration . 
Ken Salazar was working on the Cape Wind commercial wind turbine permit while the Gulf oil platform was on fire ! 
Soon after the platform sank into the Gulf Ken traveled to Massachusetts to announce that he had approved the Cape Wind permit ! 
On April 28.2010 Ken Salazar announced his decision at a joint Massachusetts State House news conference with Gov. Deval Patrick voting to go forward with the Nantucket , Massachusetts wind turbine project . 
The same day of this decision more than 5000 barrels of oil had poured into the Gulf of Mexico . 
-LRB- one barrel equals 42 gallons -RRB- . 
Several days later the MMS was broken into several sections ! 
Do we trust our government ? 
In retrospect should congress review the Cape Wind permit given out during the failures of MMS ? 
Obama , well aware that solving this takes the cooperation of the best deep water operations engineers in the world , is wise enough to listen and stay out of the way . 
Patton described it best : `` Tell your people what you want done and then leave it to them to do it . 
They will surprise and delight you with the ingenuity of their solutions . '' 
We have a problem because the prior planning BP should have had to do to get their drilling permit was n't done because BP declared that the chances of a spill were `` remote '' , and the Bush administration did n't question their asertion , it just let them drill . 
Now , after the fact and on a totally pragmatic basis BP is doing the disaster planning it should have done to get the drilling permit in the first place . 
It takes time to cobble up workable solutions to problems a mile below the surface , and the Gulf Coast is paying the price for BP 's avoiding paying for the engineering studies it did n't do before it ever contracted for the drilling ship . 
BP saved on paperwork and preplanning , and Louisiana gets to make up the savings in the ruined lives of its waterfolk . 
More or less SOP for republicans . 
This is Obama paying Whites back with a White Katrina . 
He 's acting very professorial and above it all as he and Rahm watch the livelihoods and dreams of mainly white fishermen and property owners go down the drain . 
But , they are also going to destroy the livelihoods of many minorities who rely on these middle class whites . 
The people who are being paid back the most though are those like James Carville : White Hypocrites . 
The Democratic Party is filled with White Hypocrites who have very liberal talking points but then go back to their cozy all white neighborhoods just like Ted `` 1965 Immigration Act '' Kennedy and Tip `` Anti-Irish Immigration '' O'Neill used to do . 
The reality is that change comes slowly , even in the face of crisis . 
There was no study of the environment impact of a deep water spill , there was no research into newer methods and technology for cleaning up oil spills , and there was a protocol in place to have the party responsible for the pollution be the primary responder to the spill . 
The government is almost completely marginalized thanks to the unregulated actions of an industry that effectively owns the regulators . 
What transpired 8 years ago in the energy policy meetings between Vice-President Cheney and the heads of Big Oil ? 
I 'm sure that no record exists and that we will never know . 
You have it spot on . 
BP and the industry has the brainpower all over the world to safely extract energy resources and should be in the lead to fix this mess . 
The government would have no idea what to do , even the PHD physicist Energy Secretary -LRB- big deal -RRB- . 
The government should protect the environment and bill BP . 
In fact , the winning strategy should be to let the Cajuns loose and they would protect and clean up their land . 
Noone wants this to happen . 
It 's a profound tragedy . 
Regrettably many people such as michealjwilson want to continue a narrative that is dilusional at best . 
`` Do n't blame Obama , but that damn Bush , he IS responsible ... he single handedly changed the regulations , approved permits , told BP not to worry and caused this spill '' . 
And that 's rational thinking ? 
Obama ca n't clean it up but he as a leader , can ensure that everyone works together , sets a firm but positive tone , and ensure that resources are available . 
Just like Bush did not personally cause this , Obama ca n't personally clean it up , but his administration needs to be held accountable under the OPA 90 Act which spells out clearly what are their responsibilities . 
It 's unfortunate that this spill has caused people to lose sight of the following ... 11 Americans died in the explosion and there are a lot of hard working Americans , your fellow citizens , who risk their lives daily in hazardous jobs and in remote parts of the world you would never even think existed , that provide you energy to make your life better . 
It 's just not gasoline !!! It 's lubricating oils and greases for turbine wind farms , fuels and greases for planes , the space shuttle , army tanks , diapers , tires , crayons etc. . 
Get educated about how much oil improves your life . 
what can the federal government do ? 
Our life-giving waters can not sustain more toxic burdens or spills . 
See the OFFICIAL MMS DOCUMENT `` Cape Wind Energy Project Final Environmental Impact Statement , Jan. 2009 US Dept. of the Interior , Minerals Management Service '' online for details of what MMS approved for the Breadbasket of Nantucket Sound . 
Let 's look at the US National Contingency Plan . 
This makes it very clear that the Responsible Party , in this case BP , will manage the operational aspects of the spill . 
This will be at BP 's cost . 
However , BP must present its response plan for approval to the Unified Command , consisting of the National On Scene Co-ordinator , a US Coast Guard Officer , -LRB- in this case Admiral Thad Allen -RRB- the EPA and the affected State -LRB- s -RRB- . 
So , all that BP is doing has been approved by the US Government . 
Although BP is in control of the approved day to day response , the US Government is in overall command . 
Only if the Unified Command feel that the Responsible Party is not carrying out its role properly , will it `` Federalise '' the spill , take over day to day control and thus be responsible for all the contracts and costs that this will entail . 
As to the cause of the spill , let 's wait until the full enquiry has determind the causes and responsibilities before making ill informed comments . 
Regarding the daily amount being spilled it is not helpful for so called experts to pontificate on how much , when they do not have access to the facts . 
As to the costs , the numbers being floated are wild speculation , with little foundation in fact . 
Reporters and commentators would be well advised to stick to the known facts , question more closely the veracity of the information coming from so-called `` experts '' and thus minimize the wild speculation , which only serves to exacerbate the understandable anger and frustration of the US people . 
At the height of the mission 's initial response to the Haitian earthquake , more than 20,000 U.S. troops , 20 ships and 130 aircraft were in Haiti to assist that country 's rebuilding and relief efforts . 
Mr Obama did n't need personal experience as a development engineer or relief worker to order the U.S. military to Haiti . 
Yet he is incapable of ordering emergency and relief efforts in the Gulf of Mexico ? 
Is U.S. aid for redevelopment only for Afghanistan ? 
Why is American `` soft power '' to be used only for the benefit of foreign nations ? 
Given the former vice presidents affinity for undisclosed locations , we should stuff him in the blow out preventer and not tell anyone where he is . 
Bring food and water ... erect temporary housing ... provide medical aid ... provide security . 
Whether it 's a tornado in Kansas or an earthquake in Sumatra , the basic steps are the same ... it 's usually a question of scale . 
In this case , the challenges are different . 
BP , or more generally , the oil industry , has to take the technical lead on stopping the leak . 
What could the feds do ? 
They could have requested or organized resources from the other oil companies to bring their best people in to help . 
But in this country , the government is not in the oil business , unlike many other countries around the world . 
For the containment and clean-up , I think the feds are a fairer target . 
You have to have a more effective plan . 
That is a public safety issue . 
But that also means more government regulation . 
So I hope when new regulations and requirements are put into place , we do n't hear the limited government people screaming about the feds ' intrusions on their `` rights '' . 
BHO makes Jimmy Carter look COMPETENT & Richard Nixon look HONEST ! 
just SEEING\/HEARING him makes me GAG ! 
OMG , is he finding out he 's not the Second Coming after all ? 
What will a smattering of humility do to his overinflated ego ? 
I think it 's funny indeed , this mouth had so much to say about his predecessor 's ineptitude in all matters , and now it 's become absolutely clear even to the koolaid crowd that Stinky\/BO ca n't manage his way out of a paper bag , and is a dishonest sleazebag global sycophant to boot . 
It 's Day 37 of the Spill . 
Obama still has n't declared it a national Emergency ! 
He still hasnt ' given Lousiana the VERY SPECIFIC help their Governor is asking for . 
And Obama is to blame . 
he 's the commander in chief . 
He can mobilize resources in a way no one else can . 
but he has n't done it . 
Especially in comparison to the way Bush was skewered over his handling of Katrina -- which in retrospect was really a total failure of the state and city governments to : -LRB- a -RRB- implement their disaster plans already in place and -LRB- b -RRB- fix the levees prior to katrina . 
Lousiana had klnown the levees were not sufficient but they squandered 10 's of millions of dollars over 2 decades earmarked to fix the levees . 
I am not defending the inadequacy of the Federal repsonse in those 4 days -LRB- that 's right only 4 days -RRB- following Katrina . 
It was a mess . 
But now we have Obama who has wasted 37 days !!! and counting without any coherent federal response . 
37 Days !!!! and now the entire Gulf ecosystem being destroyed before our eyes . 
And all Obama has done is pass the buck , go to fundraisers , and blame bush . 
REST GRANT THEM O LORD , AND LET PERPETUAL LIGHT SHINE UPON The Commander in Chief , who is not a veteran , will not be attending services at Arlington this Memorial Day . 
He is otherwise engaged . 
In the 2 year campaign to become president , Obama bashed the Bush administration for it 's inability to manage a crises . 
Now that he is in charge he is learning first hand that the Federal government is largely inable to handle any crises . 
No matter who is the president , government has become far too large and ineffecient to be `` managed '' . 
Obama was either naive or lying when he blamed everything from Katrina to the financial meltdown on Bush . 
I contend that he was just lying . 
He was fully aware that government was broken . 
Now his chickens are coming home to roost . 
Let 's see if he can handle the criticism with the grace of his predecessor . 
I suspect we will see armies of Obama-ites on the news shows pointing fingers at others as the only crises they are trained to handle are those of political perceptions . 
Already you have seen leftie bloggers and radio\/TV hosts blaming the oil spill on , who else , Bush . 
Because like everyone else he 's BOUGHT . 
Real leadership would 've seized the situation , as well as BP , and taken command of the situation rather than let our oceans be fouled and habitat destroyed . 
The scope of the amoral , unconscionable greed will come into full light once we ALL feel the catastrophic effects this will bring about to our planet . 
We wo n't have to wait long . 
After all , small-government libertarians and republicans want the government out of our lives , eh ? 
Why should my taxes go to clean up THEIR mess ? 
This is n't a natural disaster , it was caused by BP , and it should be BP 's responsibility to pay for whatever damage it caused . 
Why should Big Brother Government and my taxes pay for it ? 
Let Jindal go and tell BP to clean up their mess . 
If they do n't , then Louisiana should sue BP for the damage it caused . 
That 's what capitalism , the free market , and personal responsibility is all about , right ? 
As all parties realize that the lawsuits form this incident will result in setlements in the many many billions of dollars , keeping BP in the dock is fairly important . 
Ironically , this is a variation on the `` too big to fail '' fiscal problem - the only way the feds have any chance of making BP pay for the cleanup is to make sure PB can not cry that big government got in the way . 
Such officials as Bobby Jindal should rethink their desire to have the governemnt step in - it is antithetical to his basic political philosophy . 
If they can put those pipes in the water , underground or whereever , there should be shut-off vales every few miles . 
Did they think that the pipes are going to last forever , that they did n't need to put in shut-off valves ??? And another think , I certainly hope that they are not allowed to raise gas prices because of their errors . 
American people are already paying too much for gas . 
When the oil companies report millions and\/or billions in profits , it 's wrong that american people are having to pay high prices for gas . 
I can not believe for the life of me that the government has not made the oil companies reduce gas prices . 
The oil companies could sell gas for $ 1.50 or $ 2.00 per gallon and still make millions and\/or billions in profits . 
Looks to me like the oil companies are the ones that are gas gouging !! Posted by : sparkybambam | May 28 , 2010 7:17 PM | Report abuse The comments to this entry are closed . 
