Wednesday , May 26 , 2010 ; 4:26 PM As his administration comes under increasing criticism for its handling of the spreading environmental catastrophe in the Gulf of Mexico , President Obama will hold a White House news conference Thursday , his first since February , in an attempt to retake command of the message . 
He 'll do so as the crisis reaches yet another moment of high risk , both in the Gulf and in Washington . 
At the scene of the oil spill , the oil firm BP -- attempting the latest of inventive but thus far ineffective maneuvers to stop the gusher that has been spewing from the gulf floor for five weeks -- has begun to pour 50,000 barrels of dense mud into the well . 
The exercise , known as a '' top kill , '' has effectively stopped other spills in the past but has never been tried at the mile-down depth of this one . 
Meanwhile , Interior Secretary Ken Salazar is scheduled to deliver the results of a review demanded by Obama that gives an accounting of the federal government 's policies with regard to energy exploration on the outer continental shelf , including whether there are adequate safeguards with respect to regulations and inspections . 
Obama is expected to announce a series of new policies in response . 
The news conference will also come on the day before the president travels to the gulf to inspect the scene and also to send a message of engagement . 
With reporters having their first opportunity to put a full range of questions to Obama about the spill and his administration 's handling of it , here are five that should be asked : 1 . 
In explaining and defending your decision in March to open up additional offshore areas to drilling , you argued that improvements in technology have made drilling significantly less risky . 
Just 18 days before the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , you said : `` It turns out , by the way , that oil rigs today generally do n't cause spills . 
They are technologically very advanced . '' 
What kind of assurances were you given that this was the case and by whom ? 
What do you think of those assumptions now ? 
BP is now in the position of making many of the key decisions on how to deal with it -- a situation that is drawing growing criticism . 
White House officials note the administration is following a process established under the 1990 Oil Spill Act , which was passed in response to the Exxon Valdez incident ; they also concede that the government , effectively , has no choice but to let BP take the lead because it lacks the equipment and expertise to do the job . 
In at least one instance in which the federal government has attempted to overrule BP , which was over its use of dispersant chemicals that the Environmental Protection Agency says are too toxic , the company has not complied . 
What do you say to those who say too much control has been ceded to BP ? 
And what kind of changes , if any , should be made in the process for dealing with future oil spills ? 
Salazar has pledged reform of the Minerals Management Servic e , the agency responsible for offshore drilling , which is now recognized as having been too compliant with the wishes of the oil industry . 
But his proposals -- for instance , splitting the agency into separate leasing , revenue collection and oversight -- have dealt largely with the organizaton of the MMS . 
If the problem is , as you have said , a cozy culture in the agency , is it enough simply to redraw the organization chart ? 
How can you quickly change a culture that has taken decades to develop ? 
On May 6 , Salazar announced a moratorium on the issuance of final permits for `` new offshore drilling activity . '' 
Critics such as the Center for Biological Diversity note , however , that this policy has never been put into writing , and that its definition `` has become steadily narrower as the Interior Department changes it to exclude whatever drilling permits MMS issues on any given day . '' 
And the New York Times has reported that since the April 20 explosion on the rig , waivers have continued to be granted for drilling projects . 
What , exactly , does this moratorium cover ? 
Should anyone in the government be fired as the result of this disaster ? 
Washington Post staff writer Juliet Eilperin contributed to this report . 
