Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
Wednesday , May 26 , 2010 ; 4:16 PM Members of Congress from both parties sharply criticized the Interior Department 's Minerals Management Service on Wednesday , a day after the release of a report showing that the agency 's inspectors routinely took gifts such as college football tickets from the companies they were supposed to be policing . 
Lawmakers unloaded about their concerns during a hearing by the House Natural Resources Committee on the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The hearing followed the release of a memorandum by another panel , the House Energy and Commerce Committee , that described an internal BP investigation into the Gulf oil spill . 
The internal probe points to a series of equipment failures , mistakes and missed warning signs that led to the blowout and fire on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , according to lawmakers briefed by the company . 
BP 's investigation , while incomplete , highlights a series of abnormal indicators -- about pipeline pressure and the flow of drilling fluids in the five hours before the explosion -- that should have been `` warning signs '' of trouble , according to the memo summarizing BP 's report . 
In one case , BP 's investigator told lawmakers that a `` fundamental mistake may have been made despite '' an indicator of a very large abnormality . 
Among other issues , BP said it had concerns about the cementing job in the well , saying that one procedure had to be attempted nine times , which might have indicated `` contamination of the cement . '' 
`` The BP investigation has also raised concerns about the maintenance history , modification , inspection , and testing of '' the blowout preventer , lawmakers said . 
`` In addition , key questions exist about whether proper procedures were followed for critical activities throughout the day , '' the memorandum said . 
These mostly had to do with the management of drilling mud , which is used as a counterweight to oil and gas pressure pushing up from below . 
On Capitol Hill , top Interior Department officials said Wednesday the Obama administration would hold federal agencies , as well as BP , accountable for any failings related to the devastating spill . 
In the first of a series of oversight hearings by the House Natural Resources Committee , which has jurisdiction over offshore oil and gas drilling , lawmakers grilled Interior Secretary Ken Salazar on reports of misconduct at the Minerals Management Service -LRB- MMS -RRB- , the Interior Department agency that regulates offshore drilling while also collecting revenue from it . 
`` This is a BP mess , '' Salazar said in response to questioning . 
But while it is important to get `` the whole truth '' from BP about what went wrong , he said , he has also ordered the department 's inspector general to look into what the MMS did or did not do that contributed to the problem . 
`` Everyone needs to be held accountable , and that includes the federal government , '' Salazar said . 
`` It is time to abolish MMS and start anew with a new agency and new people , '' Sen. Jeanne Shaheen -LRB- D-N.H. -RRB- said in a letter Wednesday to Salazar . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
