BP 's oil spillcam : A horror movie about the gulf that 's deeply compelling For all the gunk on television , it 's hard to think of a more depressing show these days than the `` spillcam , '' the live , continuous underwater footage of the broken BP pipe that has been gushing away deep , deep down in the Gulf of Mexico for more than a month now . 
Spillcam combines the dread of horror films with the monotony of Andy Warhol 's eight-hour silent movie of the Empire State Building . 
There is no sound and nothing happens , except the inexorable , unending flow . 
You watch a little , and then a little more , and then you ca n't stop watching as a steady plume of dark brown oil belches upward from the floodlit , rocky ocean floor . 
Depending on the depths of despair that spillcam can take you to , you might find yourself thinking of spillcam even when you 're not watching it . 
During Sunday night 's `` Lost '' finale , when a Target commercial featuring the show 's evil `` smoke monster '' made you think of the underwater oil plume . 
-LRB- The resemblance is uncanny . -RRB- 
You can be in bed and wake up in the middle of the night and think to yourself : It 's still coming out . 
Then you think : What if it never stops ? 
The Weather Channel shows spillcam in the morning . 
CNN flips to it all the time . 
And you can watch it online at work all day , in a browser window you ca n't help but return to . 
The House Select Committee on Energy Independence and Global Warming , chaired by Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
, firmly requested last week that BP make public its live , continuous monitor footage of the spill . 
BP may own the camera , the committee said , but everyone needs to see the scope of the problem -- and see it at the source . 
The company agreed late last week and spillcam went live . 
The angle occasionally changes but the focus is always the leak . 
Every few seconds there 's a larger undulation within the pulsing rhythm of the gush . 
According to CNN , BP officials said Tuesday evening they would keep the spillcam feed running during the `` top kill , '' an attempt to inject tons and tons of mud into the pipe to plug up the leak . 
After a series of tests , the top kill plan might be put into action as soon as Wednesday morning . 
The top kill would be a lot of plot and drama for spillcam , and hopefully a season finale . 
Otherwise , spillcam almost never changes : Beneath the digital identification numbers imposed on the screen -LRB- with coordinates , the day 's date , and a clock ticking away -RRB- , it is always gray rock , yellow pipes , nasty plume . 
There are , of course , other ways to show this disaster , such as all those unsettling aerial pictures taken of oil slicks on the gulf 's surface . 
And on Tuesday 's `` Good Morning America , '' the show segued from spillcam to a boat off the Gulf Coast , from which the show 's dashing weather anchor , Sam Champion , donned scuba gear and dived beneath the gulf 's surface , accompanied by a camera and Jacques Cousteau 's even more dashing grandson , Philippe . 
There , beneath the blue surface , the two men were enveloped in a sick fog of brown globules . 
They came up looking like they had rolled around in the bowels of a Jiffy Lube . 
A crew hosed them off . 
And spillcam continues and continues : It has a way of highlighting one 's ignorance about geology , marine biology , energy exploration and ecology . 
It makes us wish we 'd been better earth-science students . 
Alas , everything I know about spillcam 's world I learned from `` The Abyss , '' James Cameron 's 1989 sci-fi film about deep-sea drillers who encounter underwater aliens . 
It 's on cable all the time -- Ed Harris and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio , and that black lady in the cowboy hat , and that scruffy tech guy with the pet rat . 
With their submarine robots and plucky know-how ? 
Spillcam aches for such heroes . 
Tuesday evening , the mud begins to swirl , and spillcam moves its position , and devoted viewers sit and stare , with a remote sense of hope for a happy ending . '' 
