Michael Jackson doctor Conrad Murray ` hid drug dose ' Dr Murray , shown here in February , joined Jackson 's entourage to get him fit for London concerts Michael Jackson 's doctor tried to hide the fact that he had given the singer a powerful anesthetic shortly before he died , a prosecutor has said . 
At a preliminary hearing , the prosecutor said Dr Conrad Murray phoned paramedics only after Jackson had died . 
Prosecutors say Dr Murray 's negligence in treating the singer for insomnia led to his death aged 50 in June 2009 . 
Dr Murray has pleaded not guilty to involuntary manslaughter , arguing he did not cause the singer 's death . 
At the preliminary hearing , the judge is to decide whether prosecutors have enough evidence to try Dr Murray , a cardiologist . 
It is expected to last several days . 
Dr Murray faces up to four years in prison if convicted . 
In the courtroom in Los Angeles on Tuesday , prosecutor David Walgren said that when Dr Murray realized the singer had died , he ordered a security guard to collect medical paraphernalia and other items before having him call the authorities . 
The BBC 's Rajesh Mirchandani on the day 's proceedings - Court Sketches courtesy Mona Edwards Mr Walgren said Dr Murray had given Jackson a dose of propofol , a powerful surgical anesthetic typically administered in a clinical setting , on the morning of 25 June 2009 , after giving him various sedatives during the previous night . 
He said that Dr Murray did not properly perform CPR , and said that when paramedics did arrive , Dr Murray did not mention that he had given Jackson the drug . 
`` The court will learn that in the opinion of these medical experts , there were a number of actions displayed by Dr Murray that showed an extreme deviation from standard medical care , '' Mr Walgren said , the Los Angeles Times reported . 
Mr Walgren said he expected Dr Murray 's lawyers to claim that the pop legend had injected himself with the overdose . 
Also on Tuesday , Jackson 's former personal assistant Michael Williams testified that as the singer 's body lay in bed , Jackson manager Frank Dileo told his children : `` Daddy had a heart attack and died . '' 
Mr Williams testified that Dr Murray then said : `` Do n't say that , we do n't know . '' 
Mr Williams also said Dr Murray had asked him to clear `` cream '' from the singer 's bedroom `` that he would n't want the world to know about '' . 
Mr Williams said he did not heed the request . 
Choreographer Kenny Ortega told the court that the singer had appeared unwell and out of shape in the days leading up to his death , and said he went home early from rehearsals . 
Jackson had been rehearsing for a series of highly anticipated concerts in London . 
The Los Angeles County coroner 's office ruled the singer had died from an overdose of the surgical anesthetic propofol , found in his body along with a cocktail of other sedatives . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
