Hedge funds seemed unstoppable during the boom years , lavishing riches upon their investors and managers alike . 
Now that those riches are quickly disappearing , some analysts are blaming them for propagating the high-risk culture that led to the crisis on Wall Street . 
We try to shed some light on the hedge fund industry . 
Q : What are hedge funds and how do they operate ? 
A : They are private investment funds open to a limited number of people or institutions that can afford to invest a minimum amount of money . 
Think of them as mutual funds for the wealthy . 
But unlike mutual funds , they do n't have to register with the Securities and Exchange Commission because they are not sold to the public . 
That means they can sell short , leverage , and undertake all sorts of complicated trading strategies . 
They are also run by managers who typically get paid higher fees and get a bigger take of profits than other types of fund managers . 
`` What they really should be called are unregistered funds for wealthy people , '' said John Rekenthaler , vice president of research for Morningstar . 
They were named hedge funds because they were supposed do just that : hedge their investments through a variety of methods such as taking both long and short positions . 
But in recent years , many hedge funds have been doing less hedging and actually adopting riskier practices to maximize rewards . 
Specifically , some have been leveraging themselves excessively -- investing with borrowed money . 
`` As we know , leverage increases returns but it does the same thing in reverse , maybe faster , '' said Duncan Balsbaugh , a senior market analyst for Thomson Reuters , IFR Markets . 
Q : Why do hedge funds matter so much ? 
A : Even though the hedge fund industry is n't as massive as the mutual fund industry , it still packs a big punch because each hedge fund operates with such a large sum of money . 
According to Chicago-based Hedge Fund Research , capital in global hedge funds was $ 1.72 trillion at the end of September -LRB- that was down from $ 1.93 trillion at the end of June -RRB- . 
So when one hedge fund pulls money out of the market , it tends to be a big chunk . 
Their moves also tend to be made with dramatic flair . 
`` They 're active traders compared to mutual funds , '' Rekenthaler said . 
`` They can have a larger influence regardless of their size because they trade more aggressively . '' 
Q : What is their role in the market turmoil going on now ? 
A : Hedge funds made risky bets and like many other investors , they are paying for it . 
Spooked investors are responding by pulling out their money . 
In the third quarter of 2008 , they withdrew $ 31 billion , according to HFR . 
The funds have to find cash to meet these so-called redemption requests . 
They do so by selling their assets . 
Right now , they are doing just that , which is contributing to the stock market volatility . 
`` They 're moving from an aggressive stance to a conservative stance , selling securities and knocking down the price of those securities , '' Rekenthaler said . 
Q : How much are they to blame for the global financial crisis ? 
A : It 's hard to say because they operate under a veil of secrecy . 
`` The problem is nobody knows for sure how much money they hold and where their money is invested and how significantly they 're leveraged , '' said Jeff Fischer , lead adviser for Motley Fool . 
But they are not the only ones selling stocks . 
Many panicked investors , big and small , are following suit . 
Many analysts also said it would be unfair to single out hedge funds for doing risky things such as overleveraging themselves . 
Those now-defunct investment banks and other financial institutions are guilty as well . 
That said , they could probably use more oversight , said John Jacquemin , chief executive of Mooring Financial Corp. , which has a hedge fund . 
`` It 's the Wild West out there , '' he said . '' 
