The Slavic Village neighborhood in Cleveland thrived during the mortgage boom and is now feeling the mortgage bust . 
In the year 's first half , 316 properties went through foreclosure . 
-LRB- By Tony Dejak -- Associated Press -RRB- National City , a Cleveland institution , has lost more than 80 percent of its market value this year . 
PNC agreed to buy the bank for $ 2.23 a share . 
-LRB- By Ron Schwane -- Associated Press -RRB- CLEVELAND -- This city 's biggest bank and a bedrock institution decided it faced a choice a decade ago : Find a way to grow or risk takeover . 
National City chose growth , a path that ended yesterday when it agreed to sell itself to Pittsburgh 's PNC . 
When it abandoned the conservative philosophy that had sustained it through the Civil War and the Great Depression and expanded by wading into the subprime mortgage market , National City was a solid company , its shares selling in the $ 30 range . 
Yesterday , PNC Financial Services Group agreed to buy the bank for $ 5.2 billion in PNC stock , paying $ 2.23 per National City share , and $ 384 million in cash . 
Cleveland is still home to another large regional lender , KeyCorp , but the loss of one such venerable institution was a blow to the city and is emblematic of the way the financial crisis is rippling through communities . 
Cleveland 's prospects had soared with property values during the mortgage boom earlier this decade , then collapsed in the subprime meltdown . 
Last year alone , 8,000 homes went into foreclosure in the city , whose population has shrunk below 450,000 . 
With tax collections shriveling and a recession looming , the city is in its worst shape in years . 
Mayor Frank G. Jackson -LRB- D -RRB- likened the impending departure of National City , with more than 7,000 employees in the region , to the loss of a steel mill or other major employer , as well as a stalwart corporate citizen that has been engaged in almost every philanthropic endeavor in the city . 
`` It 's not good news for Cleveland , '' he said yesterday . 
`` However , it is not news that we did not think may happen . '' 
When National City was trying to figure out how to expand in the mid-1990s , Cleveland was dormant , its population sliding and its vital industries contracting . 
Banks were reluctant lenders , and in many neighborhoods , it was nearly impossible to get a mortgage . 
At the time , the mortgage business accounted for only 5 percent of the bank 's profit . 
All of that changed when National City decided to turbocharge its earnings by going deeper into the riskier parts of the mortgage business . 
The bank began working more closely with mortgage brokers to bring in more business from faster-growing parts of the country . 
In 1999 , it bought the California-based subprime lender First Franklin . 
By 2003 , the bank was the nation 's sixth-largest mortgage lender , and home loans accounted for about half of its $ 2.1 billion in profit . 
In Cleveland 's old neighborhoods , property values began to soar . 
Wood-frame houses built nearly a century ago were fetching $ 70,000 , $ 80,000 and even $ 90,000 -- multiples of their previous peaks . 
Tax revenue accelerated , punctuating Cleveland 's claim as a comeback city . 
National City got in on what turned out to be a national boom , as it rapidly expanded its mortgage business into the fast-growing Sun Belt and ventured deeply into the subprime lending market . 
For a time , the strategy was wildly profitable , as the bank reported profit of more than $ 13 billion from 2000 to 2006 . 
And then the boom fizzled , leaving both the bank and its home town faltering . 
Overall , nearly 10 percent of the city 's properties have gone into foreclosure . 
National City has lost more than 80 percent of its market value this year . 
On Tuesday , chief executive Peter E. Raskind said 4,000 positions would be eliminated from its overall workforce of 29,000 over the next three years . 
The bank slashed 3,400 jobs a year earlier . 
The cuts were announced as the bank posted a third-quarter loss of $ 729 million -- its fifth consecutive quarterly decline -- and executives set aside precious capital to cushion it against expected losses from its bulging portfolio of toxic loans . 
