BENGHAZI , Libya | Fri Jun 17 , 2011 10:58 am EDT BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Abdullah once called himself a rebel . 
But after spending months in a rebel prison as a suspected government loyalist , the doctor says he has lost faith in the revolution against Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
Speaking inside a grimy cell in the rebel stronghold of Benghazi , the 28-year-old physician said he was captured by advancing rebel forces in the Mediterranean port of Ras Lanuf in March for working at a state-run hospital . 
`` When I was working in the hospital , I was a strong supporter of the revolution . 
But now my beliefs have changed , '' he said as he reclined on an old rug inside his dimly lit cell . 
`` I still believe Gaddafi should leave . 
But I do n't support the revolution any more . 
We are in a state of civil war . 
It 's difficult to solve problems by force . 
Every drop of blood will make it worse . '' 
The military detention facility , its facade peppered with bullet holes , was set up by the rebels early in the conflict to house government troops captured during fighting around Libya . 
Most of the 75 detainees are soldiers and officers but a handful of people , like Abdullah , were civilians . 
Snatched as Gaddafi loyalists in the confusion of the early days of the conflict , they are now stuck in limbo , unable to prove their loyalties and go back to their families . 
Some , like Abdullah , are bitter and disillusioned . 
`` No one has been charged with anything here . 
We have been told that we are here for security reasons , as POWs , '' Abdullah , who asked not to use his surname , said in fluent English . 
`` Once I talked to my family . 
Once , a month ago . 
I spoke to my brother . 
We were instructed not to give any information about how we are being treated . 
I told them I am okay , in a safe place , that 's it , '' he added . 
For their captors , they are the inevitable victims of a messy and protracted war . 
Prison authorities have promised to release everyone -- both civilians and soldiers -- once the war is over and there is a proper mechanism for their departure . 
`` They all come from their tribes . 
When Gaddafi dies or flees , we will have a big tribal meeting and people will come here from their tribes and they will take their people away , '' said Captain Tariq Muftah , 40 , a senior prison warden . 
Before becoming a prison , the facility housed administrative offices under Gaddafi 's rule , rebels said . 
Broken furniture was scattered around its crumbling rooms and corridors when Reuters was allowed to visit it this week . 
Small cells housing up to five men lined the main corridor . 
Detainees sat in their cells on old striped rugs and blankets . 
Surrounded by heaps of clothes and rubbish , they stared blankly at passing visitors through iron bars . 
Some smoked and played cards . 
Flies buzzed around in the thick , stale air . 
Pictures of helicopter gunships were scribbled on the walls . 
People 's faces were gaunt . 
Some refused to speak altogether . 
Gritting his teeth and unable to hold back his tears , one man , his eyes swollen and cheeks drawn , whispered that he used to be a fighter pilot . 
Then he turned away to face the wall . 
Prison wardens accompanying Reuters confirmed people 's stories . 
Reuters was not allowed to take video or still images . 
Sitting on a grubby mattress in the corridor , Abdusalam Osman , 23 , said he was working in a car parts workshop near Ajdabiyah when he was seized by Gaddafi soldiers in March . 
He said he was subsequently released and returned to the rebel-held east , only to be detained this time by rebel forces suspicious of his experience while in government detention . 
`` I am not a soldier . 
I work in a workshop fixing cars . 
So now we are here , '' he said , pointing at three other men sitting nearby who he said were also civilians from his home town . 
`` Revolutionaries caught me . 
They said : We are not sure you are on our side , you are coming from Gaddafi 's side , so you are going to prison . 
I believe in the revolution . 
Every day they tell me : Tomorrow you will be released , '' he added with a shrug . 
Human Rights Watch , whose researchers have visited the facility , said prisoners were generally being treated well . 
`` There have been some problems at the point of capture . 
A few detainees told us they were mistreated or shot after they were caught on the frontlines ... , '' Sidney Kwiram of Human Rights Watch told Reuters . 
`` It is critical that the opposition authorities demonstrate unambiguous leadership on how to treat captured Gaddafi forces and that they continue to underline their message about humane treatment , including to their fighters on the frontlines . '' 
Speaking to Reuters as their captors looked on , most Gaddafi soldiers said they now supported the revolution . 
`` I was told in -LRB- my hometown of -RRB- Sirt as a soldier that Benghazi was full of al Qaeda . 
So I went to fight them , '' said Nasrdin Mohammed , an army sergeant detained on March 15 . 
`` Then I realized I was on the wrong side . 
Now I just want freedom . '' 
Then he added quietly : `` I was promised to be released once Gaddafi 's government collapses but I do n't believe that . 
I do n't believe that . 
I am puzzled . '' 
-LRB- Editing by Sami Aboudi and Peter Graff -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
