In 1977 an iconic fantasy film was released . 
The cycle is now complete , but the legend is going out with a whimper Directed by George Lucas . 
Starring Ewan McGregor , Hayden Christensen The phenomenon that is Star Wars began in 1977 with a cheerful action film derived from Flash Gordon , The Wizard of Oz , Triumph of the Will and Japanese samurai movies . 
It reflected the mood of a nation emerging from the debacle of the Vietnam War and the betrayal of the Watergate scandal . 
Sub-titled ' A New Hope ' the movie centred on a trio of young people with the counsel of an elder restoring democracy to their shattered galaxy . 
Two sequels followed , neither directed by its producer and only begetter , George Lucas , each of which was supposedly deeper and darker , though many thought they merely added sententiousness and whimsy . 
At that midway point a new American President , Ronald Reagan , took up the trilogy as a national propaganda weapon , drawing on Star Wars mythology to characterise the Soviet Union as ` the evil empire ' and the film 's title was borrowed for his proposed space missile-defence system . 
Now , more than three decades since Lucas conceived it , his project has been completed by the third of three prequels , Star Wars Episode III : Revenge of the Sith , which ends by disappearing up the black hole of what is now designated Star Wars Episode IV . 
It emerges in the wake of 11 September and the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq , and more or less reflects that state of permanent war imagined by George Orwell , waged by a single authoritarian superpower . 
This wily government uses the threat of outside terror to maintain its power and manipulating democratic processes . 
` In the Jedi Council we 're making finding General Grievous our first priority , ' proclaims a sonorous Samuel L Jackson , and we are invited to hear an echo of Colin Powell declaring war on Osama Bin Laden . 
Over this period , Lucas has created his own empire with his Industrial Light and Magic company , and his two old friends from the carefree days of the 1970s , Francis Coppola and Steven Spielberg , have also created their own studios -LRB- though the former subsequently lost his -RRB- . 
Lucas has been accused of selling out , of contributing to the dumbing down of audiences world-wide . 
He 's also been claimed as one of the saviors of Hollywood and popular cinema at a time when the theatrical movie seemed on its way to art-house extinction . 
The charges and claims are both true . 
This having been said , Star Wars : Revenge of the Sith is n't much of a movie . 
The anagramatically inviting name of its villains readily suggests another sub-title , ` This Shit Hits ' . 
Its whole purpose is to explain how the Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker -LRB- Hayden Christensen -RRB- deserted the forces of light to join ` the dark side of the force ' and eventually turns into the masked , bionic warrior of what we now call Episodes IV , V and VI . 
It 's not much of a struggle . 
He is easily conned by the wicked Chancellor Palpatine into becoming a double agent . 
He gets miffed when he 's refused promotion to Jedi Master -LRB- rejection and humiliation are frequent factors in driving political leaders to the bad -RRB- ; and he finally makes a Faustian bargain to save the life of a loved one . 
There was an element of suspense in the earlier Star Wars films . 
We wondered where Darth Vader came from and what was his relationship to young Luke Skywalker . 
That has long since gone , being wholly dispelled by the prequels . 
Special effects have greatly advanced since 1978 , but technology needs imagination after it has made an initial impression . 
Imagination is not the strong suit of Revenge of the Sith . 
This new century has brought us the Lord of the Rings trilogy , which has a dramatic drive and an emotional sweep that some feel border on the spiritual . 
Peter Jackson 's films overshadow Lucas 's new picture and its ersatz mythology . 
Star Wars III aims to raise serious moral issues but never transcends the banality of evil . 
Its dialogue , combining the pretentious and the flat-footed , expresses the banality of drivel . 
Indifferently directed , the performers can do little with the material . 
The exception is Ian McDiarmid as the evil Palpatine who shows Anakin how to scowl from under his cowl and become one of the boys in the hood . 
All this compares rather poorly with Lucas 's other series , the Indiana Jones trilogy , featuring a key figure of the earlier Star Wars pictures , Harrison Ford . 
In what is also a nostalgic entertainment modelled on Saturday morning serials , Jones confronts - at least in two of his outings - genuine forces of evil , Hitler and the Nazis . 
In Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade , Indie , like Anakin Skywalker , has to make a life-and-death decision . 
In order to save his father 's life , he must help the evil powers obtain the Holy Grail , but unlike Anakin he knows how to play a canny game . 
Although Lucas appointed others to make a TV series about the young Indiana Jones , he restricted himself in the cinema to a short prequel segment about the teenage Indie , explaining his troubled relations with his father and how he came to be the way he was . 
It is a witty , sparkling 15-minute sequence tucked into the opening of The Last Crusade , not three solemn movies made over a period of five years . 
