'' Follow The Post On : BP , 8 other companies sued by Justice Dept. over gulf oil spill The Justice Department sued BP and eight other companies Wednesday over the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster , the federal government 's first legal filing in its broad investigation of the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
The lawsuit accuses BP and other firms of violating federal regulations and failing to prevent the April 20 explosion and fire , which destroyed the Deepwater Horizon offshore drilling rig . 
It seeks civil penalties under the Clean Water Act and a second federal statute for cleanup costs and widespread damage to the environment . 
Although the Justice Department did not spell out an amount , legal experts said the case could expose the companies to tens of billions of dollars in fines , under civil environmental laws . 
Justice officials emphasized that the filing - on the day of a deadline for civil filings - is a first step and that aggressive civil and criminal probes into the disaster are continuing . 
`` Even though the spill has been contained , even though it is no longer the focus of round-the-clock news coverage and the subject of front-page headlines , '' said Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. at a news conference Wednesday , `` the department 's focus on investigating this disaster , and preventing future devastation , has not wavered . '' 
Scott Dean , a spokesman for London-based BP , said the government 's filing in federal court in New Orleans was expected and `` does not in any manner constitute any finding of liability or any judicial finding that the allegations have merit . '' 
He said the company - whose stock price dropped sharply during Holder 's announcement , then partially recovered by day 's end - is cooperating with all government inquiries . 
Other companies involved in the spill and named in the lawsuit affixed much of the blame on BP . 
Brian Kennedy , a spokesman for Transocean , which leased the Deepwater Horizon rig to BP , said : `` Responsibility for oil and natural gas discharged from a well lies solely with the well 's owner and operator ... Transocean is indemnified in this matter . '' 
John Christiansen , a spokesman for Anadarko Petroleum Corp. , a minority owner of the well , said the company was `` not involved in the operations or decisions that occurred on the drilling rig . '' 
MOEX Offshore , another minority owner , said in a statement that it had `` no authority or responsibility to direct activities on the Deepwater Horizon . '' 
The Justice Department civil probe is on a parallel track with a criminal investigation that Holder said is `` very serious . '' 
Law enforcement officials and other sources have said the criminal investigation is focusing on BP , Transocean and engineering giant Halliburton , which was in charge of cementing the well . 
Sources said the FBI and other investigators are examining whether , in addition to violating environmental laws , company officials made false statements to regulators , obstructed justice or falsified test results for devices such as the rig 's failed blowout preventer . 
Another line of inquiry , sources said , is whether the companies ' cozy relationship with federal regulators contributed to the disaster . 
Halliburton , which has declined to comment on the investigation , was not named in the civil lawsuit . 
The suit is expected to become part of broad civil litigation pending in U.S. District Court in New Orleans . 
Nearly 400 lawsuits against BP and other companies - filed on behalf of fishermen , environmental groups and others in the Gulf of Mexico region - have been consolidated before the same judge . 
Justice Department officials said their participation will give them access to documents and other materials handed over in pretrial discovery , which will aid the government 's broader civil and criminal probes . 
Officials said the timing of their filing was related to Wednesday 's deadline set by the judge . 
The 27-page document says the companies failed to use the safest drilling technology and to maintain equipment `` necessary to ensure the safety and protection of personnel , equipment , natural resources , and the environment . '' 
It offers little evidence for those assertions , but officials said additional grounds - and defendants - could be named later . 
Roger Marzulla , an environmental lawyer who headed the Justice Department 's environment division in the Reagan administration , said it appeared that `` the government got rushed by the court 's deadline . 
They filed as generic a complaint as possible and figured ` we 'll sort it all out later . ' '' 
Experts said the legal standard to prove liability under the Clean Water Act and the Oil Pollution Act - the other law under which the government sued - is low . 
`` You just have to show that an event occurred and that a particular entity or person is responsible , '' said William Carter , a former federal environmental prosecutor . 
`` Anything short of an act of God - a lightning bolt hitting something - and that person is going to be responsible for the cleanup . '' 
Under the Clean Water Act , if the government can prove that BP or other companies engaged in `` gross negligence , '' each firm could be fined up to $ 4,300 per barrel of oil spilled . 
Nearly 5 million barrels were spilled into the gulf , according to federal estimates . 
`` Tens of billions of dollars is certainly a legitimate prospect here , '' Marzulla said . 
