Former Assistant Treasury Secretary for Financial Institutions -LRB- May 2009 to January 2011 -RRB- When Barr first joined the Treasury during the Clinton administration , he was a neophyte . 
Out of law school for only three years , Barr was named to the plum post of special assistant to Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin . 
The University of Michigan law professor worked as a senior fellow at the liberal Washington think-tank the Brookings Institution . 
At Brookings , he authored papers outlining how the government should help banks aid the poor , and called for government intervention in the mortgage market months before Bear Stearns collapsed in March 2008 . 
After financial regulatory reform was enacted in July 2010 , Barr was a leading contender , along with Elizabeth Warren , to head the independent consumer protection board it created . 
Warren was named as an adviser to create the board , and Barr announced in Novemebr 2010 that he would return to his academic post at Michigan . 
More on : Michael S. Barr Career History : Professor at the University of Michigan Law School -LRB- 2001 to 2008 -RRB- ; Deputy Assistant Secretary at the Treasury -LRB- 1997 to 2001 -RRB- ; Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury -LRB- 1995 to 1997 -RRB- Alma Mater : Yale University , B.A. -LRB- history -RRB- , 1987 ; Oxford University , M. Phil , 1989 ; Yale Law School , J.D. , 1992 A native of the Beltway enclosing the nation 's capital , Barr grew up with a mom who taught high school English and a dad who worked in labor law . 
For college he went to Yale University to study history , where he developed an interest in South African affairs . 
Barr even joined the Coalition Against Apartheid , a group that protested Yale 's investments in companies that did business in South Africa while the forced segregation continued in the African nation . 
Barr nearly let his personal feelings about apartheid get in the way of his academic accomplishments . 
In 1986 , he almost chose not to apply for a Rhodes Scholarship in protest of the award 's creator , early-19th-century British financier Cecil J. Rhodes , a controversial figure who gained success and wealth by mining diamonds in South Africa . 
But he reasoned that the award committee ensured that women and minorities have an equal opportunity to receive the scholarship , so he opted to apply and won the scholarship . 
In 1989 , Barr earned a master 's at Magdalen College at Oxford University . 
Shortly afterwards , Barr returned to Yale to earn a law degree in 1992 . 
In 1995 , Barr first joined the Treasury Department as special assistant to the secretary . 
He worked under Clinton Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin for two years , until he got a promotion in 1997 to deputy assistant secretary for community development policy . 
From 1999 to 2001 , while serving as a deputy assistant at the Treasury , Barr also worked as a special adviser to President Clinton . 
When Clinton 's presidency ended in 2001 , Barr moved to Ann Arbor to teach at the University of Michigan law school , specializing in financial institutions , international finance and transnational law . 
Barr also worked as a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution , a liberal think-tank from which Obama has culled many administration aides . 
In his return trip to Treasury , Barr brings with him a vast knowledge of credit-card systems and has often argued for more government banking initiatives that serve the poor . 
Long before the financial crisis exploded , Barr called in January 2008 for government intervention in stopping home foreclosures . 
Prior to the government bailout of Bear Stearns and the demise of Lehman Brothers , Barr testified before the Senate Banking Committee for government intervention in the mortgage market . 
In a hearing discussing the likelihood of a rash of foreclosures , Barr was asked whether he believed the government should create programs to save people 's homes . 
`` I do n't think we can afford to wait , '' said Barr , who was working as a Brookings senior fellow and a University of Michigan professor at the time . 
`` I think that the easy trap , in financial crisis , is to wait too long and do too little and watch the bad news dribble out , and not be on top of it . '' 
`` I think , if you look at the evidence of intervention in financial crises in the past , in serious financial crises , they are far more -- those interventions are far more successful if they 're done rapidly and at scale , rather than dribbled out and slowly . '' 
As bad bets on subprime mortgages crippled financial institution toward the end of 2008 , Barr continued to testify before Congress . 
In the same congressional hearing where Bush Treasury official Neel Kashkari was asked by Rep. Elijah E. Cummings -LRB- D-Md . -RRB- 
if banks thought he was a `` chump '' for the way the Treasury had handled the bailout funds , Barr testified on ways those funds could be used to stave off foreclosures . 
Barr pointed out that the bailout legislation authorized the Treasury to `` purchase troubled assets , including home mortgage loans . '' 
Barr called for the Treasury to help stem home foreclosures by guaranteeing home loans to the `` servicers '' who controlled the subprime loans for mortgage-backed securities ' investors . 
In order to avoid liability and extra taxes , the servicers often foreclosed on those unable to pay their mortgages instead of restructuring the loans . 
Barr also called for the Treasury to allow the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. to guarantee the loans and bolster the Federal Housing Administration , which needed more resources to aid in the foreclosure crisis . 
From 1995 to 1997 , Barr served as Clinton Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin 's special assistant . 
While there , Obama National Economic Adviser Lawrence H. Summers worked as Rubin 's deputy secretary . 
In 1999 , while Barr worked as deputy assistant secretary for Community Development Policy at Treasury , he tackled the dual role of executive director of the District of Columbia task force at the Office of Managament and Budget . 
Obama 's new OMB director , Jack Lew , served as OMB director from 1999 to 2001 . 
When Barr worked for Clinton 's State Department , he advised Director of the Policy Planning Staff James W. Steinberg . 
Steinberg joined the Obama administration as deputy secretary of state . 
Barr joined Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner 's team in May 2009 , and works closely with Deputy Secretary Neal S. Wolin , Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy Alan B. Krueger and Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy Helen Elizabeth Garrett . 
After attending law school , Barr clerked for U.S. Supreme Court Justice David H. Souter . 
`` Rep. Dennis J. Kucinich Holds a Hearing on Foreclosure Prevention - Committee Hearing , '' Political Transcripts by CQ Transcriptions , Nov. 14 , 2008 `` Sen. Christopher J. Dodd Holds a Hearing on Foreclosures and Neighborhood Preservation - Committee Hearing , '' Political Transcripts by CQ Transcriptions , Jan 31 , 2008 
