Michael Jackson did not cause own death , says doctor Dr Christopher Rogers : `` It 's reasonable to believe that the doctor had an imperfect control over the dose '' Michael Jackson could not have given himself the powerful anesthetic that caused his death , the medic who carried out the singer 's autopsy has testified . 
Dr Christopher Rogers said it was more likely Jackson 's personal physician Conrad Murray mistakenly gave him too much of the drug propofol to try to help him sleep . 
He added Dr Murray had no precision dosing device in Jackson 's bedroom . 
Dr Murray has pleaded not guilty to involuntary manslaughter . 
His lawyers claim Jackson gave himself the fatal dose while Dr Murray was out of the room . 
The doctor told police , in an interview heard in court last week , that he was away from Jackson 's bed for only two minutes on 25 June 2009 to go to the bathroom , and returned to find the singer was not breathing . 
However Dr Rogers testified that Jackson - who was already heavily sedated - would not have been able to inject a lethal dose of propofol before Murray returned . 
`` The circumstances , from my point of view , do not support self-administration of propofol , '' the chief of forensic medicine at the Los Angeles County Coroner 's Office said . 
Dr Murray has admitted to giving Jackson 25ml of the drug to help him sleep , and would have had to give regular extra doses to keep the singer unconscious . 
Dr Murray has pleaded not guilty to involuntary manslaughter Dr Rogers said evidence found in Jackson 's bedroom included an empty 100ml bottle of propofol . 
But he noted that as Dr Murray had no accurate equipment to check the doses being administered , `` essentially , the doctor would be estimating how much propofol he was giving '' . 
`` I think it would be easy under those circumstances for the doctor to estimate wrong and give too much propofol , '' Dr Rogers said . 
He also noted the lack of sophisticated medical equipment in Jackson 's bedroom where the drugs were administered , such as resuscitation equipment . 
Dr Rogers said the cause of death was `` acute propofol intoxication '' , ruling the death a homicide . 
The trial in Los Angeles Superior Court is expected to last five weeks , until the end of October . 
If Dr Murray is convicted , he faces up to four years in jail . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
