As unrest sweeps through the Middle East like wildfire , it 's worth remembering this crisis will cost all of us - especially at the gas station . 
And maybe -- just maybe -- this time , the chaos in that part of the world will finally be enough to break America 's addiction to foreign oil . 
Although Egypt is not a major oil producer , it plays a key role in the transport of oil and gas headed to the U.S. , Europe and Asia through the Suez Canal . 
Without it , shippers would have to send crude oil and gas around the Horn of Africa . 
That adds on more than two weeks of delivery time to global markets . 
With the ongoing violence and protests in Egypt , some shippers are worried about disruptions to the Suez Canal or nearby pipelines . 
Nearly 2.5 million barrels of oil go through the canal every day -- that 's about equal to Iraq 's output . 
All this comes as global oil supplies are tightening -- mostly due to China 's increasing demand . 
And the markets are reacting . 
Crude is trading at more than $ 103 a barrel -- that 's a 28-month high . 
Even before the Mideast erupted , some experts were predicting gas at $ 5 a gallon by 2012 . 
And it 's not just about the money . 
So much of the politics of the region has always been dictated by our need for oil . 
It would be nice to do what 's in our best national interest for a change ... instead of being beholden to Mideast dictators for their oil . 
Here s my question to you : Should the chaos in the Middle East be enough to break America 's addiction to foreign oil ? 
Interested to know which ones made it on air ? 
It should be , but it wo n't . 
We do not have an affordable , long-range , electric-powered alternative to replace our fossil fuel guzzling cars . 
Until that happens , we are hooked on oil . 
I 'll bet if BP and the other big oil companies held a majority interest in electric or battery production , we would have efficient , low-cost electric or hybrid vehicles next week . 
Not as long as the oil companies run this country . 
The only way America is going to escape the stranglehold of foreign oil is for oil to become so expensive Americans can no longer afford to buy it . 
Once that happens , then we will start to get serious about alternate fuels and other modes of transportation . 
Remember gas lines in the 70s ? 
If that did n't do it , nothing will . 
Americans are almost more loathe to give up their precious SUV gas-guzzlers than their guns . 
Mark in New Jersey writes : Of course not , Jack . 
The oil companies would never allow it , and they have more to say about it than us , the stupid voters . 
The House and the Senate are owned by the oil companies -- lock , stock , and barrel , no pun intended . 
Should it be enough ? 
Will it be enough ? 
It seems we 're happier to complain than make the difficult decisions to remove ourselves from foreign dependence . 
Natural gas , offshore drilling or solar panels , I do n't care ! 
Let 's do all of it and make America strong again ! 
In the land of two-Hummer families , I do n't think that 's very likely . 
Does a heroin addict stop buying heroin because his dealer is having a family dispute ? 
Foreign oil flows through our national veins like heroin in a junkie , so not only can we not stop , we will not be allowed to stop because they are addicted to our money the same way . 
Terry - Greensburg , IN `` Hoosier Hillbilly '' Should the chaos in the Middle East be enough to break America 's addiction to foreign oil ? 
Show `` US '' the closest re-hab center ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 2:59 pm | In the land of two-Hummer families I do n't think that 's very likely . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:00 pm | The only way to break the U.S. addiction to foreign oil is to put the entire country into a rehab facility . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:10 pm | The caos in the middle east will not affect our addiction to foreign oil because america runs on oil not dunkin donuts . 
The only affect caos has in the middle east is to raise the price of oil which in turn means more money for the oil companies in the u.s. and more billions for the derivatives gamblers on wall street . 
All main street can do is to sit back buckle up and pay more money . 
I thought the reason we are spending billions in iraq and afghanistan was to maintain stability in the middle east . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:12 pm | if the price hits five dollars that will break out back . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:16 pm | Green Energy pushed by President Obama is the right direction . 
Has n't the Middle East been in chaos since 1948 ? 
Nothing has changed our addiction to foreign oil or for that matter domestic oil . 
Until the greed is taken out of the equation or we run out of oil I see nothing changing . 
At $ 5.00 , or anything near that , Americans will be screaming for relief . 
Obama will continue to push for alternatives to fossil fuels . 
The giant oil companies , and their wholly-owned subsidiary , the Republican Party , will be echoing Sarah Palin 's famous `` Drill Baby , Drill '' chant . 
A compromise is likely and it will certainly diminish , if not end , our addiction to foreign oil . 
Of course not , Jack . 
The oil companies would never allow it , and they have more to say about it than we , the stupid voters . 
The House , and the Senate are owned by the oil companies , lock , stock , and barrel , no pun intended . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:29 pm | Do n't be silly Jack . 
In the globalized economy what 's good for a multinational corporation is often times at odds with some if not all nation-states . 
High oil prices benefit Big Oil and Big Oil owns our government , largely dictates our foreign policy , and suppress ' any competitor energy by either buying up the technology and shelving it or discrediting the technology with massive disinformation campaigns . 
Rest assured that the only thing that will break our addiction to Mid-East oil is the Mid-East running out of oil . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:30 pm | Cliff Glass - East Rockaway , NY Maybe you 've forgotten the Supreme Courts Soylent Green decision . 
When the Republican majority on the High Court decreed that '' Corporations -LRB- read : oil comanies -RRB- is people '' -- decisions for the collective public good have been permanently discarded in favor of campaign contributions . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:32 pm | it 's time for us to start drillingwe have enough oil and other resourses February 3 , 2011 at 3:32 pm | Not likely Jack , Dems will never allow offshore drilling to make it happen . 
And they will use the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico as the reason why . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:36 pm | It should be but it wo n't , US oil intrests are too powerful . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:39 pm | No this wo n't do it . 
The only thing that will force us to change is when there is n't any available at all . 
This is like a confirmed smoker who used to pay 10 cents for a pack of cigaretts who still smokes even when the cost is over $ 10 a pack . 
We may be forced to use less but we 'll still use it . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:39 pm | That would be the best thing to happen to us , then maybe we could mind our own business instead of theirs . 
Although all know the big oil companies are in bed with the government and they certainly do not want us break up our love affair with oil ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:41 pm | If not NOW , when ? 
I say to Presiden Obama and all future Presidents it 's time to stop entertaining these Middle East TUGS at the White House . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:47 pm | As long as the US is filled with oil lobbyists and aligns itself with dictators , I see no end to foreign oil in sight . 
Expect any move to a greener form of energy to be labeled as `` job killing '' and immediately shot down . 
you know the drill . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:51 pm | Some time it takes tough love to break an addiction . 
That might be the case for the United States when it comes to Mideast oil . 
With this kind of unstable Middle East the price for all oil will go through the roof . 
The oil companies right now with the help from our gov ' t is our main source for fuel . 
But when the price for oil goes so high that people are unable to afford it . 
They will protest as loudly as the people in Egypt are protesting . 
This will force Congress to give alternative fuels an equal playing field and help to get off the ground . 
Before the oil companies with all their money and powerful lobbyist were always able to squash any outsiders from getting a foothold into the business . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:54 pm | Tom Mytoocents Fort Lauderdale , Florida As America struggles to overcome the theft of our economy and treasury from the Titans of TARP we will be forced to overcome the inevitable $ 4.00 a gallon gas of 2007 . . 
As our economy heals and inflation slowly overcomes money stolen from the Treasury , petroleum stockpiles will decrease driving the barrel\/gallon price higher . 
Once the price exceeds $ 4.00 a gallon US , it really does n't matter if it 's $ 4.00 or $ 10.00 a gallon . 
People ca n't afford it that signals the end of recovery . 
We saw this play out in a stronger 2007 economy . 
Chaos in the Middle East will likely become the `` Change You can Believe '' promised by Obama . 
The result will be an end of either the USA or our dependance on OPEC Oil . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:54 pm | Paul , New Port Richey , Florida America runs on oil , coal , natural gas and nuclear energy . 
It is the EPA and our own government that is breaking America 's energy back and not the Middle East . 
They are simply taking advantage of us with the opportunity handed them by our own people and no doubt rewarding same for their help . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:54 pm | Every president since Carter has talked a good talk about energy independence but we will only take action if there is enough pain to motivate us like $ 10\/gallon gasoline . 
Until then `` Americans for Prosperity '' will continue to funnel millions of oil and gas industry money -LRB- Thanks to Citizens United -RRB- into pro-oil and gas ads and the coal industry will spend more millions promoting `` clean '' coal . 
February 3 , 2011 at 3:55 pm | Its nowhere near enough to break our dependency . 
Our country is notorious for learning from mistakes only AFTER the fact . 
What a refreshing change of pace it would be if we could alter our behavior before another 1970s oil crisis occurred . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:01 pm | NO !! Nothing will break our addiction to `` any '' oil . 
We have been passing energy bills for some 35 years and when an oil crisis hits we buy fuel efficient cars , pass energy bills , grill oil company executives , threaten NYMEX traders , and even threaten to drop bombs on the oil producing nations . 
As soon as the price of crude drops back , it is once again back to business as usual until the next crisis , and the next , etc. , etc. , etc. . 
We American 's account for 3.5 % of the worlds population , but we consume 25 % of the worlds oil supply , and that means that we American 's consume 20,000,000 barrels of oil every day . 
The figures speak for themselves and we will choke to death on our own gas fumes before we demand consumption limits on our love for crude ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:02 pm | It should n't have to take chaos to spur change we desperately need . 
It 's in our best interest to move away from oil , it would help to stabilize our economy . 
So just as the fuel crunch in the 70 's helped spur the birth of small cars , a steep spike in fuel prices now should spur interest in electric and fuel cell vehicles . 
Like Plato said : ` Necessity is the mother of invention ' February 3 , 2011 at 4:05 pm | Nothing short of hitting rock bottom will break our addiction to foreign oil , and we 're still a long way from that . 
As long as the price of oil escalates there are escalating profits to be made . 
Foreign devils will pump it , fleets will ship it , middlemen and speculators will flip it and Washington will tax it . 
Rock bottom happens when profits dwindle , not when prices rise . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:08 pm | The sun coming up some 20 years ago should have been good enough reason for us to work toward reducing dependence on foreign oil . 
A crisis on the African continent wo n't change a thing except for possibly having to loose a few thousand more of Americas youth in order to de nationalize oil rich countries . 
We are like pigs at the troth when it comes to oil consumption and that 's just the way the oil companies and their elected lackeys want us . 
Besides all that , how often have you seen the `` powers that be '' who run this country do what 's in our best national interest for a change ? 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:10 pm | 4000 American lives sacrificed for our occupation of Iraq and yet not a single drop of oil that flows from the earthen taps of Iraq enters a single U.S. port ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:13 pm | Boone Pickens will send us plenty of oil from Canada sand oil at about $ 5.00 a gallon . 
Sarasota , Florida February 3 , 2011 at 4:14 pm | It should be , Jack , but you know the republicans will not allow it . 
They are in the pockets of big oil and will not support anything other than their outlandish profits . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:20 pm | Jack , I think that the high price of gas per gallon should be more than enough to break our addiction to oil . 
Gas prices are slated to go to $ 4 per gallon by late spring if not sooner . 
We should have started kicking our oil addiction 40 years ago during the OPEC Oil Enbargo in the 1970 's . 
We have another chance to do just that -- Take a page from Brazil !! Also , we can expedite the manufacture and sale of electric cars with fuel cells that regenerate power , eliminating the need to recharge our auto batteries from an electrical outlet . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:21 pm | Are you kiddin ' me Jack . 
Being retired from a major oil company I can assure you we all got together once a week to figure out new ways to screw the public . 
America 's so hooked on oil there 's not a politician in sight that could control the demand . 
That includes the guy in the Oval Office . 
This little `` dust-up '' in Egypt gives us just another opportunity to up the price at the pump . 
A drug addict does n't stop using just because the cartel has a few shakeups . 
The only way the situation in the Middle East could break our addiction to foreign oil is if it spreads to the point where it severely impedes our supply , which does n't seem likely right now . 
Barring a massive `` eureka '' moment from conservatives , the only way our oil addiction will ever be cured is when we 're forced to go `` cold turkey '' , either by far greater turmoil in the Middle East , or when we simply run out . 
Unfortunately , we will suffer severe withdrawal pains if we wait that long . 
It is absolutely vital that we break our addiction to foreign oil and maybe the unrest in the Middle East will push us in the right direction . 
Now , with an intelligent and educated President in the White House and , without two oil men in charge of our country , GW Bush and Cheney , we may have a chance to finally make some progress . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:27 pm | I certainly hope so . 
Our privilege should not be at the cost of freedom from the country 's it comes from . 
Kathleen Parker , South Carolina Chaos in the Middle East SHOULD be enough to make any rational person push our government to `` fast track '' our own alternative energy programs . 
However , I am certain that once again , Big Oil and their Hired guns in Congress will spend millions of dollars to convince the clueless that such an energy program would be too expensive . 
Wake up people , one way or another , expensive oil is coming and our way of life built on oil is going . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:30 pm | No , the chaos in the Middle East will not be the watershed event that ends the US 's dependency on oil . 
Most of the oil consumed in the United States comes from outside the Middle East , and the American public will not accept an immediate shift to alternative fuel sources . 
At some point , Americans should begin a gradual transition to alternative fuel sources , but it will be one the government will support . 
Private individuals and companies are too stubborn to change . 
- Strom In Charleston , South Carolina February 3 , 2011 at 4:30 pm | No. . 
But it damn sure better make our President step up and open up all drilling for oil & natural gas and get started on the 1st of many new nuclear power plants and oil refineries that are needed . 
Next , we need to see whatever O 's admin has done -LRB- if anything -RRB- on the new power grid design -- American citizens will not accept new taxes , cap-and-trade , or any such crap before they show us the new grid design and can explain -LRB- without passing legislation , first ! -RRB- 
how it is going to work . 
Then , maybe Obama 's Sputnik moment can come in the way of developing solar\/wind power generating devices so the average homeowner can put a few panels and spinners on his\/her home and use actually some green power . 
We will be using oil for the next 20 years even if the ` big green breakthrough ' happens tomorrow . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:32 pm | It should , Jack , but it probably wo n't . 
The only way to break our addiction to imported oil is to use less oil . 
We use oil because the cost of oil at the pump has been kept artificially low . 
One major hidden cost we will the face if there is a major disruption is the fact that in the short term we have no alternative to oil . 
If gas goes to $ 10 a gallon next month , we will be facing economic catastrophe . 
The only way to use less oil is to slap a $ 1 per gallon tax on the stuff immediately , and raise that tax $ 1 a year forever . 
But no politician has the guts to do that . 
And no , we can not produce enough domestic oil to `` drill our way out '' of the problem . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:45 pm | Does a heroin addict stop buying heroin because his dealer is having a family dispute ? 
Foreign oil flows through our national veins like heroin in a junkie , so not only can we not stop , we will not be allowed to stop because they are addicted to our money the same way . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:46 pm | Of course it wo n't because the U.S. is already addicted to Canadian oil coming from our tar sands . 
Americans should know that Canada is your single largest oil exporter . 
They should also know that the oil industry is making a wasteland in that part of my country . 
The whole world needs to take alternative energy sources much more seriously . 
Living off fossil fuels indefinitely is unsustainable . 
February 3 , 2011 at 4:48 pm | Get real Jack , its mostly accepted that the price of gas must reach the $ 7 or $ 8 per gallon range before that happens . 
All this happy talk about green energy , electric cars , etc is just that ! 
It will be a few decades before fossil fuels costs exceed that of alternative fuels . 
Infraustructure will have to be revamped , not just our `` addiction '' to fossil fuels . 
If we had concentrated on making fossil fuels cleaner , and used technology to improve the use of fossil fuels , and too , prevent the environmental problems of fossil fuels , we would not be so dependent on foreign oil as we are today . 
The U.S. dos n't need chaos in the middle east to be free a foreign oil all we have to do is us our own resourses , China and Vietnam are going to be drilling in the gulf of mexico for oil , but our goverment wo n't allow U.S. companies to drill there , costing our economy thousands of jobs and making us even more dependent on foreign oil , while all this stupidity is going on in Washington , the wise people in the last congress that could n't manage to pass a budget were able to come up with 10 billion dollars to give to Brasile to develope their offshore oil fields , in waters twice as deep as what we were drilling !! February 3 , 2011 at 5:01 pm | The Suez Canal does n't have much impact on US oil supplies . 
The canal is too small for really big efficient supertankers , and even smaller ones have to pay over $ 300,000 in tolls , and then there are all the pirates at the south end of the Red Sea . 
America needs to get serious about not funding terrorism and dictatorships . 
I think a $ 1 per gallon 9\/11 tax is a good place to start , and it 's something our leaders should have had the guts to do nine years ago . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:10 pm | Not a chance Jack ! 
Our Corporate entities would never allow that to happen . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:14 pm | I am hopeful that the chaos in the Middle East will not only break America 's addiction to oil , but that we as a nation will finally pursue , in earnest , alternative fuels and formulate a comprehensive energy policy for our country . 
I am also , hopeful that we are learning that this country no longer can afford to allow partisan politics , race , gender , religion affiliations and sexual orientations to divide us as a Nation . 
The chaos in the Middle East is a wake up call to America that we must be `` undivided '' ; that we must be `` United '' . 
We must start to listen to the words in our pledge of allegiance to our flag , and then we must practice those words in our day to day living in this country . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:16 pm | I understand that the Paris HIlton of politics is organizing a giant Moose , Polar Bear and environmentalist hunt to clear the Alaskan oil fields of obstacles to oil drilling , as we speak . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:18 pm | If the Suez were blocked and tankers had to round the Horn of Africa , the Somali pirates would become some the weathiest people on the continent . 
Of course it is past time to break our dependenceon Middle East oil . 
We could produce fuel from coal ; the Germans did just that during WWII ; a fact petrochemical companies want us to forget . 
The U.S. has the largest coal supplies on Earth . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:18 pm | February 3 , 2011 at 5:18 pm | We can only hope so , but as long as the republicans are getting their pockets stuffed with money from big oil it will never happen , same as the wars we 're in , to much defense industry money going to the republicans to stop the war . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:24 pm | They pay $ 7 a gallon for gas in England . 
Other countries pay way more than we do . 
It will take gas prices rising to these levels to begin to break our addiction . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:28 pm | I hope so . 
It will force our country to become inventive and create newer and better efficient cars , heating and cooling etc. . 
It 's time for our government to return to building America for their tax payers . 
Or the `` I want change '' will be come larger and louder with every generation . 
sounds a little familiar . 
Maybe , `` it is time '' for our government to read the handwriting on the wall . 
Maybe instead of addressing Pres. Obama we should address it too congress February 3 , 2011 at 5:29 pm | Jack , once we attain 20 % unemployment we will relax our dependence on gas and oil . 
Might be cheaper in the long run and save lives if we isolate this country from the interests of big business . 
Natural gas in the way to go , period . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:31 pm | Give me a break ! 
If I 'm not mistaken most of our oil comes frfom Canada , Mexico and wells in the gulf of Mexico . 
Most of The oil brought in from the Middle East is refined here and exported to countries that do not have refining capabilities -LRB- like Iran -RRB- . 
Remaining an oil dependent nation puts us in a highly enviable position . 
When the oil runs out and we do n't have an alternative we will ... Drastically cut our carbon footprint . 
Air polution will disappear almost over night . 
Become much healthier as a nation from all the exercise we get from walking to work . 
We will eat healthier from eating produce grown in our back yards . 
Experience significant economic growth in carriage making , saddle making and other related local industries . 
It can only be win-win for us . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:37 pm | In one word no. . 
Give it all the lip service you want , we do n't have a plan . 
We do n't drill , the white house only wants to regulate the issue even if we go broker as a country . 
They want expensive gas and will use green house gases as their excuse . 
They only want us to look to them for all the answers , while limiting our movements . 
And guess what the politicians will still fly around in their jets telling us how bad things are and what they can do to help . 
I 've heard it all before . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:38 pm | It should , but it wo n't , sadly . 
Just think , years ago we could have been the leaders in all things energy efficient . 
Now it looks like China will lead the way . 
Gotta love those oil and energy lobbyists in DC doing what 's best for their bottom line instead of what 's best for the US . 
Same tune , different day . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:39 pm | We have lots of oil in u.s. . 
We are just saving it while we use other people 's supply . 
Of course at the same time some are demanding to be able to find new supplies wherever there is dirt or water . 
As long as we have a system where chaos increases the bottom line of international corporations nothing is going to change the oil economic system . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:41 pm | February 3 , 2011 at 5:43 pm | I think it is not a problem . 
It is all about greed . 
The people are Muslims , so it make a certain amount of sense to be governed by a Muslim leadership -LRB- surprise ! -RRB- . 
As soon as they discover the benefits of making profits off the oil and canal shipping they will quickly become vested members of the international community , and maintain the flow of oil . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:43 pm | My home solar panel blew away in the blizzard . 
To keep from litterly freezing to death I am burning lot 's of firewood and using lots of natural gas to keep me warm . 
Ironically , deep water drilling in the Gulf of Mexico provided gobs of domestic oil . 
As you know , it has been gone now for about 6 months . 
Possibly we should forget about building a Disney world in Anwar , Alaska 'cause our dependence on oil is going up , whether domestic or foreign . 
Yeah '' it should , but will the Republicans and the oil companies which they support see it from that perspective . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:45 pm | Jack I like too know what the worlds attitude will be toward the middle east when theres no longer any oil to suck out of their sand ? 
Something tells me they will get the ultimate cold shoulder . 
Beside headachs and oil , the world gets very little from that area . 
When oil producing countries have no oil to pacify the worlds thirst , but have access to nukes , I wonder how long before blackmail starts to become the next big thing ! 
Chaos in the middle east started before Christ was born . 
It doesn ; t help that the Jews and Palestinian have been fighting over control of the same piece of land for nearly a century . 
Why did we start a war in Iraq ? 
Why did we overthrow the elected government of Iran ? 
Who is running this country ? 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:49 pm | And what would be our alternative ? 
You forget that there are places that are NOT served by public transportation . 
We moved here in 1948 , how long should we wait for the bus to the county seat ? 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:52 pm | You would think so , but it wo n't happen . 
I remember as a kid the oil embargo of the early 70 's . 
It did n't cause any change in the ` car ' culture of the U.S. at that time either . 
Even a few years back when oil was above $ 125 a barrel and gas prices averaging almost $ 4.00 per gallon it did n't cause a fundamental shift . 
Nope , the U.S. wo n't wake up till it is way way too late . 
Nothing will change until the hold by the oil industry on our politicians and country is broken . 
But even then we are behind the curve in comparison to other countries in electric cars and alternative energy sources . 
Sad thing is we invented alot of that technology here , and now we are piddling it away . 
Jack , if the thousands that have died in Iraq has not broken us . 
What makes you think chaos in the middle east will be enough to break us ? 
What makes my blood boil is the Trillions we have sent to the Middle East to people who absolutely hate every thing we stand for ! 
Just think where we would be now if we spent those trillions of dollars on electric cars and the infrastructure to go along with them . 
Instead of and electric car that only goes 100 miles on a charge , we might have one that would go 300 miles . 
Its like the US is dating the ugliest girl\/guy in the world just because their daddy is filthy rich ! 
Its time to move on ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:54 pm | Of course not , not this Egyptian crisis anyway . 
Even when gas hits $ 5 bucks a gallon we will grouse and complain but we 'll still drive ... maybe less driving . 
I cut back on driving 3 years ago and have only driven 42 miles per week since then . 
I used to drive a few hundred so I 'm saving money everyday . 
Truth is we have no solution to quickly replace the oil problem ... we just try to tell ourselves we do . 
Maybe we should grow more corn for ethanol so more people can starve ? 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:55 pm | I doubt if we will but the US should have more choices . 
February 3 , 2011 at 5:57 pm | Jack , Nothing is going to break oils grip on our country . 
If everything we know and has happened so far has n't done it , then nothing will . 
When the price of gas goes up , it only hurts the poor and middle class who are just trying to support themselves and their families . 
We have had the technology for alternative energy for many years , and we only pay lip service to it . 
The electric car is a catch 22 . 
Do we burn more coal or build nuclear plants to keep up with the huge increase in electric we will need if everyone goes to electric ? 
We are always going to be sucking at the Middle East oil teat . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:03 pm | It should . 
We are supposed to be so smart but sometimes I think that we are slow learners . 
Read the writing on the wall already ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:04 pm | If the price of gas goes up to four dollars a gallon it will bring our economy to it 's knees and we will go strait into another depression and Obama will be toast in 2012 . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:11 pm | Jack , not even a 12 step program could get us off of foreign Oil . 
That 's just not the American way , we will stay addicted to anything as long as it makes us feel better about our lives , just ask the Tobacco Industry February 3 , 2011 at 6:13 pm | No , it is not enough . 
We have to be anywhere we think can sell us their oil . 
It makes sense for our strategic interest . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:17 pm | That whole question is really insane this country is not addicted to oil it is totally dependent on oil we in no way prepared to survive without it our country will be crushed . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:17 pm | February 3 , 2011 at 6:17 pm | No , it will not break America 's addiction to foreign oil . 
America is to fat and lazy ... February 3 , 2011 at 6:18 pm | Chris ftom Toronto . . 
You folks need to remember !! the majority of your OIL and Gnatural gas you consume comes from CANADA February 3 , 2011 at 6:18 pm | That would be nice , Jack . 
Too bad you worked so hard to help elect Republicans who will do anything for the oil industry , even if it hurts the country . 
As Wolf pointed out , we 've been talking about ending our reliance on foreign oil for more than 30 years from now . 
Sadly , based on the lack of leadership in Washington D.C. , the USA will be addicted to oil until the last drop is squeezed out of the desert . 
Provided , of course , China does n't buy it first . 
Should it yes , will it no. . 
When politicans are more enthralled with trying to keep the President from doing anything and trying to reform healthcare we have no chance of an actual debate to try to kick our habbit . 
Like you said this has been a topic for 30 years and will be for probably another 30 . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:19 pm | Not gonna happen . 
Many Americans do n't even know there is turmoil in Egypt . 
And our politicians are too indebted to the oil money to rock the boat . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:19 pm | February 3 , 2011 at 6:19 pm | Should it be enough ? 
Will it be enough ? 
It seems we 're happier to complain than make the difficult decisions to remove ourselves from foreign dependence . 
Natural gas , offshore drilling or solar panels , I do n't care ! 
Let 's do all of it and make America strong again ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:20 pm | The Pentagon , military industrial complex and the multinational corporations that own our elected officials and run our country will never let that happen , Jack . 
-LRB- see Los Angeles during the 30s 40s and 50s -RRB- They 're all more interested in profits than in anything that is best for human beings . 
They convinced half the country that war is better than peace , illness is more profitable than health , and our addiction to petroleum is the monkey on our back that will make them richer than ever . 
There are no more leaders of by and for the American people , Jack . 
Especially when it comes to protecting and increasing their profits . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:24 pm | We in the US are not addicted to oil . 
Most people want a cleaner , more effecient energ . 
It 's just the need for oil is forced upon us by our governemnt and their corparate masters . 
The combination of bank debt of oil producing nations , coupled with big oil interests are whats behind our system of burning as much oil as possible . 
After all , this is the culture of greed . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:25 pm | Are you kidding ? 
It 's so obvious to this old lady that too many Amrican citizens do n't pay much attention to the world news . 
It 's all about sports like the coming event this Sunday . 
Where I live it 's like a National Holiday ... the Super Bowl . 
I know of some who think of others and try to help as much as they can in these ` tight economical ' times ... good people . 
BUT I reallly do n't know what would have to happen to have many Americans ` do the ` right thing ' . 
I 'm afraid there are too many selfish , spoiled and ignorant people out there . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:25 pm | Although it would still be considered a foreign oil supply for the USA the Athabasca oil sands is a solution to American dependence on at least foreign oil from corrupt dictatorships and unstable nations . 
The supply of oil that can come from Canada is enough to supply all of North America for the century , but at the moment we are unfortunately seeing more investment into Canadian oil from the Chinese then the USA . 
We will pay whatever price appears at the pump . 
I believe Americans should get used to riding MASS TRANSIT or buy a DAMN BIKE !!!!!!!!!!!!! America get ready to open up your wallets !!!!! February 3 , 2011 at 6:25 pm | As long as our politicians worry more about getting re-election money from big oil than doing what is right for our country , we will be addicted to oil , probably until oil runs out . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:25 pm | An oil company will soon be in the process of testing a new process for effectively extracting clean oil from shale in Kentucky . 
The process will allow the production of unbelievable amounts of North American oil . 
There 's enough oil shale in Canada and the U.S. to get us off foreign oil . 
Let 's take advantage of that resource first , and we can get off oil altogether later . 
We are the ONLY nation without an Energy Plan ! 
We 've had our head in the sand -LRB- and other places -RRB- since the Oil Embargo of ' 73 ... why is this going to be any different ? 
\* sigh \* February 3 , 2011 at 6:25 pm | What percentage of our oil is from the Middle East ? 
Do n't see the U.S. trying to break the dependency , especially with the support they give to Middle Eastern allies like Egypt . 
I especially do n't think our country and its citizens has the capacity to sacrifice the standard of living we have enjoyed . 
Soon we will not have a choice , however . 
This is only the beginning and I do n't see it getting better any time soon . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:25 pm | Your problem is not about foreign oil , but simply oil in general . 
The current major exporter of oil to the USA is Canada . 
You will always need foreign oil until you make major changes to your dependence on oil . 
Renewal energy is the only way to go if you look longterm , rather than the next spike in gasoline prices or international crisis . 
Oh please , Jack . 
The Tea Party still needs their SUVs to carry all their ammo and guns , because the 2nd amendment tells them it is the right thing to do . 
No , their elected neglected to read about the forefathers considering anything not in their progeny to be 3\/5ths a person when the constitution was recently read in congress . 
But , this revolt is about the 3\/5ths and the Tea Party is confused . 
What 's the fuss ? 
They just need to fill up their SUV . 
They do n't care where the gas comes from . 
Just get it here . 
I 'm just a 60-percentor . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | Should it ? 
Not a chance . . 
Unless we fundamentally change the way we create , produce , accept and implement newer technology . 
I fear we will be slaves to the Middle East for the balance of my lifetime and those of the next generation . 
But boy it would be nice to see how long it takes the Middle East to change its tune if we stopped all need for its oil . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | Stop calling us oil addicts . 
For the average working Joe 's , what are the alternatives to foreign oil ? 
Other than major cities , the US has no decent mass transit . 
Stop blaming the worker bees and do n't call us addicts . 
We hate going to the pumps because we are sadly aware that every $ 40 tank of gas supports our dependence . 
The wealthy corporations may be the addicts . 
This wo n't break their addiction if they make more profits . 
Of course we should do whatever we need to do to get off foreign oil -- and begin to replace it with nuclear energy . 
Tom Friedman went through all the arguments in his book , `` Hot , Flat and Crowded '' several years ago , in which he accurately describes America 's energy future as `` electric . '' 
If our politicians can find the guts to cut the hose , we will not only be energy independent , we will deprive those Islamic lunatics of their most potent weapon -- our money . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | ever since the nixon doctrine , you guys have been relying on israel to do the dual job of dividing egypt geographically from other arabs to keep them from grouping and forming some regional power , as well as act as your agent to help you control the massive oil reserves of the middle east . 
it is precisely this control over world oil supplies that enables the US to be a super power -LRB- by constituting just above 20 % of the world 's gross production of goods using the energy you get out of it -RRB- . 
i.e. the US will lose this addiction the day it loses world domination . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | Jack , we have had enough of thier oil . 
lets be fair and keep the remaining for those youth who share the same dreams of our own natoin . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | The only way that the addiction would be broken is if the suez canal was closed for an extended period of time and gas prices were driven up to over $ 5 a gallon . 
With the knowlege that soaring gas prices could come anytime , the funding for altewrnitive fuel resecrch would skyrocket . 
This should have been done years ago , -LRB- as in the 90 's -RRB- but the outcome still might have mixed blessings . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | I do n't think that this will break Americas dependency on foreign oil . 
I think that everyday Americans are blind to the fact that we depend on these nations -LRB- The Middle East -RRB- to supply so much of our oil . 
Everyday Americans are focused on Health Care reform and tax cuts more than they are concerned about oil and rising prices . 
Americans also do not see how much we depend on the Middle East for oil , we see commercials about clean oil here in America but not the oil that we get from the Middle East . 
Foreign oil is not the top item President Obama 's agenda and it should be due to the events in Egypt and Middle East happening . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | Americans are an independent people with the exception of oil . 
The only way your going to get Americans off of oil is to outlaw it or come up with a cheaper thing to put in their vehicles . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | This situation in the Middle East is nothing but a great opportunity for speculators and oil companies to make more money . 
Arab countries have nothing to do it . 
You ought to take a serious look at who is really exploiting American people and the rest of the world . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | Do you honestly think the `` Bush 's '' of the world are going to roll over and let this happen ? 
This should have happened 40 years ago and not as a result of access or lack thereof to a canal ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | I have a geothermally-heated house , and my electricity is solar-generated . 
I have my own well . 
I used reclaimed materials in constructing the house , and I conscientiously recycle . 
And yet I drive many thousands of miles per year -- my greatest environmental sin , and an addiction that 's hard to break when your family is spread all over the country . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:26 pm | That will solve our dependency of foreign oil . 
When you are starving you do n't run out and try to invent how to grow some new kind of food and harvest it . 
You simply look for a source of what you need that is available ... Now ! 
You can work on your experimental projects all you want when you do n't have the immediate need . 
I really hate to hear over and over that Americans have an addiction to oil . 
The technology to relieve the country of this so called addiction has been in place for a long time . 
If the alternatives were readily available people would respond by using them . 
Yes , this has been a problem since the 70 's and it has been only been given a small amount of attention . 
But , I resent that it is called America 's addiction to oil . 
Let us definie it for what it is ... big oil companies and oil lobbiests and congress in cahoots for profit . 
It is way past time to do something serious about this problem . 
Hopefully , we have not waited to long at this point ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:27 pm | It should be but wo n't be as history over the last 60 years has dictated . 
To change our way of life , a way that is based partially on gluttony and lack of self control , is the same way it has always been , hit the pocket book and unite through hardship are the ways we seem to find self discipline . 
The only way we will be rid of Mideast oil is a strict cap and trade law that will initiate strong ingenuity and creativity , and\/or a total blockade of oil from the Mideast by the Mideast . 
Do we as a society have the stomach for either ? 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:27 pm | As long American big corporations continue to make huge profits , forget it . 
They have lobbysts in Washington to thwart any good intentions . 
Others will claim , it will kill jobs in America . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:27 pm | As long as our politicians worry more about getting re-election money from big oil than doing what is right for our country , we will be addicted to oil , probably until oil runs out . 
The answer is simple : break off our dependence on Mideast Oil and use natural gas . 
North America has stockpiles of natural gas in storage . 
It is a more affordable alternative . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:27 pm | The issue is not `` addiction to foreign oil , '' the issue is `` addiction to oil . '' 
Why are we addicted to oil ? 
Three reasons : Because we refuse to reduce consumption and we refuse to have fewer children and we refuse to green our economy . 
If each woman had one child and if we did n't consume things we do n't need and if we insisted that all energy be green , we would not only solve the `` oil problem , '' we 'd also solve global warming and destruction of biodiversity and world hunger , etc. . 
I 've come to assume that most people in the USA are incapable of cultural change , are incapable of caring about other species , and are incapable of caring about other people , It 's sad . 
The elites at the top are the worst when it comes to consumption . 
What is the carbon footprint of a rich child in the USA ? 
Do people even consider their carbon legacy ? 
Murtagh at OSU did this research . 
It 's not just about foreign oil consumption , it 's about the number of children we choose to have and our level of consumption and our trampling on `` the rights '' of other species as well . 
~ Tara Waters Lumpkin February 3 , 2011 at 6:27 pm | It is definitely wishful thinking . 
Every time there is a crisis in the middle east , our dependence on foreign oil is brought to the table . 
People go into a panic as gas prices rise , and ideas , some wonderful , are kicked around for a few days . 
Then , our new oil shipments from Venezuela or Brazil come in , and everyone returns to old habits . 
My , how I would love to see the day come , Jack , but I do n't think that it 's today . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:27 pm | You should go back and count the number of times you have asked `` Will -LRB- Blank -RRB- be enough to push us to end our addiction to foreign oil ? '' 
The answer is simple . 
When we stop electing republicans , we will end our addiction to oil . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:28 pm | It should be enough to break our addiction , but that should have been done long ago . 
If we do n't get oil from the Middle East , Venezuela , and Russia then what . 
We do n't have plans in place to make that kind of change . 
We need these resources considering that green energies account for less than 10 % of our power needs -LRB- electric cars still need power plants for electricity -RRB- We have oil , natural gas , coal , plus solar , wind , and hydro power here in the US , but the government strangles our own innovators . 
We have enough resources and enough American ingenuity right here to solve these problems if the government would allow the people to work . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:28 pm | Not yet Jack . 
Oil companies pour a lot of money in our politics . 
They will control the message & spin the same as the Heath Care industry did . 
Not until there is a major attack on Isreal , or something of that magnitude , will the U.S. take turn on energy . 
I 'm glad Obama is already focusing on green energy now , as opposed to waiting until crude oil being $ 200 a barrel . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:28 pm | February 3 , 2011 at 6:29 pm | The Pickens Plan is the way to go . 
I 've been pushing for this like crazy . 
we simply need to convert our transportation fuel to natural gas . 
all vehicles can be easily converted -- many Taxi and Utility company already have -LRB- why ? -RRB- 
it 's cheap , readily available and cleaner burning than gasoline . 
the infrastructure is already in place . 
we as a nation have over a 100 year supply . 
it will bridge the gap between oil and whatever comes next . 
if President Obama would simply sign a one sentence executive order stating all new cars purchased by the federal govt run on natural gas , it would instantly create jobs and drop the price of gasoline in half . 
like giving the nation a raise in wages and eliminate the dependence on foreign oil it 's a win win win deal the problem is this idea is too right and thats why it wo n't get done and it could be done tomorrow February 3 , 2011 at 6:29 pm | Its a bogus question , Jack , There 's no such thing as `` foreign '' oil . 
Oil is oil , we do n't own a drop of it in the USA . 
We lease our domestic oil fields to privately owned oil companies like BP for millions in exchange for their ownership of any oil they find . 
The only oil we own is what we have in our strategic reserves and we buy that on the futures market . 
There 's not one single Government owned producing oil well in the United States . 
All the drilling that 's done here is by oil companies and they own all they oil they bring up . 
The ONLY way to end our dependence on `` foreign '' oil is to end our dependence on all oil . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:29 pm | Good topic Jack . 
This why in Europe everybody prefer a small car . 
Besides , if politician think for a moment about the country , a gasoline tax could help to balance the budge and save the planet , but do n't count on that . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:29 pm | Oil is no longer needed for energy no matter what Royal Dutch Shell , BP or the Saudis might have you believe ... oil is a commodity to be traded like gold , copper or wheat . 
If you want the answer to your questions ask a representative of Goldman Sacks or Morgan Stanley ... anyway you look at it , the American Consumer gets screwed every time the world does not move our way ... if anyone honestly wanted to protect themselves from `` oil barons , '' they would put their money where their mouth is , like I did in 2005 when gas hit 2 dollars a gallon , I bought a Toyota Prius . 
-LRB- Insert hybrid car here , if you do not want to permute a brand . -RRB- 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:29 pm | No it will not break our addiction . 
We Have powerful domestic oil money preventing legislation which would move the US toward breaking oil dependency . 
Exxon made too much money to see US government try to curb US consumption . 
As a result of the legislative power of big US oil companies , we buy vast quantities of foreign oil and subsidize domestic production . 
If we want to beat the addiction to `` foreign '' oil , stop the corrupt practice in Washington of bribery in the form of campaign contributions . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:29 pm | Sadly , the deadly combination of our addiction to oil and the power of the venal and greedy oil executives over the members of congress tells me to answer your question with a clear `` no '' . 
Let 's not forget who calls the shots in this plutocracy of ours and it is n't President Obama . 
Definitely , it is not in the best interest of the oil companies to encourage the development of alternative sources of energy . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:29 pm | The Chaos in the Middle East will not have an impact on the United States addiction to Middle Eastern oil . 
Equally impactful crisis like the oil embargo , the Iranian crisis , and subsequent wars with Middle Eastern countries did not dampened our appetite for their oil . 
I think this hiccup in foreign policy geared towards the Middle East should be approached from an angle that addresses the spread of radicalism and terrorism more as the immediate danger to the United States . 
If like a cancer , the chaos in this region spreads , then we can talk about America s addiction to foreign oil . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:30 pm | Addiction to foreign oil did not cause the price per barrel to rise to over $ 100.00 , speculators did purely for greed . 
The shipment of oil through the Suez Canal has not been hindered . 
Speculators are always looking for any chance to put the screws to the people . 
I 'm sure the new Republican Congress is celebrating their new fortunes from our misery . 
Why does that not surprise me . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:30 pm | Hey Jack , up here in Canada we have in our western provinces a stable supply of oil , given the present rate of consumption that will last for 300 years ! 
your energy needs can be found a lot closer to home . 
think of us like Americans without guns , and hey were friendly ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | It is disheartening to hear your concern about your gas prices while Egyptians are dying to make ends meet . 
My question is how come all the oil in the Mideast have not been influential in pressuring the U.S to stop Israel from building settlements in Israel February 3 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | the Middle East conflict should be a wake up call for America to break the addiction to foreign oil . 
i have already started to take this matter into my own hands and had a 6kw solar panel system installed on the roof of my home . 
my electric meter spins backwards on sunny days . 
Its very rewarding to know i help supply energy to the grid . 
Solar Power , Wind Power , Fuel Cells Energy , Flywheel Technology , come on America lets get going , lets take charge of our energy needs now and for our future . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | In a perfect world , America and the rest of the world would be able to kick the addiction of crude oil . 
This is very far from a perfect world . 
It is not just America that is addicted to oil ; every country is addicted to oil . 
The problem does not stop there ; however , the big problem in this picture is the corporate greed that comes with the addiction . 
If America and the rest of the world can not break the addiction to greed , then we wo n't be able to break the addiction to oil . 
It is corporate greed that is increasing the price of oil , the price of gasoline , and ultimately : the price of all necessities . 
My answer to your question would be no. . 
The price of oil will continue to spike , and we will continue to pay for it by shelling money out at the pumps , as well as for basic necessities . 
We 've seen oil prices rise in excess of $ 147 per barrel . 
I believe we should be prepared for prices to rise to $ 175 , or even $ 200 per barrel . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | The chaos in the Middle East will not be enough to end our dependence on foreign oil . 
Truth be told , we should have ended it 40 years ago . 
However , our government has done nothing but prop up the regimes which are responsible for much of the unrest . 
We citizens will be upset for a little while then we 'll cry for an alternative energy source . 
Obama will make some shallow speech , then it will all go away quietly . 
Sadly , our attention spans are short and we 'll be sidetracked by something else , like latest Palin rant , or questions about Obama 's bowel movements , or indicting the latest Ponzi schemer . 
What are we doing with the huge natural gas discoveries within our borders ? 
We 're selling the gas to someone else . 
Let the madness continue ! 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | I am from Romania but I leave most of the time in US , just want to tell you that this is just another reason to finally break the US addiction to the foreign oil and stop making these dictators richer . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | Now is the time to drill for oil here at home . 
The President needs to lift all drilling restrictions -LRB- instant jobs and economic growth -RRB- and begin a project to drill in Anwar !! Now ! 
Reopen all closed nuclear plants to power the country ! 
Renewable energy makes up less than 10 % of the total energy usage in the US now . 
It is impossible to make this move to green energy anytime soon . 
Start drilling for Natural Gas and begin to make the shift from oil resources in the Middle East . 
This would also stop he dirty business of supporting bad regimes . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:32 pm | What are you talking about ? 
America gets of its oils supply from Canada . 
Do you think Canadian oil goes though Suez Canal before it reaches the U. S ? 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:32 pm | It ` s not only the oil producing countries . 
Our own oil companies are involved in the pricing at the pump . 
Whenever we start to talk seriously about alternative energy sources , they simply reduce the price and , once again , make oil the cheapest option . 
Let ` s face it , Jack . 
They ` ve got us over a barrel . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:32 pm | The oil lobby owns the republicans , and the oil lobby benefits when the price of oil goes up . 
The republicans control the house , so no , we wo n't end our addiction to oil -- foreign or otherwise . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:32 pm | I hope chaos makes a lot of people switch to electric , hybrid or alternatively fueled cars . 
I hope it heralds the return of electric or alternatively fueled public transportation and the return of passenger trains . 
Big Oil has had the USA in a stranglehold for way too long . 
Using as many alternatives to Big Oil and being as energy self-sufficient as possible should n't be considered `` sissy '' or `` left-wing '' but part of our patriotic duty as Americans . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:32 pm | I have visions of oil filled syringe needles being inserted into Uncle Sam 's veins . 
The oil addiction of this country is too deep of a problem and will not end . 
It seems as if we ca n't live without it . 
Unfortunately , unrest in Egypt will not stop the demand . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:33 pm | Yes !! But why is everybody talking about electric cars which can only go 40 miles on a charge -LRB- if you do n't want to run the A\/C , radio or lights -RRB- ? 
We could grow our fuel in the form of biofuels . 
The distribution infrastructure is already in place and farmers and oil companies could make a fortune . 
Brazil has done it and they are off foreign oil -LRB- they use sugar -RRB- . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:33 pm | I disagree , it is about the money . 
It 's about the people and companies who get rich off oil . 
Can you break their addiction to money ? 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:33 pm | Come on Jack , safe your breath . 
This situation has occurred before and the American people went back to wasting gas and forgetting about alternative sources once the situations went away . 
Nuclear power , clean coal , waste-to-energy plants , natural gas exploration and others have been forgotten by the liberals . 
What we need is for the liberals to write some more books on the theory of energy independence . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:34 pm | It would be great not to send all that money to the Middle East for oil . 
But it will be that way for some time , even if green technology expands at the rosiest of predictions . 
However , one way we could almost immediately deflate the cost of oil , and send less money over there , is to allow expanded drilling in the U.S. , including offshore . 
Just the announcement that we were going to aggressively pursue our own energy sources , including natural gas , would slow or reverse oil price increases and make us less dependent on the Middle East , and Venezuela . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:34 pm | Should it ? 
Yes , of course . 
No , of course . 
There is simply no viable alternative to the public anytime soon to allow us to switch from oil . 
I 'm sure all Americans that do not have a direct vested interest in the oil industry would switch in a nano second if they could . 
But we ca n't . 
We have been raped for decades by the greedy , money-sucking OPEC slime bags , along with our own oil industry executives and political puppets who are all beholden to the oil industry . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:34 pm | Sorry Jack , have you not yet noticed that the Mid\/east problem is simply ` racist ' . 
Egypt , Yemen , Somalia , Algeria , Yemen , Somalia , Niger , etc. - -- are all governed by a ruling elite of Arab descent . . 
Their ` indineggess ' people are AFRICAN . 
!!! Sorry ... . . 
!! The general Arab concept is that the are destined to ` use ' ` black ' people , ... . 
look at Saudi Arabia , or any Emirate . 
How many americans remain addicted to illegal drugs and alcohol ? 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:36 pm | It should definitely be enough to break America 's use of foreign oil and it may even be incentive to create more American jobs to help convert the country to using wind and solar energy as its primary source . 
It would be cheaper once implemented and we would only depend on the innovation of the American people , and of course mother nature . 
Depending on other nations for our energy resources and going further into debt , or relying on whether the sun is going to come up or the wind blow . 
If Obama is really about ` change ' , he might find a way to relieve our debt , and not having to rely on others for oil may give journalists less reason to have to go into such dangerous situations . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:36 pm | we need USA and other countries to buy our oil in Iraq and other meddle east country so we could use this income to develop and improve the life of ordinary people , however USA should change their tactics politically rather than economic interest , i hope Egypt stay as an scalier country other ways we all are a loser if Islamic extremist come to power Jack , very high gas prices will break our addiction to oil . 
Gas prices are slated to be $ 4 a gallon by late spring of this year . 
We squandered the opportunity to free ourselves from this addiction when the 1970 Oil Enbargo was imposed against the U.S. by OPEC nations -- Arab oil producing states . 
We should take a page from Brazil , which is independent of petroleum . 
We have another chance to finally start freeing ourselves of this curse . 
We are starting to manufacture celluar fusion electric cars and make greater use of solar technology and natural gas . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:37 pm | Not as long as Obama is president . 
He talks out of both sides of his mouth !! Always watch what he does , not what he says . 
It 's just like jobs , if he was really serious about getting our unemployed back to work , we would not still be importing 75 + k foreign workers a month and we would not have 8 million illegals still working . 
HE CAN NOT BE TRUSTED EITHER !! February 3 , 2011 at 6:39 pm | I am perplexed by the question . 
So what if it is enough ?? What 's the alternative ?? The only alternative has and it has always been that Americans have to lessen our need and dependency on foreign oil , or oil in general by pouring money into R&D for alternative energy sources , alternative heating and cooling systems , alternative transportation , and more efficient use of the current systems that we have in place . 
Drilling in the Artic National Widelife Refuge , or allowing more off-shore oil wells in the gulf ... . 
Is definitely not the answer . 
So what is happening in Egypt should not be a wake up call . 
Our wake up call happend during the Oil Embargo and look how little we achieved . 
A greater crisis than the Northern African Revolutions will be needed for Americans to change their habits . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:39 pm | In the U : S : states of nort and south Dakota we have over 2000 years of untapped oil reserves but environmentalists are keeping us from getting it . 
When we tap indto this oik the prce is expected to come down to $ 16 per barrel . 
The U : S : will be the biggest exporter of oil in the world and the Saudis and OOPEC will be oudt of business as will ALL offshore oil drilling . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:40 pm | We need alternative transportation choices ! 
Here in East Tenn. . 
I bike everywhere & feel like i stick out like a sore thumb because strangers come up to me to say they see me biking everywhere ... guess that is how rare I am . 
People need to get out of their cars & find other options . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:41 pm | There is a pending -LRB- 3years -RRB- patent for a pollution free engine which would solve all the industries problems and the global warming danger by using Hydrogen in this engine . 
It is designed to supply Residential Individual generation for homes and businesses along with all engine powered devises and will solve all the nations road congestion . 
All America needs to do is eliminate the oil industry 's control over allowing this patent from being approved . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:41 pm | During WWII we retooled our factories and created the military industrial complex . 
Now , we should retool all the factories that produce fighter planes that we do n't need or use and have them produce wind turbines and solar panels . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:42 pm | This is the USA 's opportunity to make Egypt aware that we rather walk than be held hostage for gas . 
Why should we succumb to their insanity per a dictator . 
Mass transit people ... . 
infrastucture would result in JOBS people !!!!! February 3 , 2011 at 6:42 pm | My guess is no. . 
It 's simple Jack . 
Unless we are forced to make changes will continue just as we have in the past . 
Think back to the Carter administration . 
We had a nice little oil crisis back then . 
I 'm sure you remember the k-car and other small cars being introduced into the market . 
Now we 're back to big heavy suburbans and SUVs that get 10 miles per gallon . 
All the while our politcians are busy campaigning for the 2012 elections and arguing over where to sit . 
This is the mentality . 
It 's business as usual just as it always has been . 
Sadly , when the real oil crisis comes we wo n't be ready . 
Imagine gas jumping to 20 , 30 , or 40 dollars per gallon . 
There will be a crisis eventually and we all know this . 
Imagine life in America with no gasoline or diesel . 
I know the republicans will not like the idea but we probably need some gov. regulation at this point . 
A little `` tough love '' would be good for America . 
We must pay now or pay a lot more later . 
Jack you once posed a similar question and in doing so referred to the importance of ending the way we use fossil fuel and in doing so compared the monumental importance of this crisis to the Manhattan project and it 's completion . 
I agreed then as I do now , it 's that important , getting around this crap must begin now and the people making a blood diamond style profit must end they way they turn huge profits . 
Our country is married to the middle east , and for one reason only , the end of this country 's enslavement to fossil fuel must begin in government . 
The same gov that just bailed out GM who just introduced a thirty two thousand dollar electric car in the middle of one of the worst economy 's this country has ever seen . 
It 's tactics like that which keep Americans the thumb of big oil . 
I would also add that all political figures running for office be made to declare in very bold text who donates to their campaign . 
Ps that electric car I mentioned should be available for about 17.500 with a three thousand dollar cash back incentive due at signing ... After all it 's you and I who bailed them out . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:44 pm | we need USA and other countries to buy our oil in Iraq and other meddle east country so we could use this income to develop and improve the life of ordinary people , however USA should change their tactics politically rather than economic interest , i hope Egypt stay as an scalier country other ways we all are a loser if Islamic extremist come to power The addiction to foreign oil should have been broken years ago . 
People tend to forget quickly . 
Remember gas prices just three years ago . 
Almost forgotten as quickly as 9\/11 . 
Bad times for the US are definitly not far off . 
Why ca n't all American 's see what is coming . 
Guess it is easier for some to ignor reality . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:44 pm | There is nothing at this point that could break our reliance on foreign oil . 
For gods sake man , we go to war for that oil . 
This action in egypt has the BP 's and Exxon 's of the world licking their lips . 
Profits , profits , profits . 
Ever heard of the `` oil futures market '' . 
The big oil companies have . 
You can count on which way their money is currently bet . 
Oil period , foreign or domestic , is big money . 
The world is not as it seems . 
Big business and wall street stand to gain at either end of the spectrum . 
Unfortunately , the sleeping people are naive to the the policies of the markets and this country . 
The corporations as well as the government like it this way . 
No sir , this will not lead to the independence from foreign oil . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:46 pm | Wake up Jack . 
This socalled `` addiction '' to oil you speak of is what FUELS our entire economy . 
Anyone who can replace an existing oil-based product with one that does n't use any oil , THAT person would be an over-night BILLIONAIRE . 
If this were so easy Jack , even YOU could become an over-night billionare . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:46 pm | The situation in the Middle East makes it clear that the United States needs to double down on Renewable Energy and all Biofuels as the next driver of economic growth and National Security . 
February 3 , 2011 at 6:46 pm | The addiction to oil is a form of economic control directed to control the people of countries that produce and buy gasoline . 
The reasons for this are twofold ; 1 -RRB- The infrastructure of most Arab states are not developed enough to export much , except gasoline . 
2 -RRB- If the USA wanted to turn Green -- it could do so very quickly since the technology is there . 
Laith F. Gulli Columbus , Indiana February 3 , 2011 at 6:47 pm | Jack Cafferty sounds off hourly on the Situation Room on the stories crossing his radar . 
Now , you can check in with Jack online to see what he 's thinking and weigh in with your own comments online and on TV . 
Would you ride in a car that drives itself ? 
Is she the answer ? 
Should the #LoneStarState be allowed to withdraw from U.S. ? 
