Egyptian soldiers did nothing to stop the violence in Cairo on Wednesday `` Let the military take over and protect you , '' Egyptian state TV declared Egypt expert : Absence of intervention is meant to intimidate Official : Cairo has a `` serious problem '' with the way Obama is `` spinning '' events -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The fiery , bloody clashes between demonstrators in Cairo -- with soldiers watching with seeming indifference -- is an apparent maneuver by the Egyptian military to raise popular support for their intervention and the old guard police state , analysts say . 
Egyptian state television on Wednesday went so far as to portray the protesters as members of a radical fringe and bluntly stated : `` Let the military take over and protect you and Egypt . '' 
`` We have confirmed reports that there are radical elements heading to cause internal strife . 
They have balls of fire and they want to start fire in the Tahrir -LRB- Liberation -RRB- Square , '' Egyptian television said . 
Much international media coverage has focused on the violence in Cairo 's Liberation Square between antagonists and protagonists for embattled President Hosni Mubarak . 
It remained unclear whether such confrontations were being repeated elsewhere . 
Contesting rallies in Egypt 's second-largest city , Alexandria , were largely peaceful . 
Other Cairo neighborhoods also remained calm . 
Violence boils over in Cairo Mubarak ` borrowing from book of Saddam ' ? 
But Wednesday 's events in Liberation Square highlighted pro-Mubarak demonstrators charging -- dramatically on horseback and camels -- anti-Mubarak protesters , the first sign of a counter-demonstration after days of mass anti-government protests . 
In stark juxtaposition , as the violence unfolded , the army did nothing . 
`` The military 's refusal to act is a highly political act which shows that it is allowing the Egyptian regime to reconstitute itself at the top and is highly , utterly against the protesters , '' said Joshua Stacher , assistant professor of political science at Kent State University and an expert on Egypt . 
He was among more than a dozen Middle East experts who met Monday with three White House National Security Council officials to talk about the Egyptian crisis . 
The absence of military action serves two purposes , Stacher said . 
`` Make the protesters go home , and two , scare the population that is n't protesting , '' Stacher said . 
`` They want the Egyptian people to submit to the police state , and they want the people to pine for their police state , so that they have stability back . '' 
`` It 's getting really ruthless , '' Stacher added . 
In Egypt , Vice President Omar Suleiman issued a statement saying that dialogue with opposition forces , as ordered by Mubarak , wo n't begin until the demonstrations stop . 
Mubarak had incited another round of protests Tuesday when he said he would wait until the September elections to step down . 
Demonstrators said they wanted an immediate exit by Mubarak . 
Meanwhile , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has begun a round of discussions with Suleiman as the Egyptian government has begun defending the pace of change and pushing back against American criticism , according to a senior U.S. official . 
Egypt 's president is going to move at his own pace and not be pressured by Obama and other world leaders , an Egyptian government official told CNN . 
At the same time , a senior U.S. official is expressing concern about Mubarak 's ties to the violence in Cairo . 
Cooper among reporters attacked in Egypt Google connects Egyptians to Twitter What 's next for Egypt 's economy ? 
U.S. officials are suspicious that Mubarak loyalists unleashed pro-Mubarak forces to intimidate protesters , the U.S. official said . 
`` Perhaps '' Mubarak is making a mess that only he can `` solve , '' the source added . 
In a public statement , the spokesman for the State Department called for restraint . 
`` The use of violence to intimidate the Egyptian people must stop . 
We strongly call for restraint , '' P.J. Crowley said in a statement Wednesday . 
However , an Egyptian government official said the government has a `` serious problem '' in how the Obama administration has been `` spinning '' the events yesterday to give the impression that Mubarak 's statement was given under pressure or a `` nudge '' from Obama . 
Robert Kagan of the Brookings Institution said the military appears to be helping the pro-government demonstrators in Cairo . 
`` It tells me that the military does n't appear to be playing the neutral , benevolent role that we hoped it would , '' Kagan told CNN . 
`` It does appear to be not only allowing these brutal pro-government thugs to come in and attack the protesters but maybe even facilitating it , which raises very serious questions about what role the military intends to play in this whole period of transition . 
`` It 's a very cynical move which I hope the rest of the world , and particularly the United States , do n't fall for , '' Kagan said . 
Michele Dunne , a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace , said it was unclear what the military 's agenda is . 
`` Does this mean they 're committed to Mubarak , or does it mean that perhaps they 're giving him one last chance , one last try to see if he can get control of the streets and get the demonstrators out ? '' 
`` I think today we saw a very ugly face of this regime . 
These are tactics that are well-known in Egypt and have been used many times before -- to send regime thugs to break up peaceful demonstrations , '' she said . 
CNN 's Jill Dougherty and Elise Labott contributed to this report . 
