2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
On Friday , looters at the Cairo Museum damaged two statues of King Tutankhamun , broke 13 glass showcases and damaged 70 other antiquities . 
There have also been reports of looting at dig sites around the country . 
This morning , Dr. Bob Brier , Egyptologist , tells American Morning s Kiran Chetry and TJ Holmes what damage has been done , how it can be repaired , and how some Egyptians are banding together to protect the museums . 
Brier says the entire country of Egypt is a `` vast outdoor museum , '' and that the monuments are certainly not safe . 
Egypt always was a nation , certainly before us - but they are throwing away their heritage -- I guess the mob mentality is human nature ... such an incredible shame and loss to us all . 
February 3 , 2011 at 11:07 am | Report abuse | It 's unfortunate that a country like Egypt with all there antiquities and monument will descend so low to damage natural endowments given to them by God which is completely priceless . 
Let the Egyptians remember that after Hosni Mubarak , the country continues . 
King Tut , is worldly , please do n't damage his tomb , looters , please , where is the coverage of the saudi protests . 
We know the protest have existed in the last weeks . 
Is there a u.s. Saudi blackout issued ? 
The treasures of egypt are intact . . 
The treasures of media integrity are in tatters . 
That includes the so called intern univesity western media of exchanged political favoritism non students . . 
No integrity is now obvious . 
looting here in chicago . . 
just like any other superbowl family treasure betting day . 
Do americans own egypts treasures also ? 
`` backing the wrong horses '' a betting empire that cares more about horse races than reality . . 
Where is the coverage of the saiudi whips on womens backs protests ? 
your prayers ring hollow . 
that is Saudi . . 
As in Arabia ... LAND OF WHIPS AND BILLIONARES WHO LOVE THEM . 
egypt is a nation . . 
Only americans throw out out tons of treasure every year and call it garbage . 
Where is your last computer . . 
The deserts are the true treasures and the people they give life to . 
What are you talking about ???? Comparing the looting of the Cairo Museum and the looting of a Best Buy is just ridiculous !!!!!! @Alj ... ... Yes most societies have become notorius for their disposable ways . 
There are many organizations that are more than happy to take what you consider trash . 
The antiquities of past should be protected . 
I am full support of change needed in countries living under corrupt governments , but such true treasures should not be put in harms way . 
The peoples need to realize that this items can not be replaced and are a gatewway to the past . 
Also the killing of others will never help either side as these individuals are not and should not be considerd `` disposable or trash '' . 
I also realize that many feel that the life of Mubarak could be grouped as such . 
@Tomcat , do YOU group the life of Mubarak as trash . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
