February 03 , 2011 | From Mohammed Tawfeeq , CNN Hundreds of demonstrators were in the streets Thursday in locales around Iraq , inspired by uprisings elsewhere in the region as they railed against the government 's inability to provide basic services and complained of food , water and power shortages , officials said . 
The biggest demonstration took place in al Hamza , a relatively poor town in a heavily Shiite region about 200 kilometers -LRB- 125 miles -RRB- south of Baghdad . 
Two Iraqi interior ministry officials -- who , per policy , did not speak by name due to security concerns -- estimated that that nearly 1,000 people participated . 
The protesters walked toward a local council building , trying to force their way in as they hurled rocks inside the compound and at police outside , the Iraqi Interior Ministry officials said . 
Some were heard shouting , `` We 've had enough '' and `` Where are your promises . '' 
Iraqi police opened fire , ostensibly to disperse the crowd , and wounded three protesters in the process , the officials said . 
Four others were hurt while skirmishing with police outside the council building . 
Eventually , tribal and civic leaders intervened to end the demonstration , the officials said . 
Some of the protesters carried items such as water tubes and oil lanterns to demonstrate a lack of basic services like water and reliable power . 
Abu Sajad , a protester , said that sewage had flooded the small town 's streets after heavy rain in recent days , and he complained that `` the government has n't done anything to solve it '' even though it happens every year . 
`` We 've suffered a lot from bad services in the town , '' Fadhil Hussein , a 50-year-old protester , told CNN . 
`` One government comes and another leaves , and nothing has changed in this town for decades . '' 
Dozens of protesters in Kut , part of another predominantly Shiite province about 110 kilometers south of Baghdad , Thursday demanded the resignation of Wasit 's provincial governor , Latif Hamed , according to a Wasit police official and an Iraqi Interior Ministry official . 
These were the latest in a string of demonstrations around Iraq , mostly emphasizing the same themes -- low-quality public services and a dearth of basic commodities . 
That was the case Monday , when dozens of protesters took to the street in northern Baghdad 's al-Husseinya district . 
A day earlier , nearly 200 Iraqis demonstrated in two locations in Baghdad to show solidarity with those in Egyptian rallying against their President Hosni Mubarak and to criticize their own leaders . 
