President Abdelaziz Bouteflika will lift Algeria 's state of emergency following protests in Algiers two weeks ago . 
Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika said Thursday he will soon end a two-decades-long state of emergency in that county , according to a news report . 
Bouteflika said he would lift the ban in the `` very close future . '' 
The announcement was reported by the Algerian Press Service . 
Experts say the announcement is a clear attempt by the Algerian leader to head off the kind of social unrest that toppled the autocratic Tunisian government and now threatens the regime of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak . 
Bouteflika 's announcement comes about two weeks after government opponents marched in the North African nation to demand that the ban be lifted . 
The demonstrators also called for the release of detainees and the restoration of individual and collective freedoms . 
`` I think you have to consider Algeria just as vulnerable to the ripple effect running through Tunisia , Egypt , Jordan or Yemen , '' said Andrew J. Pierre , a Jennings Randolph senior fellow at the United States Institute of Peace . 
`` You have a high rate of unemployment . 
You 've got a lot of societal unhappiness , so you have the potential for a social eruption there as well . '' 
The state of emergency was imposed in 1992 to quell a civil war between the Algerian government and Islamist forces . 
However , opponents of the Bouteflika regime say the Islamist threat has long since diminished and that the state of emergency now exists only to muzzle any public criticism of the government . 
Saad Djebbar , a London-based Algerian lawyer and political analyst , said the regime has clearly been affected by the democratic protest movements across the region . 
`` My take is that the regime may be preparing -LRB- for public protests -RRB- , '' Djebbar said from London . 
`` They want to produce some sort of trick that would show that reform is under way , like what Mubarak is doing in Egypt , who appears to be using all of the tricks in the book to avoid being removed . '' 
A 2001 law indefinitely banned all demonstrations in the capital , Algiers , according to the monitoring group Human Rights Watch . 
The measure said the government could ban any event that is `` likely to disturb public order and tranquility . '' 
Public protests have swept across North Africa and the Middle East in the last few weeks , prompting major changes in several countries , most notably in Tunisia , where President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali left power after 23 years , and in Egypt , where Mubarak has announced , amid massive unrest , that he will not seek re-election . 
