2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
CNN freelancer journalist Ian Lee reports that sporadic gunfire around Tahrir Square subsided around 2:30 a.m. in Cairo . 
The Army fired the shots in the air in an effort to disperse pro-Mubarak protesters trying to breach the lines separating them from anti-government activists lingering in the square in defiance of a government-imposed curfew , a source tells Lee . 
-LRB- Update 4:30 a.m. in Cairo , 9:30 p.m. ET -RRB- A spokesman for the Muslim Brotherhood , told CNN 's John King that his organization will not participate in Egypt 's general election now planned for September . 
He said that any talks regarding Egypt 's future should only take place after Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak steps down . 
`` We are not looking for any power at all , '' Essam el-Erian said . 
-LRB- Update 3:55 a.m. in Cairo , 8:55 p.m. ET -RRB- Egypt 's one small nuclear reactor , used primarily for medical research , has been shut down and is now secure , a U.S. State Department official said . 
Egyptian soldiers have been deployed to the Nuclear Research Center in Inshas , an area about 40 miles from the scene of the worst protests in Cairo , according to the official . 
-LRB- Update 4:30 a.m. in Cairo , 9:30 p.m. ET -RRB- Ammar Sherie is a renowned musician . 
Naguib Sawiris made billions in the telecom business . 
Veteran diplomat Amre Moussa is the Arab League 's secretary-general . 
These three and 16 other Egyptians have put their heads and hearts together to form the '' Committee of the Wise , '' a group of independent elite that wants to be at the table during crucial government transition talks . 
The committee late Friday called on protests to continue at Tahrir Square every Tuesday and Friday until President Hosni Mubarak `` resigns and makes true the demands of the people . '' 
Mubarak , who has led the African nation for three decades , said he has no intention of stepping down until September , when his term ends . 
But 11 days of bloody protests and high tension have offered no assurance -LRB- Update 3:30 a.m. in Cairo , 8:30 p.m. ET -RRB- Five human rights activists - including two from Amnesty International and one from Human Rights Watch - were released Friday by Egyptian military police , the two groups said in statements . 
They were among some 35 people -- including international reporters and Egyptian lawyers and activists , some of whom remain in custody , according to the two groups ' statements -- detained on Thursday at the Hisham Mubarak Law Center in Cairo . 
-LRB- Update 3:00 a.m. in Cairo , 8:00 p.m. ET -RRB- Protesters in Iraq took to the streets again Friday , showing solidarity with popular demonstrators in Egypt that they say inspired them to publicly voice concerns about their own government . 
-LRB- Update 2:45 a.m. in Cairo , 7:45 p.m. ET -RRB- The Egyptian government viewed U.S. President Barack Obama 's statement Friday as very `` positive , '' according to an official under Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak , saying that it `` clarified innuendos '' that had left a lot of ambiguity as to how the White House sees events in Egypt . 
The Egyptian official said the remarks about Mubarak 's objectives create a better atmosphere for a transition . 
-LRB- Update 2:18 a.m. in Cairo , 7:17 p.m. ET -RRB- iReporter and bookstore manager Dax Bennett Roque took these pictures at today 's `` Day of Depature '' rally in Cairo 's Tahrir Square , capturing the protest calling for President Hosni Mubarak 's resignation from various angles . 
-LRB- Update 2:00 a.m. in Cairo , 7:00 p.m. ET -RRB- President Barack Obama condemned the attacks on journalists in Egypt Friday amid mounting criticism that President Hosni Mubarark is orchestrating the violence to suppress international coverage of bloodshed by pro-government operatives against peaceful protesters . 
`` We continue to be crystal clear that we oppose violence as a response to this crisis , '' Obama said . 
`` We are sending a strong , unequivocal message : Attacks on reporters are unacceptable . 
Attacks on human rights activists are unacceptable . 
Attacks on peaceful protesters are unacceptable . '' 
-LRB- Update 1:00 a.m. in Cairo , 6:00 p.m. ET -RRB- Protesters in the United States upset with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak gathered in New York City 's Times Square Friday , demanding the embattled leader resign . 
-LRB- Update 12:00 a.m. in Cairo , 5:00 p.m. ET -RRB- An Egyptian military spokesman said on state-run Nile TV that the curfew imposed across Cairo and beyond would extend from 7 p.m. to 6 a.m. daily . 
This is a shorter span than had been imposed previously , with the curfew once going from 3 p.m. to 8 a.m. . 
The government order has not appeared to keep anti-government demonstrators , as well as those favoring President Hosni Mubarak 's regime , from hitting the streets . 
-LRB- Update 10:52 p.m. in Cairo , 3:52 p.m. ET -RRB- A video circulating on YouTube shows what appears to be a white diplomatic van running over people in a crowd . 
The video is dated the 28th of January and shows the van running over protestors in a street that appears to lead to Tahrir Square . 
The U.S. State Department is very aware of the video and they are checking it out , says spokesman P.J. Crowley . 
He said it is possible it was a U.S. Embassy van stolen during the recent unrest . 
-LRB- Update 10:25 p.m. in Cairo , 3:25 p.m. ET -RRB- President Barack Obama said the transition to a new government in Egypt `` must begin now '' in order to address the grievances of the Egyptian people . 
He also reiterated his opposition to the use of violence against protesters and members of the press . 
Obama said it is his understanding that discussions between the government and the opposition have started . 
Negotiations must `` include a broad represenation of the Egyptian opposition , '' he said . 
`` The entire world is watching . '' 
-LRB- Update 9:56 p.m. in Cairo , 2:56 p.m. ET -RRB- White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said Friday the administration remains unsatisfied with the pace of change in Egypt . 
Change needs to begin in a `` real and concrete and legitimate way , '' he told reporters . 
-LRB- Update 9:48 p.m. in Cairo , 2:48 p.m. ET -RRB- Opposition figure Mohamed ElBaradei told CNN Friday that he is willing to run for president `` if people want '' him to and if Egypt becomes a `` democracy based on social justice . '' 
ElBaradei declined to elaborate when pressed on whether he planned to seek the presidency . 
-LRB- Update 8:48 p.m. in Cairo , 1:48 p.m. ET -RRB- The death toll from the violent clashes in Cairo 's Tahrir Square has reached 11 , Egypt 's Health Ministry reported Friday . 
The ministry earlier said 916 people were injured during the clashes Wednesday . 
-LRB- Update 8:18 p.m. in Cairo , 1:18 p.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq says compromises are key as the country pursues dialogue with opposition groups . 
Shafiq says opposition forces are helping Egypt `` correct its path . '' 
-LRB- Update 7:14 p.m. in Cairo , 12:14 p.m. ET -RRB- Authorities have no word on the whereabouts of three French journalists and a French researcher in Egypt , according to France 's Foreign Ministry . 
The journalists work for Le Figaro newspaper and Magneto Presse , and the researcher is employed by Amnesty International , it said . 
-LRB- Update 6:28 p.m. in Cairo , 11:28 a.m. ET -RRB- A security force accompanied by a `` gang of thugs '' stormed the office of the Muslim Brotherhood 's news website Friday and arrested the journalists , technicians , and administrators who were present , the group said on its website . 
Eyewitnesses later saw those arrested taken to the headquarters of the nearby Interior Ministry , the group said . 
-LRB- Update 6:02 p.m. in Cairo , 11:02 a.m. ET -RRB- Eyewitnesses tell CNN correspondent Ivan Watson that pro and anti-Mubarak protesters are fighting running battles close to Talaat Harb Square , one-third of a mile -LRB- 0.5 kilometer -RRB- from Tahrir Square . 
CNN has not independently confirmed the report . 
-LRB- Update 5:29 p.m. in Cairo , 10:25 a.m. ET -RRB- Contrasting tweets sent one minute apart by two CNN correspondents in Cairo : Arwa Damon : Outside of square situ very tense , we has 2 B very subtle 2 film , small pro-mubarak grps gathering . 
`` Life '' at near standstill Ben Wedeman : Stuck in friendly crowd of 500 waiting to get in to tahrir -LRB- Update 5:25 p.m. in Cairo , 10:25 a.m. ET -RRB- Tens of thousands of Egyptians protesting in Cairo 's Tahrir Square cheered an announcement on state television Friday that the public prosecutor had frozen the assets of the country 's trade minister and imposed a travel ban on him . 
-LRB- Update 5 p.m. in Cairo , 10 a.m. ET -RRB- A communique from the European Council , a conference of the leaders of 27 countries , called on Egyptian authorities `` to meet the aspirations of the Egyptian people with political reform , not repression . '' 
`` All parties should show restraint and avoid further violence and begin an orderly transition to a broad-based government , '' the communique read . 
`` The European Council underlined that this transition process must start now . '' 
-LRB- Update 4:22 p.m. in Cairo , 9:22 a.m. ET -RRB- About 5,000 people have been injured since the unrest in Egypt began , Egypt 's health minister told the Al-Arabiya network on Friday . 
-LRB- Update 4:08 p.m. in Cairo , 9:08 a.m. ET -RRB- Egypt 's health minister told state TV Friday he plans to go to Cairo 's Tahrir Square , check on the huge crowd and coordinate efforts with the country 's military . 
-LRB- Update 3:37 p.m. in Cairo , 8:37 a.m. ET -RRB- Navi Pillay , the U.N. human rights chief , said on Friday there must be a `` transparent and impartial '' probe into whether the violence in Egypt was planned . 
-LRB- Update 3:16 p.m. in Cairo , 8:16 a.m. ET -RRB- About 35,000 people have taken to the streets Friday in the Egyptian city of Suez , a spokesman for opposition leader Ayman Nour told CNN . 
A rocket-propelled grenade was fired at state security headquarters in the Egyptian Sinai town of El Arish , a government official told CNN Friday . 
The official , who asked not to be named because he is not authorized to speak about the incident , said the strike caused a fire but there were no casualties . 
-LRB- Update 3:02 p.m. in Cairo , 8:02 a.m. ET -RRB- The spokesman for Al-Azhar University , the prestigious center for Sunni Muslim education in Cairo , told CNN Friday he has resigned from his position and joined the anti-government protesters in Tahrir Square . 
-LRB- Update 2:53 p.m. in Cairo , 7:53 a.m. ET -RRB- Amre Moussa , the Arab League 's secretary-general and a veteran Egyptian diplomat , joined protesters in Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Friday , state-run Nile TV reported . 
Time magazine has described him as `` perhaps the most adored public servant in the Arab world . '' 
-LRB- Update 2:45 p.m. in Cairo , 7:45 a.m. ET -RRB- Alan Fisher , an Al-Jazeera correspondent , sent a Twitter message saying `` thugs '' had stormed and trashed the network 's Arabic office in Cairo . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron says the Egyptian government has failed to meet the `` aspirations '' of its people for a `` credible '' transition , the BBC reports via Twitter . 
-LRB- Update 1:44 p.m. in Cairo , 6:44 a.m. ET -RRB- The U.S. State Department says it has no evacuation flights from Egypt planned for Friday . 
-LRB- Update 12:49 p.m. Friday in Cairo , 5:49 a.m. Friday ET -RRB- More protesters gathered Friday at a mosque in central Alexandria , Egypt 's second-largest city . 
Writings on the walls leading to the mosque include `` Pharaoh 's last day , '' `` leave us alone old man '' and `` game over . '' 
The streets leading to the Al Kaed Ibrahim mosque were packed as a sermon began for midday prayers . 
Pro-Mubarak groups were notably absent from Tahrir Square , where they clashed with anti-government protesters earlier this week . 
Pro-government supporters are gathering at a mosque in Cairo for a `` day of loyalty . '' 
Anti-government demonstrators are calling Friday for a `` day of departure '' and `` day of farewell . '' 
-LRB- Update 11:55 a.m. Friday in Cairo , 4:55 a.m. Friday ET -RRB- Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei said Friday that the uprising in Egypt is a blow to U.S. policies in the region , Iran 's state media reported . 
`` The people of Egypt , if they are able to push this through , this will be a defeat for the U.S. , '' he said . 
-LRB- Update 11:10 a.m. Friday in Cairo , 4:10 a.m. Friday ET -RRB- Anti-government protesters beat drums , played music and chanted slogans at Tahrir Square , which has become ground zero for demonstrators demanding an end to Mubarak 's three decades in power . 
Military forces freed 18 journalists `` captured by thugs and took them to a safe place , '' state media reported . 
Egypt 's defense minister is on his way to the square with some senior military officials , state media reported . 
-LRB- Update 10:00 a.m. Friday in Cairo , 3:00 a.m. Friday ET -RRB- The Egyptian government 's official figures on the number of people injured in unrest has climbed to 896 , the country 's health minister told state media . 
Eight people have been killed , he said . 
-LRB- Update 9:17 a.m. Friday in Cairo , 2:17 a.m. Friday ET -RRB- Demonstrators had stacked piles of rocks Friday throughout Cairo 's Tahrir Square , where a large number of people had already gathered by 9 a.m. -LRB- 2 a.m. ET -RRB- . 
Troops surrounded the area , and anti-government protesters manned their own security checkpoints . 
Anti-government demonstrators have dubbed Friday `` Day of Farewell '' and `` Day of Departure '' and planned large protests that they hope will prompt Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak to step down . 
-LRB- Update 6:56 a.m. Friday in Cairo , 11:56 p.m. Thursday ET -RRB- Egyptian authorities had stepped up security around Cairo 's Tahrir Square early Friday morning , with additional troops in riot gear carrying automatic weapons and blocking the nearby October 6 bridge , CNN 's Thomas Evans reported . 
Troops have detained some people leaving the square , pointing guns at them and forcing them to lay on the ground . 
Anti-government demonstrators have dubbed Friday `` Day of Farewell '' and `` Day of Departure '' and planned large protests that they hope will prompt President Hosni Mubarak to step down . 
-LRB- Update 4:50 a.m. in Cairo , 9:50 p.m. ET -RRB- National Security Council spokesman Tommy Vietor said Thursday night that U.S. officials have discussed with Egyptian officials `` a variety of different ways '' in which a new government could take shape . 
But Vietor stressed `` all of those decisions must be made by the Egyptian people . '' 
Also , a senior official in U.S. President Barack Obama 's administration knocked down a New York Times report that the Egyptians and Americans were near consensus on a specific proposal . 
-LRB- Update 4:47 a.m. in Cairo , 9:47 p.m. ET -RRB- Egyptian Vice President Omar Suleiman says blame for some of the unrest in Egypt goes to the media . 
`` I actually blame certain friendly nations who have television channels , they are not friendly at all , who have intensified the youth against the nation and the state , '' Suleiman told state-run Nile TV . 
`` They are actually continuing . 
They have filled in the minds of the youth with wrongdoings , with allegations , and this is unacceptable . '' 
A change in Egypt is necessary but Obama repeats exactly the mistakes of Carter in Iran in 1979 . 
These mistakes result in the poor situation of the Iranian people , in the Iran -- Irak war then , and will cause simmilar results in the Arab world and the Israli -- Palestinian coflict now . 
It is easier to throw nice words than to solve the problems of Egypt which produces 1 million mouths to feed and supply new jobs every year . 
A process of change should be gradual and controlled under the supervision of the army and the help of Western Powers . 
February 5 , 2011 at 2:40 am | Report abuse | Reply It 's 11 PM Hawaii time , 11 AM Cairo time . 
Why is n't CNN covering it live ??? @Obama iluminati enuendo ... one man 's puppet is another man 's extremist . 
It 's like an old woman always meddeling in other peoples affairs ... nothing good comes from it . 
THANK YOU ... THANK YOU ... NOW . . 
YOUR PICUTURE IN OUR HEART NOT IN OUR HISTORY BOOK ... YOU DESERVE THE NOBLE PRICE ... HEAY MAN . . 
YOUR NAME WILL BE A SMILE ON EVERY EGYPTIAN CHILDREN SMILE ... YOU ARE THE GREATEST OF ALL ... GO ON . . 
GO ON ... STOP THE DEVILES WORSHIPING IN EVERY COUNTRY ... AND PLS . 
COME TO EGYPT AGAIN ... IN THE EGYPTIAN MUSEUM ... YOU ; LL A SMILE ON KING -LRB- TUT ANK AMOUN FACE -RRB- ... WELLCOME TO HISTORY BOOK ... TEARS ON MY EYES ... I do n't understand why the death toll started over . 
I guess the first 300 do n't count . 
For all the people that say if Mubarak left it would be chaos and he should stay till September . . 
What if he had a heart attack and died ? 
After all he is 82 ! 
And for all the people that say its just 6-7 months , just leave him till September . . 
If you are an owner of a business and your appointed manager killed your son will you still be able to honor your employment contract with him till it ends ?! Egyptians want real democracy . . 
Please respect that , and try to understand that the whole world does n't revolve around USA . 
We are a peaceful nation that wants freedom , we do n't want war nor chaos . 
If you 've actually saw any pictures for Tahrir square you 'll find that the people of the revolution are the men , women , youth , elders , as well as children of the Egyptian Society . 
and besides mike only few accept differences mostly will never . . 
try to realize most of us were assertive , selfish , opinionated and this particular feeling is very provocative . 
I think we americans need to just keep our noses out of other countrys buisness , stop giving out money to fund wars and fix the problems we have in our own country first . 
If money is so tough and the goverment is having to cut school funding and other important things we dont have the money to support a war which has nothing to do with us . 
Greetings in the name of Lord Jesus Christ ! 
I am Nabeela Saddique form Punjab Pakistan . 
I am working with orphaned , street and poor children in pakistan . 
Today I have visited your website . 
Its realy wonderful work ... If you have translation work this is my request kindly contact with me . 
I am able to do Translation and recording work in some Pakistani Languages . 
Our National Language is Urdu and some other Provinces Languages . 
I do enyone Translation work in Low and proper rates in Urdu , Punjabi , and Arbic languages . 
Hopefuly you will Contact with me soon . 
God bless you and keep you . 
May His Grace , Peace , Joy and Love with you and your family . 
May He provide us a way that we work together for the spreading Word of God in Pakistani areas . 
All suicide bombers are going to Hell becuase they have disobeyed God 's command and do n't have time left to repent . 
Quran -LRB- 4:29 -RRB- O you who believe , do not consume each others ' properties illicitly only mutually acceptable transactions are permitted . 
You shall not kill yourselves . 
GOD is Merciful towards you . 
Perhaps when they get to Muslim heaven they wo n't be forced to wear multiple layers of hot clothes in summer time ? 
Perhaps they wo n't be obliged to all dress and loom exactly the same , with head scarves and so on ? 
Perhaps they 'll be free to live their lives as they choose and be able to make up all sorts of rules about how Muslim men should behave ! 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
