February 03 , 2011 | By Joe Sterling , CNN The streets are calm in the far-off western Egyptian town of Siwa , but one resident says the social unease gripping the country 's capital can be felt just the same . 
Mohamed Aziz is general manager of Siwa Safari Paradise Hotel & Tourist Village , whose name conjures a different world from the tumult in the the boiling-mad crowd in Cairo 's Tahrir Square . 
He said the atmosphere in the town of Siwa is normal and safe , and `` nothing is happening '' on the streets there . 
But he said there 's a sense of `` anxiety '' over daily life and the prospects for the future among citizens in the town . 
Observers trying to get a handle on Egyptian public opinion say that kind of unease appears to reflect the dissatisfaction with the economic quality of life and the political uncertainty in Egypt , home to more than 80 million people . 
It 's a mood that appears to pervade the villages , towns and cities where not everyone is taking to the streets and where protests are n't confrontational . 
Shadi Hamid , director of research for the Brookings Institution 's Doha Center , said that while public opinion is `` notoriously difficult to gauge '' in Egypt , he says the `` undercurrent of anger and frustration is n't limited to a minority . '' 
`` I think the protesters capture a real building sentiment that has grown and grown over the last decade . 
They are expressing a widespread public outrage at the current state of affairs , '' he said . 
`` There 's an overwhelming sense that things have gone wrong . '' 
Hamid said Egypt has had some of its best growth in recent years , but that growth has served to generate `` popular discontent . '' 
He said people have been upset that economic dividends have not been evenly distributed and `` the middle class feels it wants and deserves more . '' 
He said the people who are driving the uprising are n't poorer people from rural areas , where people tend to be a bit more fatalistic and latently supportive of the status quo . 
They are middle-class and urban people with high expectations who believe they should be employed , but are n't . 
Some pro-Mubarak demonstrators were also in Tahrir Square on Tuesday morning and some residents said they were opposed to the protests . 
`` I am upset with the revolution in Tahrir Square , '' said Muna al-Mahdi , her voice trembling as she spoke in her middle-class Cairo neighborhood . 
`` It does n't represent us . 
It does n't represent our opinion . 
We are here sticking with Hosni Mubarak only . 
Give him two months , give him time to work . 
And then he can go peacefully . '' 
