The popular uprisings against longtime strongmen in Tunisia and now Egypt have triggered aftershocks around the Middle East and North Africa as authoritarian rulers move to head off similar uprisings in their own nations . 
Here 's a summary of what has happened elsewhere : President Abdelaziz Bouteflika will lift a nearly 20-year-old state of emergency in the `` very close future , '' the state news agency announced Thursday . 
The move is one of several demanded by demonstrators in recent protests against the government , which imposed the emergency decree in a crackdown against Islamic political parties in 1992 . 
The clampdown triggered an Islamist insurgency that left more than 100,000 dead , according to human rights groups . 
Those taking to the streets in recent demonstrations have also called for the release of prisoners and the restoration of individual and collective freedoms . 
Saad Djebbar , an international lawyer and Algeria analyst based in London , said the Algerian leadership has clearly been affected by the regionwide protests -- but warned that authorities may `` produce some sort of trick '' to convince its population that reforms are under way . 
Following several weeks of protests over political and economic grievances , King Abdullah II sacked his government , named a new prime minister and met privately with leaders of the nation 's main Islamist group Thursday , the first such talks on record . 
The Islamic Action Front , the political wing of Jordan 's Muslim Brotherhood , says it plans another round of demonstrations Friday . 
Secretary-General Hamza Mansour told CNN Thursday that changing prime ministers was not the solution Jordanians needed . 
Though protesters have stopped short of directly criticizing the king , Abdullah has acknowledged the reform process `` has suffered from many shortcomings '' and young Jordanians were frustrated by lack of opportunity . 
He has instructed his new government to re-examine the election law and urgently tackle corruption -- but his appointment of former intelligence chief Marouf Al Bakhit as his new premier was also seen as an attempt to shore up support among Jordan 's tribes , the bedrock of loyalty to the monarchy . 
