One week ago , angry , disenfranchised and energized Egyptians emerged from Friday prayers , took to the streets and chanted , `` Freedom ! '' 
`` We want -LRB- Mubarak -RRB- to leave , '' said one 19-year-old man hours after the intense day of protests . 
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak is not gone , but his days are numbered . 
The leader agreed Tuesday to not seek re-election in September . 
He told ABC News Thursday he would like to step down right away , but can not because he does not want to risk plunging his nation into chaos . 
In the bloody blur of days since his announcement that he would not stand for re-election , regime foes and opponents have clashed repeatedly in Cairo 's Tahrir Square , the center of anti-government demonstrations . 
Eight people have been killed and nearly 850 injured , according to the health ministry . 
Although his government has made concessions , Mubarak faces another challenge Friday , which opponents have dubbed `` Day of Farewell '' and `` Day of Departure '' -- references to further large protests they hope will prompt the president to step down now . 
Thursday saw an escalation of attacks on journalists , many of whom asked whether the government was clearing them out of the way so as to cloak its actions . 
Journalists said it was too dangerous to be at Tahrir Square or to provide live camera feeds . 
Vice President Omar Suleiman laid some of the unrest 's blame on the media . 
`` I actually blame certain friendly nations who have television channels , they are not friendly at all , who have intensified the youth against the nation and the state , '' Suleiman told Nile TV . 
`` They have filled in the minds of the youth with wrongdoings , with allegations , and this is unacceptable . '' 
State-run Nile TV said a segment of anti-government protesters , called the 25th of January Youth , will leave the square and form a political party to compete in upcoming elections . 
Meanwhile , CNN 's Anderson Cooper said on `` Parker Spitzer '' Thursday night that , if anything , the Mubarak foes increased the portion of Tahrir Square they occupy in the standoff . 
It 's not clear if organizers of the protests planned after Friday prayers would be able to rally the numbers they had last week or reach the presidential palace , Cooper said . 
Tension was building before dawn Friday , he said . 
Mubarak told ABC News correspondent Christiane Amanpour that he was troubled by the bloody clashes that broke out Wednesday in Tahrir Square . 
