2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Could the U.S. shut down the internet ? 
: It seemed so easy for Egypt . 
Just order a shutdown of the country 's internet connections and - bam - it happens . 
But is such an authoritarian action transferable ? 
Could the U.S. government shut down American internet connections ? 
And is it possible for the global internet to be toppled ? 
Mass protests planned for Friday as Mubarak holds on : Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak told ABC News on Thursday that he would like to step down right away , but can not because he does not want to risk plunging his nation into chaos . 
Whoopi : I was a high-functioning drug addict : While her co-hosts may have criticized Charlie Sheen over a recent report that he 's skipping rehab to go back to work , Whoopi Goldberg says she understands the decision . 
`` The View '' host revealed Wednesday that she was once a high-functioning drug addict . 
Bitter cold , outages follow in wake of storm : A swirl of sleet and freezing rain barreled into the Gulf States Thursday , yet another winter storm carrying frigid weather to a region unaccustomed to the cold . 
Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke cautioned on Thursday that , while the U.S. economy is on the mend , unemployment remains an issue . 
Some highlights from the day 's business news : Stocks end higher ahead of jobs report U.S. stocks ended higher Thursday as investors digested comments about the economy from Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke , who said a weak job market continues to weigh on the recovery . 
Stocks have been wavering over the past couple of sessions as investors remain nervous about Friday 's big employment report from the government . 
This week 's labor reports painted a mixed picture . 
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 20 points , or 0.2 % , led by Cisco and Bank of America . 
Earlier , the blue-chip index shed 60 points , but it erased most of those losses ahead of Bernanke 's speech . 
50 people in 50 days : California girl snatched from parking lot in '88 Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com 's news blog This Just In will feature the stories of the missing . 
This is the 14th case , and it aired Thursday night on HLN . 
Michaela Garecht was abducted in November 1988 , when she was 9 , in Hayward , California , according to a friend who was with her . 
Michaela and her 9-year-old friend rode their scooters to a market on a Saturday morning to purchase candy and soda , Michaela 's mother , Sharon Murch , has said . 
When the girls left the store , they began to walk home , forgetting they had rode their scooters . 
They realized their mistake and went back to the store , but Michaela 's scooter was missing . 
`` Michaela spotted it in a parking lot next to a car and went to get it , and when she bent over to pick up the scooter , a man jumped out of the car , grabbed her from behind , threw her into the car and took off with her , '' Murch said in 2009 . 
A swirl of sleet and freezing rain barreled into the Gulf States Thursday , yet another winter storm carrying frigid weather to a region unaccustomed to the cold . 
The storm system extended from Corpus Christi , Texas , through Louisiana , Mississippi and most of central Alabama , as forecasters predicted up to 5 inches of snow in scattered areas across the Deep South and along the U.S.-Mexico border . 
A wintry mix of snow and sleet is expected to coat downtown Houston with about an inch of accumulation , forecasters said . 
Phillip Garrido faces charges including kidnapping , rape and false imprisonment . 
Dugard was snatched in 1991 from the street in front of her home in South Lake Tahoe , California . 
Authorities accuse Garrido and his wife , Nancy , of holding Dugard in a hidden compound behind their home for 18 years . 
Dugard was 29 when she was found in August 2009 at the Garridos ' home in Antioch , about 120 miles from her house . 
Nancy Garrido pleaded not guilty late last year to charges in connection with the case , and proceedings against her husband were suspended last year until a determination about his competency could be made . 
Verizon reserves the right to slow down your access speed on your new iPhone 4 . 
$ 3 million gone in 30 seconds : It may sound like a lot to shell out for a commercial spot during the Super Bowl , but some companies clearly think it 's worth the cost . 
Last year 's game drew about four times the audience of the first Super Bowl , in 1967 , when 27 million viewers saw the Green Bay Packers crush the Kansas City Chiefs . 
And Sunday night football draws an average of 20.8 million viewers . 
Check out a sneak peek of the Super Bowl ads . 
Cowboys cheerleaders cash in -LRB- video -RRB- : For more than 30 years , the Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders have made money for the Cowboys NFL Franchise through branding merchandise , Barbie dolls , calendars and a reality TV series . 
The economy is on the mend ? 
So says Fed chairman Ben Bernanke . 
Speaking to a room full of reporters at the National Press Club , Bernanke said there are signs of stronger consumer and business spending . 
But the recovery is still not at a point that will significantly reduce the unemployment rate , which sits at 9.4 % . 
GM , Ford and Chrysler driving up auto sales : AutoNation , the country 's largest network of auto dealers , said sales rose the most sharply at dealerships selling Ford , General Motors and Chrysler products . 
New car sales surged 24 % at dealers selling Detroit brands , compared with 15 % overall . 
Five-time World Series winner Andy Pettitte , one of baseball 's most accomplished pitchers and a man whose reputation took a hit when he admitted taking a performance-enhancing drug , is about to call it a career . 
Pettitte , 38 , will announce his retirement Friday , according to the New York Yankees , with whom he won all his World Series titles and played 13 of his 16 Major League seasons . 
The left-handed Louisiana native and Texas resident will finish his career with a 240-138 record and 3.88 ERA in 479 starts with the Yankees -LRB- 1995-2003 and 2007-10 -RRB- and the Houston Astros -LRB- 2004-2006 -RRB- . 
The fashion designer issued a quick apology Thursday after Twitter followers were not amused by his attempt at an Egypt-related joke . 
`` Millions are in an uproar in #Cairo , '' he tweeted . 
It was n't long before Cole tweeted his regrets : `` Re Egypt tweet : we were n't intending to make light of a serious situation . 
We understand the sensitivity of this historic moment . '' 
It also was n't long before a fake Kenneth Cole PR account was created to make fun of him . 
A couple of its latest tweets : `` Check out our new colab with @BP_America - slick looks for spring ! '' 
`` People of Haiti , fall into our store for earth-shattering savings ! '' 
`` Iran is enriching uranium . 
Our shoes will enrich your suits . '' 
The 26-year-old member of Norway 's parliament said he nominated WikiLeaks for a Nobel Peace Prize because it has helped `` redraw the map of information freedom . '' 
`` Publishing material that is deemed classified by the government is an obvious right that newspapers and media have practiced for many , many decades , '' Valen wrote on his blog . 
`` This way , the public has become aware of abuses of power that governments should be held accountable for . 
`` The internet does n't change this - it merely makes information more accessible , easier to distribute , and more democratic in the sense that virtually anyone with an internet connection can contribute . '' 
Valen is a keyboardist , a member of the bands Amish 82 and Peevish Penfriend . 
He is a former member of Gallery . 
Coblentz , a longtime aide to Mohamed ElBaradei , says the Egyptian opposition figure previously had no ambitions for office in Egypt , according to a Wall Street Journal article . 
`` When people were first approaching him saying , ` Will you run for president of Egypt in 2011 ? ' 
he was very dismissive of it , '' Coblentz told The Journal . 
Coblentz helped ElBaradei write a memoir that is due out in April , The Journal reported . 
After ElBaradei learned how to use social networking on the internet , he learned he was more popular than he had realized , Coblentz told The Journal . 
`` It was really this last 14 months , where someone I knew as not being particularly computer savvy , taught himself to use Facebook and Twitter and YouTube and started to do in virtual space which was forbidden to do by the Mubarak regime , the freedom of assembly by large groups , '' Coblentz said , according to The Journal . 
Colbert is the first minority appointed to new Ohio Gov. John Kasich 's Cabinet . 
Kasich has been criticized for his string of white appointees , but Colbert , who is black , broke the string when Kasich named him to lead the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services . 
Colbert had been interim director of the department , The Columbus Dispatch newspaper reported . 
`` I am comfortable with who I am , '' Colbert said at the announcement of his appointment , according to the Dispatch . 
`` I understand my heritage . 
I 'm very proud of that heritage . 
I 'm very proud of those that paved the way for me to get this position . 
Additionally , I know the job that I 'm doing . 
I 've been doing this for the last three years on the financial side , and I understand what we need to do to get services to Ohioans . '' 
FBI and Army officials repeatedly ignored multiple warning signs that could have prevented the November 2009 massacre at Fort Hood , Texas , according to a long-awaited report released Thursday by two U.S. senators . 
The inability to act was a result of both bureaucratic inefficiency and an unwillingness to identify and confront homegrown Islamic extremism , the report concludes . 
Army psychiatrist Maj. Nidal Hasan is accused in the shootings , which left 13 people dead and 32 wounded . 
He faces a likely court-martial and potential death penalty . 
The No. 1 bestselling book The Big Short : Inside the Doomsday Machine that details the 2008 financial crisis is now out on paperback with a new afterword . 
Today on American Morning , `` Big Short '' author Michael Lewis talks about the roller-coaster ride of the economy last year and the reactions to the book by some of its subjects , including members of Congress . 
Lewis also gives his insight on the protests in Egypt and the economic toll they may have on the financial markets in the United States . 
Watch to see why he says Wall Street is always looking for something to blame . 
Miller High Life markets itself as the beer for the everyman . 
And now the company is launching an ad campaign for the everyman too . 
Miller High Life will air new commercials that revolve around the customer . 
Consumers will be able to sign up with Miller High Life to be `` sponsored '' and will then have the choice of receiving a $ 1 check , a $ 1 coupon for Miller High Life or donating $ 1 to U.S. veterans . 
Windell Middlebrooks , the man starring in the ads , talks to T.J. Holmes about the philosophy behind the Miller High Life campaign and gives American Morning a preview of a new commercial . 
Who are the pro-democracy protesters leading the demonstrations on the streets of Egypt ? 
While protesters of all ages have all been spotted participating , the young generation bound together by the internet is significantly influencing the rising movement in the country . 
TIME s cover story takes a closer look into the pro-democracy protesters . 
The organizers are young , but maybe not as young as you think . 
Check out American Morning s preview of the piece with its author Bobby Ghosh , deputy international editor of TIME . 
Spc. Daniel Logrosso of Springfield , Illinois , removes ice from a Humvee windshield Tuesday . 
About 500 Illinois National Guard members were called out to deal with the snowstorm . 
Bitter cold , with some more snow and ice mixed in , will follow the monster storm that dominated much of the country earlier in the week . 
Wisconsin can expect wind-chill values between 20 and 25 degrees below zero Fahrenheit , and parts of Maine and New Hampshire can expect several inches of new snow , the National Weather Service said . 
Sleet and freezing rain are expected along the Gulf Coast . 
All of this is coming as vast areas try to clear streets and restore electricity after the massive storm that brought as much as 2 feet of snow to some locales . 
Australians are still feeling the effects of Cyclone Yasi , whose torrential rain and high winds have knocked out power to large portions of the country 's northeast . 
Demonstrations continue in Cairo , Egypt , after anti-government protesters held their ground overnight in the capital city 's Tahrir Square . 
Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq said Wednesday 's attacks on demonstrators would be investigated . 
Meanwhile , in Jordan , the main Islamist group says it plans further street demonstrations Friday in the capital to protest the appointment of a new prime minister by King Abdullah II . 
The Islamic Action Front , the political wing of the Muslim Brotherhood , has rejected talks with new Prime Minister Marouf al Bakhit , who is forming a new government . 
But several of its representatives will be meeting the king later Thursday . 
And in Yemen , thousands of anti-government protesters gathered near Sanaa University , indicating many in the country were not satisfied with President Ali Abdullah Saleh 's recent announcement that he would not seek re-election . 
About a kilometer away , a large crowd of government supporters gathered for a demonstration . 
Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Chairman Joe Lieberman and Ranking Member Susan Collins will hold a news conference at noon to release their bipartisan report on the failures of the U.S. government to prevent the November 5 , 2009 , shooting at Fort Hood Army Post that killed 13 people and wounded 32 others . 
Today marks the beginning of year 4709 on the Chinese calendar , the Year of the Rabbit . 
Celebrations were taking place across Asia . 
Egyptologists and archaeologists have been uneasy since late last week when the unrest in Egypt led to damage to some of the nation 's priceless treasures . 
On Friday , looters at the Cairo Museum damaged two statues of King Tutankhamun , broke 13 glass showcases and damaged 70 other antiquities . 
There have also been reports of looting at dig sites around the country . 
This morning , Dr. Bob Brier , Egyptologist , tells American Morning s Kiran Chetry and TJ Holmes what damage has been done , how it can be repaired , and how some Egyptians are banding together to protect the museums . 
Brier says the entire country of Egypt is a `` vast outdoor museum , '' and that the monuments are certainly not safe . 
Ongoing coverage - Protests in Egypt 8:00 am ET - National Prayer Breakfast - President Obama and Mark Kelly , husband of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords , speak at the National Prayer Breakfast in Washington . 
9:30 am ET - Senate hearing on Iraq - The Senate Armed Services Committee holds a hearing on the current situation in Iraq . 
10:30 am ET - Pentagon briefing on Afghanistan - U.S. Army Brig. Gen. Mark Martins briefs reporters to provide an update on the rule of law in Afghanistan . 
1:00 pm ET - Obama talks clean energy - President Obama promotes clean energy innovation in remarks in State College , Pennsylvania . 
CNN.com Live is your home for breaking news as it happens . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
