By the CNN Wire Staff Cooper recounts being attacked in Cairo NEW : Vice President Omar Suleiman says the media is partly to blame for the unrest NEW : A Reuters television crew is beaten in Cairo U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton condemns the targeting of reporters Al Jazeera , The Washington Post and others report detained journalists Cairo , Egypt -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Journalists attempting to cover unprecedented unrest in Egypt reported being beaten , arrested and harassed by security forces and police for a second day Thursday , leading to sharply limited television coverage of the protests . 
Various news outlets -- including the BBC , Al-Arabiya , ABC News , the Washington Post , Fox News , Al Jazeera and CNN -- said members of their staffs had been attacked or otherwise targeted . 
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch also reported that staffers were detained . 
The Committee to Protect Journalists -LRB- CPJ -RRB- , a New York-based advocacy organization , said late Thursday it had recorded 24 detentions , 21 assaults and five instances of equipment having been seized in the past 24 hours . 
A popular Egyptian blogger was among those who reported being beaten . 
`` With this turn of events , Egypt is seeking to create an information vacuum that puts it in the company of the world 's worst oppressors , countries such as Burma , Iran and Cuba , '' said CPJ Executive Director Joel Simon . 
Reporter caught in the grips of protest Anderson Cooper , crew attacked in Egypt Worn and battered after day of clashes Van plows into people on Cairo street As access grew more and more limited , news channels curbed their coverage of the crisis , showing file footage of the protests and cutting some of the intensity that characterized their earlier reports . 
CNN journalists broadcast from secret locations Thursday night because of security concerns . 
Bert Sundstrom , a foreign correspondent for Sweden 's SVT television , was found in a Cairo hospital , severely beaten , the executive editor of SVT told CNN . 
Sundstrom had been missing and feared kidnapped . 
Fox News reported Thursday that a reporter and cameraman , forced to flee their position after a Molotov cocktail ignited a fire , ran into pro-Mubarak protesters and were so severely beaten they spent the night in a hospital before being released . 
A Reuters television crew was beaten in downtown Cairo , the news agency said . 
The team had been working on a piece about stores and banks being forced to close when the crew was attacked . 
ABC News reported that a group of men carjacked and threatened to behead members of one of its crews . 
A producer , cameraman and two other ABC News employees were surrounded on a busy road between Cairo 's airport and the downtown area , ABC reported . 
They were later released . 
Al Jazeera said Thursday that six of its journalists had been detained by Egyptian authorities in the past week , with equipment stolen and destroyed . 
`` It has also faced unprecedented levels -LRB- of -RRB- interference in its broadcast signal across the Arab world , '' the network said in a statement . 
The Washington Post reported , citing multiple witnesses , that its Cairo bureau chief , Leila Fadel , and photographer Linda Davidson were among two journalists arrested Thursday morning by the Egyptian Interior Ministry . 
The Post later said on its blog that Fadel had called to say she and Davidson were released , but the two were separated from Sufian Taha , their translator and a longtime Post employee , and their Egyptian driver , Mansour el-Sayed Mohammed Abo Gouda . 
The two men were unaccounted for , the Post said . 
The New York Times reported Thursday that two of its reporters had been released after being detained overnight in Cairo . 
Others said their equipment had been confiscated . 
And the BBC tweeted Thursday , `` Egyptian security seize BBC equipment at Cairo Hilton in attempt to stop us broadcasting . '' 
`` Gear taken at hotel for its own security , '' one photojournalist posted online . '' 
... See if we get it back . '' ' 
A cloud of rocks in the sky ' Should Obama take Egypt ` behind scenes ' ? 
Explain it to me : Arab unrest Mubarak ` borrowing from book of Saddam ' ? 
Speaking on state-run Nile TV Thursday , Egyptian Vice President Omar Suleiman mentioned the role of the media and , at least in part , blamed journalists for the country 's current unrest . 
`` I actually blame certain friendly nations who have television channels , they are not friendly at all , who have intensified the youth against the nation and the state , '' he said . 
`` They are actually continuing . 
They have filled in the minds of the youth with wrongdoings , with allegations , and this is unacceptable . '' 
Meanwhile , in Washington , U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton condemned the attacks on journalists in Egypt Thursday , `` in the strongest possible terms . '' 
`` This is a violation of international norms that guarantee freedom of the press and it is unacceptable in any circumstances , '' she said . 
U.S. State Department officials told CNN earlier that they have information that Egypt 's Interior Ministry was behind the journalist detentions , citing reports from the U.S. Embassy in Egypt . 
Department officials were expected to discuss the issue with the Egyptian Embassy in Washington and the Foreign Ministry in Cairo . 
Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said the attacks and harassment of journalists seem to be part of an organized effort , but it was unclear who was directing it . 
`` I do n't think these are random attacks , '' he told reporters . 
`` There is a concerted campaign to intimidate international journalists in Cairo and interfere with their reporting , '' Crowley posted earlier Thursday on Twitter . 
A photojournalist for CNN-IBN , CNN 's sister network in India , Rajesh Bhardwaj , was detained in Cairo 's Tahrir Square , the site of bloody clashes between supporters and opponents of President Hosni Mubarak . 
He was taken away by the Egyptian Army and later released , but only after his identification card and tapes were destroyed , said Suhasini Haidar , CNN-IBN deputy foreign editor . 
Other journalists reported being beaten and harassed by protesters , while some spoke of close calls . 
`` The threats to journalists on the street were explicit , and increasing . 
We pulled back accordingly to protect our people , '' said CNN Executive Vice President Tony Maddox . 
CNN 's Anderson Cooper tweeted Thursday : `` Situation on ground in Egypt very tense . 
Vehicle I was in attacked . 
The Greek daily newspaper Kathimerini said one of its reporters , Petros Papaconstantinou , was beaten by protesters in Cairo 's Tahrir Square . 
Papaconstantinou was clubbed in the head with a baton and stabbed in the foot , either with a knife or a screwdriver , said Xenia Kounalaki , head of the newspaper 's foreign desk . 
A photographer also sustained minor injuries , Kounalaki said , and both were treated at a Cairo hospital and released . 
Marie Colvin of the Sunday Times of London said she was approached by a gang of men with knives in Imbaba , a poor neighborhood of Cairo . 
Another group of men pushed her into a store and locked it to protect her , she said . 
`` Get the journalists out of the way so we can beat up those loudmouths in Tahrir Square ! '' 
she said , as a way to describe the thought process of groups attacking reporters . 
`` Tomorrow 's going to be hell . '' 
In addition , several human rights groups reported their representatives had been detained . 
The Hisham Mubarak Law Center , a human rights law firm , was taken over by military police , as was the Egyptian Center for Economic and Social Rights , Oxfam International said in a statement . 
A total of eight people were detained , including the directors of both centers , the organization said . 
Oxfam said several of its staff members were among those detained . 
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch each said one of their researchers was detained at the law center . 
They were interrogated before being taken away to an unknown location in Cairo , Human Rights Watch said . 
All three groups called for the immediate release of their staffers . 
U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon condemned the attacks . 
`` The freedom of speech , whether journalists or demonstrators -- they should be fully guaranteed and protected . 
That is a ground principle of democracy , '' he said . 
Meanwhile , Shahira Amin , a reporter for Egypt 's state-run Nile TV , resigned Thursday . 
`` I spent the day at Nile TV yesterday , '' she told CNN . 
`` I was only allowed to air the pro-Mubarak rallies that were going on , as if nothing was happening at Tahrir Square . 
We were n't allowed to reveal any figures . 
There was a near total blackout , '' she said , calling it `` hypocritical ... I just do n't want to be part of it . '' 
She said she should have resigned `` ages ago . 
... I was happy to spend the day in Tahrir Square where the people are . 
... I am on their side . '' 
`` People are too scared to tell the truth , '' she said . 
`` There is a built-in or inherent feeling that many Egyptian journalists have because of -LRB- the threat of -RRB- detention and arrest . '' 
She added , `` I have n't been intimidated all these years . 
I have been telling the truth . 
I managed to get away with it until now . 
This time around , I just could n't tell the truth , so I just walked out . '' 
Jeffrey Schneider , senior vice president for ABC News , said the network is continuing to assess the security situation in Egypt . 
`` Obviously today was an even more terrifying day ... Nothing is more important than the safety of our troops in the field , '' he said , adding `` we continue to cover this important story . '' 
CBS News spokesman Jeff Ballabon declined to comment on the specifics of the situation . 
`` For security reasons , we will not be disclosing our security plans or our personnel 's activities , movements or locations , '' he said . 
Journalists were also targeted on Wednesday , with some beaten , bloodied , harassed and detained by men , most of them apparently aligned in some way with Mubarak . 
In several cases , news personnel were accused of being `` foreign spies , '' seized , whisked away and often assaulted . 
CNN 's Hala Gorani got caught Wednesday morning in a stampede of demonstrators , some of whom were riding on camels and horses . 
`` I got slammed against the gates and was threatened by one of the pro-Mubarak protesters who was ... telling me to ` get out , get out ! ' '' 
`` The pro-Mubaraks , whoever they are , whoever sent them , are being threatening toward camera crews , journalists , anybody who looks like they may be onlookers . '' 
`` It was pandemonium . 
There was no control . 
Suddenly a man would come up to you and punch you in the face , '' said CNN 's Cooper , describing being attacked by pro-Mubarak demonstrators along with two colleagues outside of Tahrir Square . 
A BBC correspondent , Rupert Wingfield-Hayes , and his crew were `` arrested by members of the secret police '' on Wednesday after interviewing a presidential adviser , the BBC reported . 
They were later released , the network said . 
The Dubai-based Al-Arabiya news network was among the worst hit , with its office damaged and several of its staff targeted . 
Among them was correspondent Ahmed Abdullah , who his editor confirmed Wednesday was found bloodied after being severely beaten by his captors . 
He was transported to a hospital , Maurice Sarfatti told the Brussels-based Le Soir newspaper , which he writes for along with publications in Switzerland and France , that he `` received a stream of blows to the face '' from men claiming he backed leading opposition figure Mohamed ElBaradei . 
`` I am being guarded by two soldiers with Kalashnikovs -LRB- rifles -RRB- and bayonets , '' said Sarfatti , according to a translation from Le Soir . 
`` They say I will be taken before the intelligence services . 
They say I am a spy . '' 
The Committee to Protect Journalists claimed that such accounts were all too commonplace around Cairo . 
In a news release , the group detailed about two dozen incidents , accusing men -- most of them described as pro-Mubarak demonstrators , `` plainclothes police , '' uniformed officers and military -- of perpetrating attacks on reporters seen with cameras and notepads . 
The group laid the blame for this violence squarely on Mubarak 's administration , accusing it of scheming to suppress and stifle news coverage . 
`` The Egyptian strategy is employing a strategy of eliminating witnesses to their actions , '' said Mohamed Abdel Dayem , the committee 's Middle East and North Africa program coordinator . 
`` The government has resorted to blanket censorship , intimidation and , today , a series of deliberate attacks on journalists carried out by pro-government mobs . '' 
CNN 's Christine Theodorou , Jill Dougherty , Elise Labott and Ben Smith contributed to this report . 
