2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Wisconsin can expect wind-chill values between 20 and 25 degrees below zero Fahrenheit , and parts of Maine and New Hampshire can expect several inches of new snow , the National Weather Service said . 
Sleet and freezing rain are expected along the Gulf Coast . 
All of this is coming as vast areas try to clear streets and restore electricity after the massive storm that brought as much as 2 feet of snow to some locales . 
Australians are still feeling the effects of Cyclone Yasi , whose torrential rain and high winds have knocked out power to large portions of the country 's northeast . 
Demonstrations continue in Cairo , Egypt , after anti-government protesters held their ground overnight in the capital city 's Tahrir Square . 
Egyptian Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq said Wednesday 's attacks on demonstrators would be investigated . 
Meanwhile , in Jordan , the main Islamist group says it plans further street demonstrations Friday in the capital to protest the appointment of a new prime minister by King Abdullah II . 
The Islamic Action Front , the political wing of the Muslim Brotherhood , has rejected talks with new Prime Minister Marouf al Bakhit , who is forming a new government . 
But several of its representatives will be meeting the king later Thursday . 
And in Yemen , thousands of anti-government protesters gathered near Sanaa University , indicating many in the country were not satisfied with President Ali Abdullah Saleh 's recent announcement that he would not seek re-election . 
About a kilometer away , a large crowd of government supporters gathered for a demonstration . 
Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee Chairman Joe Lieberman and Ranking Member Susan Collins will hold a news conference at noon to release their bipartisan report on the failures of the U.S. government to prevent the November 5 , 2009 , shooting at Fort Hood Army Post that killed 13 people and wounded 32 others . 
Today marks the beginning of year 4709 on the Chinese calendar , the Year of the Rabbit . 
Celebrations were taking place across Asia . 
its cold here in new hampster , butt my gerbil is warm . 
Al Gore is a charlatan who lined his pockets , with profits resulting from his global warming scam . 
Like Obama , he was also showered with undeserved awards , like the Nobel Prize . 
I guess the upside down concept of ` every kid should get a trophy ' , has traveled up hill to our undeserving leaders ... with the dangerous result of power in the hands of the inept and incompetent . 
Mother Nature is just chemistry , biology and physics . 
That 's all she is . 
You can not sweet-talk her . 
You can not spin her . 
You can not tell her that the oil companies say climate change is a hoax . 
No , Mother Nature is going to do whatever chemistry , biology and physics dictate '' `` Mother Nature always bats last , and she always bats 1.000 '' fort hood ... War tribunals about a bigot army with a failed worldwide dj shoe polish agenda . . 
A clown military of never ending clown headlines like a lieberman who hates a helen thomas veteran . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
