The Egyptian people are not buying what Hosni Mubarak is selling . 
In fact , the anti-government protesters have only become more emboldened since Mubarak 's announcement that he 'll step down from the presidency - but not until September . 
But they want him gone now . 
They think 30 years is long enough . 
However , that does n't seem to matter much to Mubarak . 
He told ABC 's Christiane Amanpour that he 's sick of being president and would like to leave office now . 
But he says he ca n't for fear of the country slipping into chaos . 
That 's as opposed to what we 're seeing in the streets of Cairo right now . 
As for the people shouting insults at him , Mubarak says , `` I do n't care what people say about me . 
Right now I care about my country , I care about Egypt . '' 
Earlier this week , President Obama seemed to suggest Mubarak step down sooner rather than later , saying an orderly transition to a new regime `` must begin now . '' 
U.S. officials say the protest movement is n't going away - it 's only getting bigger . 
They worry that the longer the crisis goes on without a resolution , the worse the economic impact and violence will become . 
Already there are food and fuel shortages and bank closures . 
Other world leaders have also called on Mubarak to step aside , including Turkey 's prime minister , who says Mubarak should `` satisfy the people 's desire for change '' without hesitation . 
Others are suggesting an interim `` caretaker government '' that could oversee the upcoming elections . 
Here s my question to you : Should Mubarak be forced out now rather than waiting until his term expires in September ? 
Interested to know which ones made it on air ? 
The Middle East is starting to look like one big game of dominoes . 
As the kings , unelected presidents and emirs watch what 's going on in the streets of Cairo , they 've got to be wondering if they 're going to be next . 
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak 's days are clearly numbered . 
At this point , it seems highly unlikely he 'll even make it through the rest of his term . 
Mubarak would be following Tunisian President Zine El Abedine Ben Ali out the door after similar popular street movements pushed him out of power . 
No doubt about it , some sort of genie is out of the bottle . 
Yemen President Ali Abdullah Saleh says he wo n't seek re-election when his term ends in 2013 . 
That 's after more than three decades in office . 
He also says he wo n't hand power over to his son . 
Of course , he made that announcement ahead of a `` day of rage '' protest scheduled for Thursday . 
Thousands of people have already been demonstrating in Yemen in recent weeks . 
Over in Jordan , King Abdullah has sacked his government and appointed a new prime minister in the face of protests . 
The king is asking the new government to implement what he calls `` genuine political reform . '' 
It s funny how `` reform '' has suddenly become a priority in some of these countries after decades of repressive governments . 
Meanwhile , demonstrators also are calling for change in Algeria and Sudan . 
And in Syria , there are protests planned for this week . 
Experts say these protests sweeping across the Middle East and North Africa are `` unprecedented '' and a `` watershed event for the Arab world . '' 
For now , the leadership in Saudi Arabia and Libya seems secure , but it 's safe to say a new day is dawning . 
Here s my question to you : What 's next for the Middle East ? 
Interested to know which ones made it on air ? 
Somebody suggested , `` The devil you know is better than the devil you do n't know . '' 
When it comes to Egypt , Hosni Mubarak is the devil we know . 
Ruling for the last three decades , Mubarak has maintained Egypt as a moderate regional force in the face of extreme Islamist nations . 
He 's also helped keep peace with Israel . 
Now Mubarak says he 's not running for re-election and it 's unclear how much longer he will cling to power . 
Which brings us to who 's the devil we do n't know ? 
History suggests we might want to watch what we wish for : Remember when the Bush administration pushed for democratic elections in Gaza and Hamas won ? 
Or go back a little further : When the Shah of Iran was toppled 30 years ago , the ayatollahs took over and Iran became an Islamic republic . 
The Iranian Revolution was originally backed by many groups - much like the one in Egypt - but the extremists took control of the movement - and look where we are today . 
Some worry the same thing could happen in Egypt . 
They fear the rise of the Muslim Brotherhood . 
Even though the extremely conservative Islamic organization is banned from Egypt , it 's still the largest opposition group . 
But not everyone agrees . 
Egyptian opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei rejects the idea that Islamic fundamentalists will take over . 
The secular ElBaradei says he 's reaching out to the Muslim Brotherhood and that they need to be included in any new government . 
Here s my question to you : What are the risks if Mubarak is removed from power in Egypt ? 
As Egyptian protesters demanding reform fill the streets by the hundreds of thousands , it 's worth remembering that the U.S. helps control the purse strings in that country . 
American taxpayers give $ 1.5 billion dollars a year in foreign aid to Egypt , second only to Israel . 
Although the White House has said it 's reviewing this aid depending on the military 's behavior - One top Republican says now is not the time to threaten to withhold any of this money . 
Congresswoman Kay Granger - who chairs the house subcommittee in charge of foreign aid - says we should n't use the money as a stick to force Mubarak into reforms . 
Granger says most of the $ 1.5 billion goes toward the military - which seems to be a stabilizing force among the demonstrators . 
Granger says Congress should only consider withholding aid if there 's evidence that U.S. military equipment is being used improperly . 
Several top Democrats are on the same page , saying the U.S. should remain committed to assisting Egypt . 
They point to the close relationship between the two countries . 
Nonetheless , some experts think cutting financial aid is the best way to get results . 
A bipartisan group of former officials says the administration should suspend all aid to Egypt until the government : Agrees to elections as soon as possible , allows banned candidates to run , immediately lifts the state of emergency that 's been in place for decades , releases political prisoners , and allows for freedom of the media and assembly . 
Here s my question to you : Should the U.S. withhold any of its $ 1.5 billion in financial aid to Egypt ? 
Interested to know which ones made it on air ? 
Jack Cafferty sounds off hourly on the Situation Room on the stories crossing his radar . 
Now , you can check in with Jack online to see what he 's thinking and weigh in with your own comments online and on TV . 
Would you ride in a car that drives itself ? 
Is she the answer ? 
Should the #LoneStarState be allowed to withdraw from U.S. ? 
