Official : U.S. , Egypt talk ways to ` move ' political transition forward As they talked publicly in generalities about a smooth transition to a new government in Egypt , U.S. officials have been working behind the scenes on ways to `` move that process forward , '' a national security spokesman said . 
Top members of the Obama administration stated Thursday their desire for embattled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak to leave office and for inclusive negotiations to begin immediately with his political opponents . 
National Security Council spokesman Tommy Vietor added that U.S. officials have also discussed with Egyptian officials `` a variety of different ways '' in which that new government could take shape . 
But Vietor stressed `` all of those decisions must be made by the Egyptian people . '' 
A senior Obama administration official knocked down a New York Times report that the Egyptians and Americans were near consensus on a specific proposal . 
`` It 's simply wrong to report that there 's a single U.S. plan that 's being negotiated with the Egyptians , '' the official said . 
U.S. officials have made clear in recent days their desire to jumpstart talks between opposition and ruling forces in order to lay the groundwork as soon as possible for a governmental transition . 
That includes pressuring , besides Mubarak 's government , opposition groups to engage immediately in talks . 
Mubarak has announced he will not seek re-election in September . 
Protesters , however , continue to demand that he step down immediately , with a caretaker unity government running the country until the fall elections . 
While some , like former Foreign Minister and Arab League Secretary General Amr Moussa , believe concessions made by Mubarak presented an opportunity to build upon , members of the opposition Muslim Brotherhood have insisted no talks should take place until the president leaves office . 
`` It 's time for both of them to roll up their sleeves , '' a senior State Department official said . 
`` The government has to take some steps , but the opposition has to be willing to participate in negotiations as well . '' 
Egyptian Vice President Omar Suleiman made `` important statements '' about a political dialogue , the senior official said . 
Still , he added that the Egyptian government should allow the opposition to bring its own ideas , rather than dictate the pace and scope of a transformation to democracy . 
The urgent call for talks comes as the Egyptian government pushed back on what it described as `` vague '' statements from the Obama administration about the pace of transition . 
