BP oil spill cost hits nearly $ 10bn BP has set up a $ 20bn compensation fund after the Deepwater Horizon disaster , which has so far paid out 19,000 claims totalling more than $ 240m BP 's costs for the Deepwater Horizon disaster have hit $ 10bn . 
Photograph : Ho\/Reuters BP 's bill for containing and cleaning up the oil spill has reached nearly $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.4 bn -RRB- , as the US government declared that the blown-out well has finally been plugged , five months after the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
The beleaguered oil company revealed that its total cost of the spill had climbed to $ 9.5 bn . 
BP also said payouts to people affected by the spill such as fishermen , hoteliers and retailers had dramatically increased since it handed over authority for dispensing funds to a White House appointee . 
BP has set up a $ 20bn compensation fund , which has so far paid out 19,000 claims totalling more than $ 240m . 
The fund is run by lawyer Kenneth Feinberg , the Obama administration 's former executive pay tsar . 
The oil company previously paid out about $ 3.5 m a day in compensation , but this has risen to $ 12.5 m a day since Feinberg took over . 
However , BP 's incoming chief executive , Bob Dudley , who formally takes over from Tony Hayward on 1 October , told the City a week ago that the company expects to pay out less than the committed $ 20bn . 
It has also set up a facility allowing any unpaid amounts to be paid back to BP . 
The oil well that spewed millions of gallons of crude into the sea has been sealed for good . 
Thad Allen , the former coast guard admiral heading the US government response to the spill , declared the well `` effectively dead '' following a pressure test by BP yesterday . 
`` Additional regulatory steps will be undertaken but we can now state , definitively , that the Macondo well poses no continuing threat to the Gulf of Mexico , '' he added . 
The spill was halted in July with a temporary cap while a relief well was completed . 
That well finally reached the main shaft on Thursday , permitting a cement plug to be pumped in . 
