US still counting financial and environmental cost of the disaster The clean-up operation on the coast of Louisiana at the height of the spill Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP The US government has declared the blown-out BP well in the Gulf of Mexico , which caused the biggest oil spill in American history , `` effectively dead '' after a final plug of cement was pumped in . 
Five months after the explosion that killed 11 workers on the Deepwater Horizon rig and let loose millions of barrels of crude oil , the well passed a pressure test yesterday that confirmed it was sealed about 5,000 metres below the sea bed . 
`` We can finally announce that the Macondo 252 well is effectively dead , '' said Thad Allen , the former coast guard admiral heading the government response to the spill . 
Allen declared that the well `` poses no continuing threat to the Gulf of Mexico '' . 
The spill was brought to a halt in July with a temporary cap while a relief well was completed . 
That well finally reached the main shaft on Thursday , permitting the cement plug to be pumped in . 
Barack Obama hailed the news as an `` important milestone '' and praised those who `` worked around the clock to respond to this crisis and ultimately complete this challenging but critical step to ensure that the well has stopped leaking for ever '' . 
Obama said the government remained committed to helping communities along hundreds of miles of Gulf coast recover from the disaster . 
BP is still counting the cost of the disaster . 
It was forced by the US government to establish a $ 20bn compensation fund . 
Nearly 70,000 people or businesses have lodged claims mostly for loss of earnings or profits . 
So far about one in four have been paid although some of the recipients say with cheques far lower than their claims . 
The majority come from Florida and Louisiana . 
BP last week refused to process a claim by the state government of Alabama for $ 148m in lost income tax revenues because workers have lost their jobs or have diminished earnings as a result of the spill . 
The company is also facing about 400 lawsuits and many more are likely to be filed . 
BP is estimated to have paid $ 8bn so far in clean-up costs . 
It has launched a national advertising campaign that promises to make right the damage caused by the spill . 
The environmental toll is still being assessed but thousands of dead birds , turtles and other wildlife have been found even if the impact is not as great as initially feared . 
The debate over where the spilled oil has gone continues . 
Last month the government said that nearly three-quarters of it had evaporated , been devoured by living organisms or scooped up . 
But some scientists claim that a massive plume of oil remain in the Gulf of Mexico with some of it having settled on the sea bed . 
Earlier this month , BP published its own findings into the causes of the disaster . 
It accepted a partial share of the blame for the blowout but also accused a contractor , Halliburton , of sub-standard work at the well head which led to the disaster and the owner of the rig , Transocean , for the failures of the blowout preventer on the ocean floor . 
The blowout preventer , a series of valves designed to stop a surge of oil and gas , is being held at a Nasa facility in New Orleans to await examination next month . 
BP 's position is widely viewed as establishing its legal strategy as it faces fines and possible prosecution over the disaster . 
