TRIPOLI , Libya | Sat Jul 23 , 2011 10:52 am EDT TRIPOLI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya is ready to hold more talks with the United States and with rebels trying to overthrow Muammar Gaddafi , but the Libyan leader will not bow to demands he quit , a government spokesman said . 
Moussa Ibrahim said Libyan officials had a `` productive dialogue '' with U.S. counterparts last week in a rare meeting that followed American recognition of the rebel government that hopes to end Gaddafi 's 41-year rule . 
`` Other meetings in the future ... will help solve Libyan problems , '' the spokesman told reporters in Tripoli late on Friday . 
`` We are willing to talk to the Americans more . '' 
He said Gaddafi would not leave his position nor Libya . 
Hours later NATO planes bombed targets in the capital , causing damage and casualties , Libyan state television said , without giving details . 
NATO said it had hit a `` command and control node . '' 
A Reuters witness heard at least six blasts early on Saturday , the largest to hit the capital in several weeks , four of them shaking the hotel hosting international media . 
Rebel leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil said Gaddafi must agree publicly to stand down before any talks could begin . 
`` There are no negotiations with this regime unless he declares his departure and that he is stepping down , he and his sons , from power , '' he said in a weekly statement to Libyans broadcast on rebel-run television . 
As Gaddafi clings to power despite five months of civil war and a NATO bombing campaign authorized by a U.N. resolution , the West is increasingly hoping for a negotiated settlement . 
But the United States also says Gaddafi must go . 
Ibrahim said Libyan officials - but not Gaddafi himself - would be willing to hold further meetings with rebels , who now control roughly half of Libya , only on the government 's terms . 
`` Nations do not negotiate with armed gangs , '' he said . 
Gaddafi is urging Libyans to persuade rebels to disarm and rejoin the loyal fold -- and to fight them if they do n't . 
His comments came as Libya reported a NATO airstrike near the eastern oil hub of Brega , the scene of recent fighting , which the government said killed six guards at a water plant . 
NATO said the strike targeted a `` military storage facility '' rather than the water pipeline plant . 
As Western nations intensify diplomatic efforts , a European diplomat said a U.N. envoy would seek to persuade the warring parties to accept a plan that envisages a ceasefire and a power-sharing government , but with no role for Gaddafi . 
The diplomat said the informal proposals would be canvassed by the special U.N. envoy to Libya , Abdul Elah al-Khatib , who has met both government and rebels several times . 
Jalil , who heads the rebels ' Transitional National Council that many Western nations now recognize as the Libyan authority , told Reuters on Saturday that Khatib 's plan for power-sharing could be discussed as long as Gaddafi himself was out . 
`` Any diplomatic solutions are acceptable if they include this main condition , '' he said . 
A rebel spokesman told Reuters that Khatib would come to their eastern stronghold of Benghazi early next week . 
Poorly armed rebels seem unlikely to quickly unseat Gaddafi . 
They declared advances this week but they also suffered losses near their enclave of Misrata and in fighting for Brega . 
Gaddafi has stepped up his defiant rhetoric amid persistent reports of talks . 
Pro-government rallies are being shown almost daily on state television , perhaps a reminder to outsiders that he can still command considerable support . 
On Friday , thousands gathered near Tripoli 's historic center for the unveiling of a massive likeness of the longtime leader . 
State television said Gaddafi would make another speech on Saturday , this time addressed to Egyptians on the anniversary of their revolution -- not this year 's , which toppled President Hosni Mubarak , but pan-Arabist Gamal Abdel-Nasser 's in 1959 . 
Nasser was a role model for Gaddafi who seized power in a coup as a young revolutionary . 
Spokesman Ibrahim denied a rebel report that Mansour Daw , a key aide to Gaddafi , had been wounded in a rebel rocket attack in Tripoli on Thursday . 
He said there had been an explosion but it was caused by a kitchen gas cylinder . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Let the leaders of both factions stand down and then talk to each other . 
What kind of idiot says they will negotiate with the opposing faction as soon as they leave power ? 
`` As Gaddafi clings to power despite five months of civil war and a NATO bombing campaign authorized by a U.N. resolution , the West is increasingly hoping for a negotiated settlement ... But the United States also says Gaddafi must go . '' 
The civil war was created out of whole cloth by NATO 's intervention , and the UN resolution authorised a no-fly zone , which is a far different thing from a bombing campaign . 
As for a negotiated settlement , see above . 
What kind of an idiot ... Well , every schoolyard bragger\/bully wants to `` talk '' once he is finally getting his butt whipped . 
Most of the time it 's a little late for that . 
Everybody has willing to `` talk '' to Moammar for the past 40 years . 
All he ever did was rant and rave and thumb his nose . 
Now , the time for `` talking '' has passed . 
This is not about `` fair '' . 
The `` negotiations '' that will take place when Moammar -LRB- perhaps -RRB- announces he will step down only concern the method and manner of his exile and imprisonment and issues such as the immunity of his family from prosecution . 
Of course , he can always lead his devotees to utter destruction , then put a pistol in his mouth like Hitler . 
Or , he can `` negotiate '' . 
This is all about powers-that-be who have had completely enough of Moammar and have decided , irrevocably , to relegate him to history . 
Any `` idiocy '' would be in the assumption that the dialog surrounding this conflict is ever likely to be some kind of fair and open discussion . 
It 's not a debate in sociology class , it 's the end -LRB- finally -RRB- of Moammar . 
Whether or not that 's nice , or fair , or whether the above mentioned powers-that-be are being less than impartial in their application of justice is entirely irrelevant . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
