BP denies ` buying silence ' of oil spill scientists Oil giant says it is just keeping company data confidential , as it faces 200 federal civil lawsuits over spill Friday 23 July 2010 10.27 BST BP clean-up workers collect tar balls and other oil debris . 
The firm has been accused of muzzling the academics it is hiring Photograph : Alex Ogle\/AFP\/Getty Images BP has rejected accusations of muzzling the scientists and academics it has hired to help fight hundreds of lawsuits relating to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
The American Association of University Professors claims the oil giant is seeking to `` buy the silence '' of the scientific community in its fight against litigation . 
But BP says it is only protecting confidential information and is not trying to prevent the discussion of scientific data . 
A copy of the contract issued by BP to scientists , obtained by the BBC , says they can not publish the research they conduct for BP or speak about the data for at least three years , or until the government gives the final approval to the company 's restoration plan for the gulf . 
It also states that scientists may perform research for other agencies only so long as it does not conflict with the work they are doing for BP , and that they must take instructions from lawyers offering the contracts and other in-house counsel at the oil company . 
Cary Nelson , president of the American Association of University Professors , criticised the contract . 
He told the BBC : `` This is really one huge corporation trying to buy faculty silence in a comprehensive way . '' 
Bob Shipp , head of marine sciences at the University of South Alabama and one of the scientists approached by BP 's lawyers , said the company wanted to hire his whole department . 
`` They contacted me and said we would like to have your department interact to develop the best restoration plan possible after this oil spill , '' he said . 
`` We laid the ground rules that any research we did , we would have to take total control of the data , transparency and the freedom to make those data available to other scientists and subject to peer review . 
They left and we never heard back from them . '' 
BP said that it had hired a number of experts to help with the lawsuits , as well as a number of national and local scientists with expertise in the resources of the gulf of Mexico to help in restoration work . 
`` These scientists are helping us collect and understand data about the impacts of the oil spill on the natural resources and to plan for restoration of those resources , '' BP said . 
`` As is customary , we have asked these experts -LRB- more than a dozen -RRB- to treat information from BP counsel as confidential . 
However , BP does not take the position that environmental data are confidential . 
`` Moreover , BP does not place restrictions on academics speaking about scientific data . '' 
Seven federal judges next week will meet attorneys in Boise , Idaho , to try and decide whether or how to consolidate more than 200 federal civil lawsuits filed by a range of claimants , from fishermen to injured rig workers , oil-rig owner Transocean and other contractors tied to the spill . 
The judges will consider two key questions : where the cases will be heard and who will preside over them . 
The lawsuits range from civil racketeering and personal-injury suits to claims from out-of-work shrimpers and owners of now-vacant hotels on the gulf shore . 
The cost of the spill to BP has already exceeded $ 3.1 bn -LRB- # 2bn -RRB- , and the company has pledged some of its assets as security to the US government while it builds up a promised $ 20bn compensation fund . 
Analysts at Goldman Sachs estimate the final bill for the disaster caused by the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig , which killed 11 workers , could run to $ 70bn . 
