Full text : Blair 's Newsnight interview The prime minister talked about tax , immigration and his own future with the BBC 's Jeremy Paxman . 
But first , as ever , came the war Thursday 21 April 2005 17.48 BST Paxman : Hello , welcome to the second of three interviews with the leaders of the three big parties , who want our votes on May 5 . 
On Friday , it 's Michael Howard ; this evening I 'm in Leeds with the prime minister , Tony Blair . 
Prime Minister , is there anything you would like to apologise for ? 
Blair : Well , if you want me apologise for the war in Iraq , I 'm afraid I ca n't say sorry we removed Saddam . 
No , if you 're asking me other things I 've got wrong over the past eight years , I 've already said there are certain things that any government gets wrong . 
I suppose I 've had my share of those . 
Paxman : But do you accept that there is a trust issue , and that the reason opposition parties can talk about wiping the smirk off your face is because you ca n't any longer say : ` Look at me . 
I 'm a pretty straight kind of guy ' ? 
Blair : Well , trust is an issue . 
But then people are going to have decide , you know : are we to be trusted when we say we 've run a strong economy and we 'll continue to do so with low interest rates and low unemployment and low inflation ? 
I said that we would put investment into the public services ; we have . 
You go and look at any school or hospital ; you look at this city here and how it 's been transformed in the past few years . 
Look at the investment in the local regeneration of an inner city such as Leeds . 
Now , if you 're talking about Iraq , yes , there 's an issue because people , some people , feel they were misled over the war and some people powerfully disagree with the reason why we went to war . 
Paxman : All right , let 's look at Iraq . 
When you told parliament that the intelligence was `` extensive , detailed and authoritative '' , that was n't true , was it ? 
Blair : No , it was true . 
There was no doubt about ... Paxman : It was n't extensive , it was n't detailed and it was n't authoritative . 
Blair : I 'm sorry : it was . 
And the great thing about this now for any member of the public is that thanks to the Butler report - and remember , we 've had four separate inquiries into whether this intelligence was misused or not - each of them have come to the same conclusion , and people can actually go and look on the website and they can go and study the Joint Intelligence Committee reports that I got . 
Blair : And see the intelligence that was given to us . 
Paxman : OK , but you know , do n't you , that just two weeks before you made that statement the Joint Intelligence Committee said that ` intelligence remains limited '' . 
Blair : Of course , intelligence always is limited , but ... Paxman : Well , therefore it 's not extensive , detailed and authoritative , is it ? 
Blair : No , it ... I 'm sorry , their judgment was absolutely clear . 
Look , the one , the one thing you can do is go and read it . 
It said that Saddam Hussein ... Blair : -LRB- It said he -RRB- had chemical and biological weapons ; that he could manufacture new stocks of VX and sarin agent within months of doing so . 
That he could use those weapons against not just military targets but strategic targets . 
You can go and read it . 
Paxman : They said it was limited ; you said it was ` extensive , detailed and authoritative ' . 
Blair : They also made it clear that there was extensive intelligence about Saddam . 
They said , however , of course it 's necessarily limited : intelligence always is . 
Paxman : So was the JIC , the Joint Intelligence Committee , report wrong ? 
Blair : No , they were n't wrong in what they reported at the time ; they were absolutely right . 
But later it transpired that ... Blair : Some , not all , of that intelligence was wrong . 
But the decision I had to take at the time was whether as a result of that intelligence we could conclude Saddam was in breach of United Nations resolutions , and I concluded he was . 
And I may say the evidence is that he indeed was in breach of UN resolutions . 
Paxman : Well , so when you wrote in the forward to the dossier that the threat from Saddam was ` serious and current ' , it was n't . 
And indeed your own chief of staff , Jonathan Powell , had said the dossier did nothing to demonstrate a threat . 
Blair : No , I 'm sorry . 
The evidence that we presented was absolutely clearly set out in the Joint Intelligence Committee reports . 
You 've had four inquires in to this . 
We subjected ourselves as a government , me as a prime minister , to a more extensive inquiry than any government has ever given , and what I 'd simply ask people to do , instead of continually attacking my integrity over Iraq ... I 've never disrespected people who have taken a different point of view . 
But I had to take a decision in the best interests of the country ; I took that decision . 
I can not , I 'm afraid , apologise for having taken it . 
I believe still it was the right thing to do . 
I understand the fact ... Paxman : Despite the fact there were no weapons of mass destruction Blair : That disagree with ... Yes , because ... Paxman : And you told us there were . 
Blair : The legal case was the breach of United Nations resolutions . 
The evidence from the Iraq survey group is that he was indeed in breach of UN resolutions , and incidentally it was n't just us in Britain that concluded he had WMD : the entire United Nations concluded that , which is why they passed resolution 14.41 . 
Paxman : Did you see the Foreign Office legal advice which said military action against Iraq would be ` illegal without a further UN resolution ' ? 
BLAIR : No , I had the attorney general 's advice to guide me . 
But again this thing has been built in to , you know , a Paxman : You did n't see that Foreign Office advice saying that an invasion would be illegal without a second UN resolution ? 
Blair : No , because I had the attorney general 's advice . 
Paxman : You did n't see it ? 
Blair : Yes , I did n't see it . 
But I had the attorney general 's advice , and the attorney general made it absolutely clear that provided we could show that there were breaches of the United Nations resolutions ... Paxman : The attorney general is a political appointment , Prime Minister . 
Should n't you have seen the Foreign Office legal advice ? 
BLAIR : But the attorney general 's advice is the advice he gives us as the law officer . 
He acts in an independent way in doing that . 
Paxman : Do you accept any responsibility at all for the death of Dr David Kelly . 
Blair : It was a terrible , terrible thing to have happened . 
I do n't believe we had any option , however , but to disclose his name because I think had we failed to do so , that would have been seen as attempting to conceal something from the committee that was looking into this at the time . 
And again ... Paxman : Do you accept any responsibility at all ? 
Blair : In relation to this . 
Blair : No , I 've said what I 've said , and I feel desperately sorry for his family and indeed for the terrible ordeal that they were put through . 
But as I said at the time - and again , this has been gone into time and time again - if we had concealed the fact , because this whole row was about the information that - as you know , we 've been over this many , many times - had been given to the BBC reporter , he had then come forward and said to his superiors : `` This is me . 
I think it 's me who 's responsible for having given this story '' ... There was a Foreign affairs select committee report going at the time . 
I think if we 'd concealed that from people , we would have been subject to a different type of allocation . 
Paxman : So the short answer to the question is , you do n't accept any responsibility . 
Blair : Well , it 's not a question of not accepting responsibility ; it is a question of simply explaining the circumstances . 
Paxman : It 's a question to which you could give a yes or no answer , Prime Minister . 
Blair : Yeah , but it 's maybe not a question you need to give a yes or no answer to . 
Paxman : All right . 
You keep referring to these inquiries . 
The inquiry that you set up under Lord Butler concluded that what went wrong there was partly the consequence of your style of government , so-called sofa government . 
Will your next government , if you have one , be any different ? 
Blair : I do n't run a sofa style of government . 
There were over 20 cabinet discussions of the Iraq war . 
Paxman : Lord Butler said : `` We are concerned that the informality and circumscribed character of the government 's procedures , which we saw in the context of policymaking towards Iraq , risks reducing the scope for informed , collective , political judgment . '' 
Are we going to see a different style of government in future , if you are in government ? 
Blair : We have a government that involves people fully . 
I 'm sorry , I do n't accept that we did not discuss Iraq in a proper way : we did . 
Paxman : How many times did the ministerial defense and overseas policy committee meet in the run-up to war ? 
Blair : It did n't have to meet the whole ... Paxman : It did n't meet at all , did it . 
Blair : Well , hang on . 
It did n't have to meet , Jeremy , because we had an ad hoc committee of ministers that were meeting virtually daily at points . 
Paxman : And that is precisely what Lord Butler criticised . 
Blair : No , he does n't criticise that , actually ; that 's completely different from the so-called sofa style of government . 
Look , I want to make this point to you because you can go on , over and over and over , about these events that have happened . 
In the end , I had a decision to make back in March 2003 . 
We had 250,000 UK and US troops there ; we had Saddam not in compliance with UN resolutions . 
I tried desperately hard to get a second UN resolution . 
I could n't get one . 
Now I had a decision to make as to whether to leave Saddam there , in breach of UN resolutions , and end up in a situation with the international community humiliated and him emboldened , or to remove him . 
I decided to remove him . 
Now , you can go through these issues about my integrity , my character , the legal advice - because the legal advice , actually , the legal issue , was exactly the same as the political issue - or you can accept that in the end a decision had to be taken ; there was no middle way , there was no fence to sit on . 
I took that decision . 
Now , I know people strongly disagreed with it . 
In the end , I had to take the decision as prime minister that I thought was right for the country , and I did so . 
Paxman : The problem is , Prime Minister , that the next time the Joint Intelligence Committee come to you and say , `` We have extensive , authoritative intelligence of a threat or possible threat to this country . 
We urge pre-emptive action , '' you wo n't be able to sell it to the public . 
Blair : Well , let 's wait and see if that ever happens - and I hope it never does . 
But I think that people , actually , when they look at this , despite all the stuff , because continually this argument is conducted ... Paxman : Why should they believe you again ? 
Blair : Because in the end , people have got to make a judgment about this . 
This was not an easy decision to take ; it was a hard decision . 
Blair : I took the decision I thought was right , and if I had not taken that decision , then what ? 
You 'd have Saddam Hussein and his sons still running Iraq ; you would n't have 8 million Iraqis going out voting at the polls ; you would n't have change spreading across the Middle East as it is . 
There has been a lot that has happened on the other side of the argument that , just occasionally , we should also pay attention to . 
Paxman : Although those , of course , are not the grounds on which you told us we should go to war at the time . 
Blair : The grounds were , the legal case was , breaches of UN resolutions . 
He was in breach of UN resolutions . 
But again , if I may say , this again has been completely rewritten afterwards . 
Blair : I spoke about the regime and the nature of regime continually , because what I said to people was : `` This is a difficult situation but let us , if we have to remove them , remove them with a clear conscience , because this is a man responsible for hundreds of thousands of deaths . '' 
Paxman : This matters also , Prime Minister , because during your time in office you have committed British forces to battle on five separate occasions . 
On past form , we can expect if you 're returned to Downing Street they might be committed another couple of times in another Blair government . 
You have n't given George Bush any undertakings about anywhere else in the world , have you ? 
Blair : I have n't given him any undertakings about anywhere and I do n't make the decision according to what the president of the United States might want . 
I make it according to what I think are in the interests of this country , and if you look at the military action we 've taken in respect of Kosovo , right , well , we could have opted out of that , too , but look what happened in the early 1990s , when hundreds of thousands of people died in the Balkans . 
We took military action in Afghanistan . 
Look at the democratic election that 's happening there . 
We took the action in Iraq , and I explained that already . 
We took the action in Sierra Leone , where we saved a country ' democracy from a gang of murderous gangsters , you know , and I going to do ... No , I 'm sorry . 
I think we can be proud of what the magnificent British armed forces have done , and those decisions , some of them , particularly Iraq , were very difficult . 
Paxman : While we 're on defense , Prime Minister , the British independent nuclear deterrent is going to need replacing , probably a decision that has to be taken in the next government that takes office after May 5 . 
Will you replace it . 
Blair : Well , we 've got to retain our nuclear deterrent , and we 've had an independent nuclear deterrent for a long time . 
Now that decision is for another time , but in principle I believe it 's important to retain our own independent deterrent . 
Paxman : A continuing independent nuclear deterrent . 
Blair : I believe that is the right thing for the country . 
I think it 's important that however we look at all the different aspects of it ... And a decision has n't yet been taken . 
Paxman : And the billions of pounds that are involved , you 're prepared to make available ? 
Blair : Well , we have to see . 
Cost is one aspect to it . 
But I think it 's important this country retains a strong defense at all times . 
Paxman : Would cost convince you not to go ahead with it ? 
Blair : You just ... Look , there 's no point in speculating about that at the moment because we 're a long way off taking the decision . 
Paxman : Just while we 're on foreign affairs : there 's a new Pope appointed . 
Do you agree that ... Blair : Now , that 's one election I ca n't comment on , I 'm afraid . 
Paxman : Do you agree that condoms prevent the spread of Aids ? 
Blair : Yes , I do . 
Paxman : Would you be prepared to tell the Pope that ? 
Blair : Jeremy , I mean , you know , I 've ... I do n't know . 
If I ever have this conversation with him , I 'm sure we will talk about how we can do lots of things to help the world , but I do n't want to ... I 've got enough issues in my own election without getting into his . 
Paxman : Let 's look at tax . 
Before the last election , you made exactly the same promise you 're making this time : no increase in the basic rate of tax ; no increase the higher rate of tax ; no commitment at all on national insurance . 
You spoke to us , very kindly , before that election , and I suggested to you that any reasonable person would therefore conclude that after the election , you would raise the basic rate of national insurance . 
You said that we should n't make such an assumption , and then you did it . 
You 're not expecting us to fall for that a second time are you ? 
Blair : Well , it was n't a question of falling for it the first time . 
The fact is ... Paxman : Well , we did . 
We took you at your word . 
Hang on a minute . 
I was asked the question , is there a reason why , in the government 's proposal you should raise national insurance ? 
I said you should n't make any assumption about that at all . 
Paxman : Would n't any reasonable person suppose that you therefore propose to increase national insurance contributions ? 
Blair : For exactly the reason I 've just given . 
Blair : Yeah , but you were saying to me , as I recall it : `` Look , your spending proposals mean you 're going to have to put up taxes . '' 
Now the reason why we ended up putting 1 % on national insurance was because subsequent to the election we got a report on the National Health Service that said you 're going to have to raise spending by more than you had thought in order to make sure that you get a proper and full financing of the National Health Service . 
So the actual commitments ... Paxman : But Prime Minister , you had committed before the election to raise the National Health spending to the European average . 
You made that commitment before the election . 
And in the manifesto what we said was that the commitments we had could be financed by the taxes that had been set aside . 
What happened after the election was , we got a report that said : no , actually , if you want to reach the European Union average , the figures are n't as you supposed they are . 
You 're going to have to raise it further in order to do that . 
And that 's why we did it , and that 's why we 've got the 1 % national insurance . 
Now that was a catch-up in the health service , but you know , it was necessary . 
Paxman : There could be any old report coming along after this election which will necessitate you raising taxes again . 
Blair : I think the health service is a special case . 
But look , in the end people again are going to have to make a judgment about it . 
I ca n't , I ca n't sit here and write the budget for every year of a Labor government . 
What I can say to people is , overall , our taxes are actually lower than the European average , and they 're lower as a proportion of our national income than most of the years that Margaret Thatcher was in power . 
Paxman : You are going to have to raise taxes after the election , are n't you ? 
Blair : No , you ca n't say that on the basis of the spending plans we have . 
Paxman : Well , you ca n't give us a commitment ; you wo n't . 
Blair : Well ... if you remember , we had precisely the same discussion before , and not just in relation to national insurance but other taxes , too . 
And what I said to you then , and I say it to you now , is the spending proposals that we have are adequately catered for by the tax plans that we 've got . 
Paxman : And there is no question , on your watch , of a local income tax ever being introduced . 
I mean , well ... We have a review into the council tax and what 's the right way to replace it , so you ca n't as it were foreclose options but for , for me the local income tax has always been a problem because it 's all very well for the Lib Dems to say , get rid of the council tax , and everyone says , well , that 's fantastic . 
But if you 're a two-earner or three-earner household , you 're going to pay a lot more money under local income tax . 
Paxman : So no local income tax on your watch . 
Blair : Well , as I say , we 've got a review , so I 'm not going to , I ca n't start closing everything off , but what I can say to you is , personally , and I think I 've said this on many occasions , I think there are big problems of local income tax . 
Paxman : You 've promised assistance to those people at the Rover works who will lose their jobs . 
What is the moral difference between those people losing their jobs and the tens of thousands of civil servants you propose should lose their jobs ? 
Blair : Well , one is happening as an immediate redundancy . 
I mean , they 've actually been handed their redundancy notices . 
The other will happen over time . 
Paxman : They 've still got mortgages to pay . 
Which is why it 's being structured over a period of time , so that we can help people , retrain and get other jobs , and the one thing we 've done as a government , I think quite successfully , is , wherever there are large-scale job losses ... But Rover is different : you 've got 6,000 jobs going immediately , jobs in the supply chain going immediately . 
You should go there and try and support them and give some support to the infrastructure . 
Paxman : And what was it in your analysis of what was wrong with Britain that convinced you that what this country needed was 40 super casinos ? 
BLAIR : Well , the question is : how do you prevent that happening ? 
It 's not a question of , do you think it 's what the country needs . 
Is n't it sensible to have an overhaul of the gambling laws ? 
Paxman : Despite , you know , the social damage that is caused by addictive gambling ? 
Blair : Yeah , but that 's not the question . 
We actually are setting up for the first time a gambling commission that will look into these issues and make recommendations . 
People think you can go down the street now and gamble . 
You can gamble your mortgage away on putting money on a horse or , you know , take a bet on the election . 
The point is , this type of larger casino , which is a big leisure complex , properly run , is it a disaster for the country ? 
I do n't think so . 
I think that if you look at the evidence of where these large-scale casinos have been introduced , it does n't bear out the opponents ' case at all , and I might just point out to you that until , certainly the newspapers started running a campaign on this , virtually everyone was in favor of these proposals . 
Paxman : Can you tell us how many failed asylum seekers there are in this country ? 
Blair : No , I ca n't be sure of the numbers of people who are illegals in this country . 
For the same reason that the previous government could n't . 
What I can say is that the asylum system has been toughened up and tightened up hugely , and according to the United Nations commission for refugees and not us , asylum figures have fallen by more than a half in the past two or three years . 
Paxman : Can you give us a rough idea of how many there may be ? 
Is it tens of thousands ? 
Blair : I 've said I do n't think there 's any point in speculating . 
Paxman : But you have no idea . 
Blair : Well , it 's not a question of having no idea . 
Paxman : Well , what is your idea , Prime Minister ? 
Blair : What you can say is , how people are applying for asylum , month by month , how many people you are removing and what is the backlog , and we are dealing with all of those issues . 
Paxman : Prime Minister , you have really no idea of how many failed asylum seekers there are illegally in this country ? 
Blair : It is difficult , for the very reason that ... Blair : Hang on . 
For the very reason that the previous government gave , you can not determine specifically how many people are here illegally . 
Paxman : You have no idea . 
Blair : What you can say is , here are the number of people that are actually currently applying for asylum . 
Blair : This is the backlog of claims that you 're dealing with . 
And these are the people who are being removed from the country . 
Paxman : Do people not come to you and say : we think , Prime Minister , there may be 100,000 or 250,000 , or 500,000 ... Blair : They do n't come and say that . 
Paxman : So you have no idea . 
Blair : No , hang on a minute . 
You have an idea of the numbers that are claiming , the backlog , and the numbers that are being removed . 
Some of those asylum seekers , when they fail and their claim fails , they will go back voluntarily . 
Paxman : What 's your working assumption ? 
Blair : I do n't make a working assumption about it . 
What I do is I concentrate on the bits that are absolutely vital to concentrate on , which is - hang on , just let me finish - which is the numbers who are coming in , the numbers we 're removing and the backlog . 
The only long-term way of dealing with this issue , however , is to introduce the proper controls of borders through an electronic visa regime . 
And the other thing is identity cards . 
Paxman : Does the fact that you 're unable or unwilling to tell us indicate that you have in fact lost control of our borders ? 
Blair : No , it does n't indicate that , beause no government has ever been able to say that . 
What you are able to say however is , here are the measures that we 're taking to control it properly , to deal with the abuses , and you are also able to say , which I can say to you very clearly because we keep the proper statistics of this , is the numbers that are claiming now and the numbers that we 're removing , and the way to get asylum figures down so that it 's only genuine refugees you 're taking ; to do precisely what we 've done : clean up the system , remove the tiers of appeal , make sure that people ca n't destroy their documentation when they come here and improve the removal system . 
We 're doing all of those things . 
Paxman : And just one final time , you have no figure that you can give us for the number of refused asylum seekers who are in this country . 
Blair : I 'm giving you the information that I 've got , and I 've answered that question . 
Paxman : You ca n't give us any kind of figure . 
Blair : The reason is because some people will return after their asylum claim has failed . 
So you have no idea . 
Blair : Well , what you have is an idea of the numbers that are coming in and claiming and the numbers that you 're removing . 
Now , those are the two important things to concentrate on . 
Paxman : Well , what is that number ? 
Blair : The number coming in now , it 's fallen to just over about 2,000 a month who are claiming asylum , and that 's down from , at its height , around 8,000 a month . 
And actually , that is lower than the figure in March 1997 . 
Paxman : But it gives us no indication of the backlog , of course . 
Blair : Well , no , sorry , it does give me an indication . 
Blair : No , no , no , Jeremy . 
You can say what the backlog is of claims . 
The backlog of claims , I think , is down to round about 10,000 . 
That 's down from 60,000 that we inherited . 
In respect of removals , there were one in five asylum seekers who failed , were being removed . 
It 's now half of them that are being removed . 
And the answer that I have given to you on the numbers of illegals here is precisely the answer we have always given , and the last government gave . 
Paxman : Although you 've not given us a number . 
Blair : Well , I 've just explained to you why it 's impossible to do that . 
But what you can do is give numbers for the other things . 
Paxman : Let 's look at economic migrants . 
Is there an upper limit to the number of economic migrants who should be allowed into this country ? 
Blair : Well , there 's an arbitrary limit or a quota , in my view , but there 's going to be a limit set by what your economy needs . 
Paxman : What does our economy need ? 
Blair : And the points system that we 're introducing will make sure that only people get work permits who actually come in and we need for our economy . 
Paxman : What does our economy need ? 
Blair : Well , at the moment , I think ... Well , I have n't got the exact figure off the top of my head , but I think it 's about 130,000 come in with work permits , but most of those people will come in , work for a time and go again . 
Paxman : Your previous home secretary , David Blunkett , told us that he saw no obvious upper limit . 
Blair : No , what he 's saying is exactly the same as me . 
The Tories say you set a quota . 
Supposing you get a major company that says - I mean , here we are , a company of law offices here which is actually connected with an American company - supposing they need someone to come in from abroad for a short time . 
Why should n't you have them in ? 
The point is to make sure that you have strict controls that mean the only people your economy needs to come into this country come into this country . 
Paxman : But you have predictions of the economic growth of this country . 
You know roughly what 's going to happen with the labor market . 
Why are you so shy of just putting a rough figure on it ? 
Blair : Well , you can take the figures now . 
I do n't think the figures on work permits have changed that much in the past few years . 
But the reason I should n't put a figure on it , is that I do n't run every business in the country . 
Supposing you get a business in the City of London that says , actually , we need 50 people in this specialty to come in and work here for six months . 
You 'll do tremendous damage to your economy if you start taking out all migrant labor . 
Or for , even more absurdly , parliament to come along and say we , parliament , suddenly know what the needs of employers are in the country , it makes no sense to do that . 
Paxman : Prime Minister , if you are returned to Downing Street on May 6 , can you at least give us a guarantee that within , say , 12 months of your handing in your cards as prime minister , there would be a general election ? 
Blair : Well , I 've said I 'll service a full term , and you know ... Again , I mean , I 've been over this . 
Paxman : But people are entitled to know what they 're voting for , are n't they ? 
Blair : Yeah , absolutely . 
That 's why I 've said ... Paxman : Or what they 're going to get . 
Blair : I 'll serve the full term . 
And they 'll get New Labor . 
Paxman : So that means , by the time there 's a new American President coming on his first visit to Britain in 2009 , you will still be in Downing Street . 
Blair : Well , people elect me , but I have n't won the election yet . 
Paxman : But if you 're elected , you will still be in Downing Street ? 
Blair : I 've said I 'll serve the full term , and exactly what situation happens then and how you hand over , well you can leave that to a later time . 
But it 's not unknown , you know , for there are countries with fixed-term parliaments . 
Paxman : Oh , absolutely . 
Blair : There are other prime ministers who 've said : `` Look , this is my ... I 'll serve this term but I wo n't serve another term . '' 
I mean , I think the public actually has a very clear and sensible view of this . 
Paxman : Have you told Gordon Brown when you 're going to stand down ? 
Blair : No , I 've said to Gordon the same as I 've said to everyone : if you elect the prime minister , you serve the term . 
Paxman : So if there is any deal between the two of you , it 's a deal just in Gordon Brown 's mind . 
Blair : You do n't do deals about jobs like this . 
And Gordon and I have actually been working extremely closely together . 
It 's been a great partnership . 
I hope it 's also been a good partnership for the country . 
I mean , we 've known each other for 20 years , and he 's been a magnificent chancellor . 
He 's produced tremendous economic strength in this country , and you know , we can be proud , I hope , of what we 've achieved for the country . 
Paxman : So this deal is just in his mind . 
Blair : Well , I think you going on about what is in his mind ... As far as I 'm aware , as I think he was saying this morning , as we sat on the sofa together , , you know , we were there together to serve as prime minister and chancellor . 
Paxman : When you look at your time in Downing Street , when you came in 1997 , you were a young man . 
You were talking about the ... Blair : You 're not going to show the old pictures , are you ? 
None of us can really survive that . 
Paxman : But you came in , a young prime minister talking about a young country . 
Now they talk about how you 've got a fake tan . 
You have n't got a fake tan , I take it . 
Blair : I have n't got a fake tan . 
As a matter of fact , you look as if you 've been sitting out in the sun as well . 
Paxman : Well , actually , I have n't , no. . 
I know that 's your story . 
You ca n't make that claim any more that you 're a young man in a young country . 
Is n't there a point where you think : God , it 's going to be great to be shot of all of this ? 
Blair : Well , not at the moment because I still think we 've got things to do . 
I 'm not saying the irony of this job is that you 're less popular as you go on , but in some ways you 're better equipped to do the job . 
And I feel that we 're just really poised on the health service , education reform , a lot of the stuff we 're doing on law and order . 
I think with the economy there 's a whole new series of things we 've got to do about science , technology , apprenticeship , vocational skills and , you know , there 's masses for me to do . 
And that 's what gets you up in the morning : it 's recognizing that whatever ghastly stuff is appearing from time to time in the media , you 've still got the energy and the determination to do the job . 
And then I 've a limit on my time doing it and then it 's for somebody else to take on the baton and run with it . 
But I still feel there 's things we 've got to do , and I think we can accelerate the change , drive it faster in this third term . 
But we 've got to get elected first . 
Paxman : Tony Blair , thank you . 
