An array of potentially costly lawsuits are landing at BP s feet , some from seafood businesses and restaurants . 
Photograph : Stephane Jourdain\/AFP\/Getty Images While work continues to try to staunch the flow of oil into the Gulf of Mexico , an avalanche of class action lawsuits is descending upon BP in courthouses from Texas to Louisiana , Alabama , Mississippi and Florida . 
The suits include claims for loss of earnings , loss of enjoyment or property , or for bereavement suffered by families of the 11 workers killed when BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig caught fire and sank on 30 April . 
BP has pledged to meet all `` legitimate claims '' . 
But after the failure of the company 's attempted `` top kill '' fix at the weekend , financial analysts fear the cost could become astronomical if oil continues to flow into the Gulf for weeks to come . 
Estimates of the potential cost of the spill vary widely . 
Including the clean-up , compensation and fines , UBS has suggested BP could face a bill of $ 12bn -LRB- # 8.25 bn -RRB- . 
Jason Kenney , an analyst at ING Commercial banking , increased his estimate of the cost from $ 5.3 bn to up to $ 22bn if the spill continues until August . 
Among the most harrowing claims is a suit filed by survivors and bereaved family members from the blast that sank Deepwater Horizon . 
Rhonda Burkeen lost her husband , Aaron , on the rig , where he worked as a crane operator . 
Another plaintiff , Bill Johnson , was Burkeen 's supervisor , who escaped the accident but suffered smoke inhalation and traumatic stress . 
Johnson escaped on a lifeboat , but was kept alongside the rig , with colleagues , for hours as a fire raged . 
The lawsuit says : `` The company made the decision to keep these men there for over 10 hours alongside the blazing rig as the men stared at the rig , knowing their friends were on it . '' 
The rig , leased by BP from a Swiss-registered firm , Transocean , was covered by a Lloyd 's insurance policy . 
Lloyd 's said last week it expected to meet claims of between $ 300m and $ 600m arising from the loss of the offshore platform . 
Faced with clean-up and compensation bills , BP is seeking up to $ 700m from Transocean 's insurers . 
This claim , filed on 14 May , has gone down badly with insurers , who say they are only responsible for damage to the rig not for any leak below the surface of the water . 
An array of potentially costly lawsuits are landing at BP 's feet . 
One suit is filed in the name of Kimberly and Do Nguyen , who run a seafood business called The Shrimp Guy . 
It seeks damages on behalf of all Mississippi businesses engaged in `` wholesale , retail and\/or delivery '' of seafood caught in the Gulf of Mexico , accusing BP of failure to `` prevent or mitigate risk '' of an oil spill . 
In common with many similar lawsuits , the claim alleges that BP ignored evidence of a broken seal on its well , 50 miles off the US coast , and that it and Transocean were aware of failures in the power source of a blowout preventer that was supposed to seal the well in an emergency . 
A class action lawsuit on behalf of restaurant owners has been filed under the name of the Smiling Fish Cafe , known for its locally caught seafood , in Santa Rosa Beach , Florida . 
It says pollution has made produce costlier and harder to come by , and tourism is under threat . 
`` May is the beginning of the summer season , when visitors and locals alike flock to Florida 's coastal seafood restaurants to enjoy the sea 's bounty , '' it says . 
The Sprinkle Net Shop , which sells and repairs equipment used by fishermen in Mobile county , Alabama , claims its business and thousands like it have been hit by BP 's `` negligence '' . 
And a trio of Mississippi businessmen say their recently completed 16-room luxury fishing lodge , intended for upscale tourists , has been rendered `` practically worthless '' by the spill . 
Mark Lanier , a Houston-based lawyer for one group of plaintiffs , said the litigation against BP would make the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska look like `` an oil leak in a car '' . 
`` Honestly , this is a monstrosity , it 's a tragedy , '' he told Texas Lawyer magazine . 
He said it might become the biggest legal battle in US history . 
`` This is going to be , in my estimation , the largest tort we 've had in this country . '' 
A version appeared on p15 of the Main section section of the Guardian on Our selection of best buys Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
