cents Operation to cut broken pipe deemed too risky earlier cents BP boss describes ` open heart surgery on TV for everyone ' BP 's Deepwater Horizon oil rig . 
After the failure of the ` top kill ' repair of the oil leak , BP have admitted that the last-ditch attempt to cut into the pipe is extremely risky . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP Under immense pressure to plug its catastrophic American oil leak , BP is preparing for a hazardous last-ditch salvage operation that risks making the gush of crude into the Gulf of Mexico even heavier if its robotic submarines fail in an inch-perfect exercise to cut through a broken pipe a mile beneath the ocean 's surface . 
After the failure of a `` top kill '' effort to stuff the leak with mud and rubbish , BP 's managing director , Bob Dudley , stressed the difficulty of a new plan to pipe spurting oil to a ship on the ocean 's surface , describing it as highly challenging for engineers who will be asked to perform `` the equivalent of open heart surgery on television for everyone '' . 
The under-fire company faced calls from Louisiana lawmakers to make an immediate $ 1bn investment to protect threatened wetlands and estuaries on the Louisiana coast . 
The White House 's energy tsar , Carol Browner , warned that the giant , rapidly expanding oil slick caused by an explosion on BP 's Deepwater Horizon oil rig was `` probably the biggest environmental disaster we have ever faced '' . 
Since becoming severed from BP 's destroyed offshore rig on 30 April , a broken drilling pipe known as a `` riser '' , which carries oil from an underground seam through the ocean floor , has been kinked downwards in the water . 
BP is deploying diamond-rimmed saws to cut through the pipe below this kink , in the hope that it can create a sufficiently clean break to attach a cap capable of siphoning oil to the ocean 's surface , known as a `` lower marine riser package '' . 
Experts worry that by removing the bend in the pipe , any remaining resistance to the flow of oil into the ocean will be eliminated . 
Philip Johnston , an engineering professor at the University of Alabama , said : `` This operation is scary for BP . 
`` When they cut the riser the rate of flow from the well , which is already truly horrific , will get significantly bigger . 
If they ca n't then get the cap on , it will make things worse . '' 
BP 's chief operating officer Doug Suttles told a press conference on Saturday that he could not guarantee the attempt would work , and even if it did it would only capture `` the majority '' of the oil . 
Following the first Gulf war in 2001 , a similar capping procedure was used to extinguish the well fires lit by the retreating Iraqi army . 
However , it has never been attempted 1,500 metres -LRB- 5,000 ft -RRB- below sea level . 
President Obama admitted that cutting the riser pipe `` is not without risk '' , saying : `` That is why it was not activated until other methods had been exhausted . '' 
On the Louisiana shore , dozens of shrimpers , fishermen , holiday-home owners , restaurateurs and hoteliers have filed lawsuits against BP for the damage to their earnings caused by the slick . 
Local people expressed fury at the British company 's apparent inability to stem the flow . 
Claude Marquette , a retired doctor in his boat at the fishing port of Venice Marina , said : `` It 's been a screw-up from day one . 
Nothing was at the ready and no one was in a position to respond . '' 
Father Gerry Stapleton , a priest at St Patrick 's Catholic church in nearby Port Sulphur , said : `` Even the government seems powerless and all the experts . 
If these people ca n't stop it , then who in the name of God can ? '' 
There is particular acrimony that BP 's initial estimate of the leak at 5,000 barrels of oil a day dramatically understated the scale of the flow , which is now put at 12,000 to 19,000 barrels a day . 
Ed Markey , the Democratic chairman of a congressional energy committee investigating the disaster , said BP was `` either lying or they were incompetent '' . 
Speaking on CBS 's Face the Nation talkshow , Markey described the leak as criminal and added : `` I have no confidence whatsoever in BP . '' 
The waters affected by the spill are among the most sealife-rich around the US . 
In 2008 , commercial fishermen landed 600m kg of finfish and shellfish in the Gulf of Mexico , generating $ 659m . 
Oyster fishermen worry that not only the oil but the chemical dispersants used to break up the slick will poison their harvest for months and years to come . 
Mary Landrieu , a Democratic senator for Louisiana , said BP should immediately commit $ 1bn to safeguarding the coastline : `` While we may not be able to plug the leaking well right away , there is nothing that should stop us from getting help to the Gulf coast immediately . '' 
Obama ordered government and contractor clean-up resources in areas affected by oil to be tripled . 
The Washington Post termed the leak `` the well that will not die '' . 
Many critics of the response to the crisis have urged the president to put the armed forces in charge , taking over operations from BP . 
But Mike Mullen , chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , said that the military did not have the necessary expertise . 
`` It 's really not for us to lead right now because of the technical challenges , '' said Mullen . 
`` The technical lead for this in our country really is the -LRB- oil -RRB- industry . '' 
Even if BP succeeds in its latest effort to siphon oil , the operation faces a meteorological hazard in the hurricane season , which starts at the beginning of June . 
David Summers , a professor of mine engineering at Missouri University of Science and Technology , said it would be impossible to leave a containment vessel collecting oil on the open sea if severe weather sweeps into the Gulf . 
As it attempts a seal , BP will need to pump large volumes of warm water towards the leak to avoid the formation of ice crystals , which stymied a previous attempted fix . 
Summers said : `` This may be the best option they 've got but because they 're going to be dragging through the flow of oil as they cut , it 's going to be difficult to achieve a smooth , straight cut . '' 
If BP can not halt the flow , oil will continue to gush until two relief wells are ready to intercept the flow of oil by intersecting with the original bore beneath the ocean floor . 
One of these has reached a depth of 3,600 metres -LRB- 12,000 ft -RRB- , while the other is down to 2,500 metres , but they need to go as far as 5,500 metres before they can tap into the oil , which may not happen until August . 
By then , the slick on the ocean 's surface , estimated at 18m to 40m gallons of oil , could have doubled in size . 
