Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke yesterday laid out his most comprehensive vision yet for how to overhaul the rules governing the nation 's financial system , and advocated changing accounting methods that he said have exacerbated the financial crisis . 
Appearing before the Council on Foreign Relations , Bernanke said the financial system must be regulated `` as a whole , in a holistic way '' to avoid some of the failures that have led to the current meltdown -- which he called `` the worst financial crisis since the 1930s . '' 
He said policymakers must better supervise institutions perceived as too big to fail and consider requiring firms to set aside more capital so that they have it when economic conditions worsen . 
`` These crises have revealed some rather shocking gaps in our regulatory oversight , '' Bernanke said . 
`` I mean , who was overseeing the subprime lenders , for example ? 
Who was overseeing AIG ? 
There simply was n't enough adequate oversight in those cases . '' 
In comments on a subject that is drawing increasing scrutiny , Bernanke said current accounting standards need to be revised so they do n't amplify the negative effects of a downturn . 
Rules underlying what is known as `` mark-to-market '' or `` fair-value '' accounting now require companies to disclose the value of certain types of assets based on what buyers would pay for them if they were to be sold now . 
But because buyers have fled the marketplace , driving down prices , companies have been forced to write down the value of their assets , even if they do n't plan to sell them for years . 
Mark-to-market rules are intended to give investors a clear and accurate picture of the value of a company 's assets . 
Bernanke said that remained an appropriate system , but he said policymakers `` should look to identify the weak points of mark-to-market and try to make some improvements on a more expeditious basis . '' 
That would likely mean that certain kinds of assets now valued at their market price would instead be valued according to their underlying economic value , which is generally higher . 
On Capitol Hill , where the American Bankers Association and other trade groups have been pushing for changes to mark-to-market accounting , Rep. Barney Frank -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
, chairman of the House Financial Services Committee , echoed Bernanke 's views and said lawmakers are nudging regulators to explore the possibility of implementing new guidelines . 
A Financial Services subcommittee has scheduled a hearing on the issue for tomorrow . 
`` The mark-to-market rule has clearly got to be made better in its workings . 
There has to be more flexibility in its application , '' Frank said . 
`` There has to be discretion in what the consequences are . '' 
Bernanke touched on a host of other regulatory challenges in a wide-ranging speech that mapped out the ways in which stronger oversight of the financial system could help avert crises on the magnitude of the current one . 
Among the most sweeping changes lawmakers are considering is the creation of a regulator to monitor firms that pose a systemic risk because they are so interconnected with other firms . 
The idea of a systemic risk regulator has been around for a while but has taken on new urgency following the failure of Lehman Brothers and the government takeover of insurance giant American International Group , which was brought down mainly because of losses generated by an unregulated unit based in London . 
The Fed is the leading candidate to take on the job of systemic risk regulator because its already oversees bank holding companies and serves as the lender of last resort . 
Some analysts and lawmakers have objected to the Fed taking on more responsibility because it is already stretched thin . 
Bernanke responded to those concerns by saying Congress would be able to define the central bank 's role . 
Ann Owen , a former Fed economist , interpreted Bernanke 's comments as an argument for `` a more defined system to give them more authority to do this . '' 
`` I do n't see how you can set up some systemic risk authority that operates independent from the Fed because at the end of the day , if there needs to be lender of last resort , it needs to be the Fed , '' she said . 
At various points , Bernanke referred to the global nature of financial markets and the current crisis . 
He urged coordination with bank regulators abroad but stopped short of endorsing an international financial regulatory regime -- an idea that has been pushed by some European leaders . 
The issue is likely to come up when the G-20 meets in a few weeks in London . 
Bernanke avoided specifics during his speech , merely making suggestions that could be taken up later by Congress . 
But that approach left some analysts wanting . 
`` The issue is how do we get from Point A to Point B and what role should the Fed play , '' said Steven Davidoff , a law professor and an expect on securities regulation . 
`` Nothing he 's saying is not already in the works or being discussed in Congress or at the White House level . '' 
Indeed , few of the policy ideas he offered were new . 
The accounting rule changes , for example , are `` on everybody 's list , '' said Hal S. Scott , a Harvard Law professor and director of the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation , a group of academics and finance industry leaders . 
`` Our committee is looking at it . 
Every other group I know that is looking at the financial crisis is looking at it . '' 
However , analysts said there was value in the Fed chairman acknowledging the consensus that has emerged among academics , former regulators and lawmakers about overhauling financial regulation . 
`` That 's a good thing . 
If you compared this to -LRB- Alan -RRB- Greenspan 's speeches ... the world has changed , '' Davidoff said . 
`` Greenspan was not a pro-regulatory force , and now we have someone advocating regulation across the board . '' 
After his speech , Bernanke was asked when he expected the economy would recover . 
`` My forecasting record is about the same as the win-loss record of the Washington Nationals , '' he said . 
`` We will eventually recover . 
There 's no question , '' he added . 
`` There 's too many underlying strengths . 
It 's too dynamic an economy . 
It 's a question of whether it happens quickly or less quickly . '' 
Staff writer Zachary A. Goldfarb contributed to this report . '' 
