MEXICO CITY | Sat Apr 25 , 2009 12:51 am BST MEXICO CITY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A dangerous strain of flu never seen before has killed up to 60 people in Mexico and spread into the United States , where several people were reported ill . 
Here are some questions and answers about the virus : HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE AFFECTED ? 
Mexico has confirmed 20 deaths from the flu and has 40 other possible fatalities and 1,004 people reported infected . 
Most of those who died are aged between 25 and 45 . 
In California and Texas , eight people were infected with the new strain , but all of them have recovered . 
WHAT KIND OF FLU IS IT AND HOW IS IT SPREADING ? 
The virus is an influenza A virus , carrying the designation H1N1 and is spreading from person to person . 
It contains DNA from avian , swine and human viruses , including elements from European and Asian swine viruses , according to the U.S. Centres for Disease Control and Prevention , or CDC . 
The virus is being passed on by sneezing , coughing or physical contact . 
Though a link to swine flu was originally suspected , the Mexican government has now ruled out any risk of infection from eating pork . 
The CDC says it is too early to fully assess the threat posed by the new flu virus . 
The Mexican government said on Friday the rate of deaths has slowed in recent hours and that it has a million doses of antiviral drugs , which is more than enough to treat all reported cases . 
Central American countries were not reporting any cases of the new flu for the time being . 
HAS MEXICO EVER SEEN AN OUTBREAK LIKE THIS BEFORE ? 
Mexico has not suffered a serious flu epidemic before . 
Many Mexicans vaccinate themselves against common flu , which hits each year in a season that normally ends in February or March . 
Worldwide , seasonal flu kills between 250,000 and 500,000 people in an average year . 
WHAT MEASURES IS THE MEXICAN GOVERNMENT TAKING ? 
Mexico City has closed universities and schools until further notice , suspended all major public events and advised people feeling flu-like symptoms to stay home from work . 
Mexico City 's busiest subway stations are handing out face masks to passengers to use on crowded train carriages . 
The city government has closed museums , including the popular Anthropology Museum . 
Authorities recommend people avoid crowded places and have cautioned people not to shake hands or kiss when greeting or to share food , glasses or cutlery . 
The government has also extended the deadline on filing tax returns by a month to the end of May . 
WHAT IS THE REST OF THE WORLD DOING TO HELP ? 
The U.S. government said it was taking the situation seriously and monitoring for any new developments . 
The CDC said it is working on a vaccine . 
Geneva-based U.N. agency the World Health Organisation said it was in close contact with U.S. , Canadian and Mexican authorities and had activated its Strategic Health Operations Centre -- its command and control center for acute public health events . 
The WHO says it is ready to use rapid containment measures if needed , including antivirals , and said Mexico is well-equipped to handle the outbreak . 
SHOULD TOURISTS WITH TRIPS PLANNED TO MEXICO BE WORRIED ? 
The CDC and the WHO say there is no need to alter travel plans and Mexico said it saw no need to close its borders . 
Canada 's government has advised doctors to be on the alert for reports of illness from people who recently traveled to Mexico , but has not recommended canceling trips . 
