MEXICO CITY\/GENEVA | Sat Apr 25 , 2009 7:32 pm EDT MEXICO CITY\/GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A new flu that has killed up to 68 people in Mexico could start a global epidemic , the World Health Organization warned on Saturday , as tests showed the strain might be spreading in the United States . 
Mexico 's crowded capital , where most of the deaths happened and home to some 20 million people , hunkered down in fear of the swine flu . 
Tests confirmed that eight New York City schoolchildren had a type A influenza virus that was likely to be the swine flu , the city 's health commissioner said . 
Kansas state health officials confirmed two cases of swine flu , CNN reported , adding to the original eight cases in the United States . 
Officials from WHO and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention helped Mexican health experts test hundreds of patients with flu symptoms for the never-before-seen virus . 
In Mexico City , parents canceled kids ' parties , bars were closed and residents stocked up on DVDs as people stayed home for the weekend to avoid contamination . 
`` I think it 's worse than they 're telling us , '' said 35-year-old Lidia Diaz , sniffling and wearing a surgical mask as she headed to a clinic in the capital . 
WHO declared the outbreaks a `` public health event of international concern '' and urged all countries to boost their surveillance for any unusual outbreaks of influenza-like illness and severe pneumonia . 
The agency stopped short of raising the threat level for a pandemic -- a global epidemic of serious disease . 
`` It has pandemic potential because it is infecting people , '' WHO Director-General Dr. Margaret Chan said in Geneva . 
`` However , we can not say on the basis of currently available laboratory , epidemiological and clinical evidence whether or not it will indeed cause a pandemic . '' 
The last flu pandemic was in 1968 when `` Hong Kong '' flu killed about a million people globally . 
A pandemic would deal a major blow to a world economy already knocked into its worst recession in decades by the crisis in financial markets . 
As far away as Hong Kong and Japan , health officials stepped up checks of travelers with flu-like symptoms , and the CDC said it was actively looking for new infections in the United States . 
`` We are worried and because we are worried we are acting aggressively on a number of fronts , '' the CDC 's Dr. Anne Schuchat told reporters . 
`` The situation is serious . '' 
Mexico has said the flu had killed 20 people and could be to blame for 48 more deaths . 
In all , more than 1,000 suspected cases have been reported nationwide . 
Most of the dead were aged 25 to 45 , a worrying sign because a hallmark of past pandemics has been high fatalities among healthy young adults . 
The new flu strain -- a mixture of swine , human and avian flu viruses -- is still poorly understood . 
Mexico has shut schools and museums and canceled hundreds of public events in the capital to prevent further infections . 
A significant worsening of the outbreak could hit tourism and consumer spending in a country already weakened by the global economic crisis and an army-led war on drug cartels . 
Calderon reassured Mexicans that the flu was `` curable '' , while Mexico City Mayor Marcelo Ebrard said his goal was to slow the spread of the virus in the capital . 
No countries or global bodies have issued travel bans to Mexico , but some countries alerted travelers to check websites for information on the flu outbreak . 
The WHO says the virus from 12 of the Mexican patients is genetically the same as a new strain of swine flu , designated H1N1 , seen in eight people in California and Texas . 
All of the eight have recovered . 
