What we are witnessing , in the broadest sense , is the bankruptcy of modern economics . 
Its conceit has been that we had solved the problem of stability . 
Oh , there would be periodic recessions , but the prospects of a major economic collapse were negligible because we knew how the system worked and could take steps to prevent it . 
What 's been so unsettling about the present crisis is that it has not conformed to the standard model of business cycles and has not submitted to familiar textbook solutions . 
A hallmark of the crisis has been the stark contrast between the `` real economy '' of production and jobs and the tumultuous financial markets of stocks , bonds , banks , money funds and the like . 
Even with the 60 percent drop in housing construction since early 2006 , the real economy has so far suffered only modest setbacks . 
Yes , there are 605,000 fewer payroll jobs than there were in December ; still , 137.5 million jobs remain . 
Meanwhile , financial markets verge on hysteria . 
The question is whether this hysteria will drive the real economy into a deep recession or worse -- and what we can do to prevent that . 
The word that best epitomizes mainstream `` macroeconomics '' -LRB- the study of the entire economy , not individual markets -RRB- is demand . 
If weak demand left the economy in a slump , government could rectify the situation by stimulating more demand through tax cuts , higher spending or lower interest rates . 
If excess demand created inflation , government could suppress it by cutting demand through more taxes , less spending or higher interest rates . 
Economists of this tradition watch consumer and business behavior . 
Are car sales soft ? 
How much are companies raising prices ? 
The $ 152 billion `` stimulus '' program earlier this year was a classic exercise in `` demand management . '' 
It did n't work well mainly because this crisis originated in frightened financial markets . 
Massive losses on mortgage-related securities caused some financial institutions to fail . 
As fear spread , financial institutions grew wary of dealing with each other because no one knew who was solvent and who was n't . 
To Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke , this financial breakdown now threatens the real economy . 
Companies depend on bank borrowings and sales of commercial paper -LRB- in effect , short-term bonds -RRB- to conduct everyday business -- to buy inventories , to pay suppliers and workers before cash arrives from sales . 
Credit markets were freezing , Paulson and Bernanke decided . 
Panicky investors were shifting from commercial paper to Treasury bills ; banks were n't lending to each other . 
If it continued , consumers and firms would n't get essential credit . 
If you reject that conclusion , then the whole crisis has been a contrived farce . 
Some economists do ; they note that downturns always involve losses and disruptions . 
This one is n't so different . 
But many economists agree with Paulson and Bernanke . 
`` If we ca n't calm down short-term credit markets , we 're looking at a pretty severe recession , '' says Michael Mussa of the Peterson Institute for International Economics . 
`` If businesses ca n't roll over their short-term debt , -LRB- they -RRB- ask where can we cut back '' -- firing workers , reducing spending -- `` to avoid bankruptcy . '' 
Unfortunately , we lack experience with stabilizing financial markets , and the issue has been at the fringes of economics . 
Mostly , markets should operate freely . 
When is intervention justified ? 
Of course , economists recognized that the Federal Reserve should act as a `` lender of last resort '' and that permitting two-fifths of banks to fail in the 1930s aggravated the Depression . 
But the creation in 1933 of deposit insurance -LRB- now up to $ 100,000 -RRB- was thought to prevent most bank runs , and the `` lender of last resort '' role never anticipated a worldwide financial system that mediated credit not just through banks but also through hedge funds , private equity funds , investment banks and many other channels . 
In congressional testimony last week , Bernanke admitted the Fed has been `` shocked '' at how elastic the `` lender of last resort '' role has become . 
The resulting intellectual vacuum has spawned political chaos . 
Unpleasant and untested ideas invite opposition . 
Paulson 's plan to buy up to $ 700 billion of impaired securities is wildly unpopular . 
It may not work and raises many problems . 
If the government pays too little for the securities , financial failures may mount ; if it pays too much , it may create windfall profits for some investors and losses for taxpayers . 
But Paulson 's plan has better prospects for restoring confidence by removing suspect securities from balance sheets than suggested alternatives would . 
Selective injections of capital into banks , for instance , might involve favoritism and operate too slowly to improve confidence . 
The economy will get worse . 
Mussa thinks unemployment -LRB- now 6.1 percent -RRB- could peak near 7 percent ; other projections are higher . 
The harder question is whether financial turmoil heralds an era of instability . 
Our leaders are making up their responses from day to day because old ideas of how the economy works have failed them . 
These ideas were not necessarily wrong , but they 're grievously inadequate at the moment . 
