Follow our step-by-step timeline of the BP oil spill , from the construction of Deepwater Horizon to date Thursday 22 July 2010 10.25 BST A bird covered in oil from the BP Deepwater Horizon spill struggles to climb on to a boom in Barataria Bay in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP Construction begins on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in Ulsan , South Korea , by Hyundai Heavy Industries Shipyard . 
The rig is delivered and valued at more than $ 560m . 
Explosion and fire on the BP - licensed Transocean drilling rig Deepwater Horizon in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Eleven people are reported missing and approximately 17 injured . 
A blowout preventer , intended to prevent release of crude oil , failed to activate . 
Deepwater Horizon rig sinks in 5,000 ft of water . 
Reports of a five-mile-long oil slick . 
Search-and-rescue operations by the US National Response Team begin . 
The US coast guard suspends the search for missing workers , who are all presumed dead . 
The rig is found upside down about a quarter-mile from the blowout preventer . 
A homeland security department risk analysis says the incident `` poses a negligible risk to regional oil supply markets and will not cause significant national economic impacts '' . 
White House press secretary Robert Gibbs says : `` I doubt this is the first accident that has happened and I doubt it will be the last . '' 
Oil is found to be leaking from the well . 
A homeland security report on critical infrastructure says the problem has `` no near-term impact to regional or national crude oil or natural gas supplies . '' 
US coast guard remote underwater cameras report the well is leaking 1,000 barrels of crude oil per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- . 
It approves a plan for remote underwater vehicles to activate a blowout preventer and stop the leak . 
BP 's shares fall 2 % amid fears that the cost of cleanup and legal claims will hit the London-based company hard . 
Roughly 15,000 gallons of dispersants and 21,000 ft of containment boom are placed at the spill site . 
The US departments of interior and homeland security announce plans for a joint investigation of the explosion and fire . 
The coast guard announces it will set fire to the leaking crude to slow the spread of oil in the Gulf . 
The homeland department 's infrastructure and risk analysis center reports : `` Release of crude oil , natural gas and diesel fuel poses a high risk of environmental contamination in the Gulf of Mexico . '' 
BP reports a rise in profits , due in large part to oil price increases , as shares rise again . 
The coast guard says the flow of oil is 5,000 bpd , five times greater than first estimated , after a third leak is discovered . 
BP 's attempts to repair a hydraulic leak on the blowout preventer valve are unsuccessful . 
President Obama talks about the spill at the White House , his first public comments on the issue . 
He pledges `` every single available resource '' , including the US military , to contain the spreading spill , and also says BP is responsible for the cleanup . 
Louisiana declares a state of emergency due to the threat to the state 's natural resources , as the oil slick approaches land . 
An Obama aide says no drilling will be allowed in new areas until the cause of the Deepwater Horizon accident is established . 
The US justice department announces that a team of lawyers is monitoring the spill . 
Safety inspections of all 30 deepwater drilling rigs and 47 deepwater production platforms are ordered . 
BP chairman Tony Hayward says the company will take full responsibility for the spill , paying for all legitimate claims and the cost for the cleanup . 
Conservationists warn of impending disaster for wildlife in the area of the spill . 
The coast guard announces the leak will affect the Gulf shore . 
US officials close areas affected by the spill to fishing for an initial period of 10 days . 
Obama visits the Gulf coast to see cleanup efforts first hand . 
BP starts to drill a relief well alongside the failed well . 
An additional 30 vessels and 1,000 responders are deployed to the Gulf coast . 
BP executives face Congress in a closed session , as the White House backs a Senate proposal to increase the limit on liability payouts from $ 75m to $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.5 bn -RRB- for the cost of a spill . 
BP successfully attaches a valve to the end of the broken drilling pipe at the Macondo well in a bid to end the flow of oil into the US Gulf . 
BP says one of the three leaks has been shut off by capping a valve , but that would not reduce the amount of oil gushing out . 
Officials conduct controlled burns to remove oil from the open water . 
BP confirms the arrival of three huge containment domes designed to collect much of the 5,000 bpd leaking into the US Gulf from the Macondo blowout . 
The department of justice asks Transocean to preserve evidence in connection with the explosion and sinking of the rig . 
Toxic pink oily seawater washes ashore on the Chandeleur Islands off the Louisiana coast , an important nesting and breeding area for many bird species . 
Hayward tells the BBC that the blowout preventer owned by Transocean was at fault for the leak . 
BP , he said , `` will be judged not on the basis of an accident that , you know , frankly was not our accident '' . 
Analysts put the cost of the spill for BP at # 15bn . 
BP engineers use undersea robots to move the containment chamber over the larger of the two remaining leaks on the seabed . 
This containment method has never before been attempted at such a depth . 
Efforts to close valves on a failed blowout preventer with underwater robots are abandoned . 
BP 's containment dome hits a snag when a buildup of crystallised gas forces engineers to postpone efforts to place the chamber over the oil leak and draw the oil to the surface . 
BP says it might try to plug the undersea leak by pumping materials such as shredded tyres and golf balls into the well at high pressure , a method called a `` junk shot '' . 
BP announces plans to place a small containment dome , known as a `` top hat '' , over the blown-out well to funnel oil to the surface , as Hayward holds a press conference . 
At a hearing before the Senate committee on energy and natural resources , representatives of the three oil companies involved in the Deepwater drilling blame each other for the accident . 
Halliburton , which cemented BP 's well , claims to have met BP 's stated requirements for the task and cites the failure of Transocean 's blowout preventer . 
Transocean 's CEO says the blowout preventer was successfully tested a week before the accident ; he also blames BP and Halliburton for the inadequate cementing believed to have led to the explosion . 
BP 's president says that Transocean , as owner\/operator of the drilling rig , is responsible for safety . 
After the failure of the four-storey-high dome to draw oil from the major leak , BP lowers a five-foot-high dome to attempt to cover the smaller leak . 
The congressional hearing is told BP , Halliburton and Transocean ignored safety warnings in the hours before the Deepwater explosion . 
Steve Wereley , a researcher at Purdue University , tells the press he believes the well is leaking 70,000 bpd . 
BP releases underwater footage of the effort to stem the leak . 
BP plans to insert a 4in-tube into the ruptured 21in riser pipe that would take the oil to the surface . 
If that fails , they will use the small containment dome that has already been lowered . 
Both methods are intended to reduce , not to stop , the leak . 
The tube begins to draw oil to the surface . 
The volume of oil traveling through the tube is gradually increased to avoid the hydrate formation that doomed the large containment dome . 
Obama plans to establish an independent commission to investigate the oil leak , according to an anonymous administration official . 
As the spill continues to spread , the no fishing zone is doubled to 19 % of the Gulf waters . 
BP reports that the amount of oil drawn off by the tube has increased to 5,000 bpd . 
Given that BP had previously estimated the entire leak at 5,000 bpd and the tube only draws off a fraction of the spill , the leak must be much larger than previously estimated . 
Experts testifying at the congressional hearing put the figure at 20,000-100 ,000 barrels per day . 
The tube inserted into the leaking pipe captures much less oil than expected . 
BP pumps thousands of barrels of mud into the well in an attempt to plug the leak . 
The process , known as top kill , fails to overcome the flow of oil . 
A White House leak shows Obama ended a briefing with the terse command : `` Plug the damn hole . '' 
Hayward causes outrage after telling reporters , `` There 's no one who wants this over more than I do . 
I would like my life back . '' 
BP begins an advertising campaign in the US aimed at boosting opinion . 
Hayward features in the first . 
Attempts to place a cap over the valves that were meant to prevent the rig from leaking show signs of success . 
BP announces the containment cap is capturing 10,000 barrels of oil a day ; approximately half the total amount being leaked . 
In an interview on NBC Obama says he would have sacked BP 's chief executive if he had been working for him . 
David Cameron calls BP 's chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg , to a meeting at Downing Street to discuss the oil disaster . 
Scientists double their estimate of the scale of the spill to 40,000 barrels a day . 
Fitch ratings agency cuts BP 's credit rating as the cost of the spill continues to escalate . 
BP agrees to a $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.5 bn -RRB- downpayment towards compensation for victims of the oil spill . 
Hayward is accused by members of the US Congress of `` stonewalling '' after failing to answer a series of questions about the spill 's causes . 
BP 's credit rating is downgraded by Moody 's after expressing concern at the escalating cost of the cleanup and the potential cost of litigation claims . 
One of BP 's partners , Anadarko Petroleum , refuses to accept any responsibility for the Deepwater Horizon explosion despite owning a quarter of the well . 
Its chief executive , Jim Hackett , says BP 's actions probably amounted to `` gross negligence or wilful misconduct '' . 
Photographs of Hayward attending a yacht race on the Isle of Wight with his son cause anger in the US . 
A Deepwater Horizon worker claims that the oil rig was leaking several weeks before it exploded . 
Hayward fails to make an appearance at a gathering of the oil industry on the same day that control of the oil disaster passes to American Bob Dudley . 
Greenpeace protesters storm the stage during his replacement 's speech . 
An accident puts BP 's oil cap out of action , allowing oil to flow unhindered for several hours . 
BP shares hit a 14-year low of 304p after the clean-up bill reaches $ 2.35 bn . 
Russia 's top energy official says he expects Hayward to step down soon . 
BP denies he is close to resigning . 
BP announces the cost of the oil spill has now risen to over $ 3bn . 
The company asks its partners , Anadarko and Mitsui Oil Exploration , to contribute almost $ 400m . 
BP 's share price rises as speculation mounts that the company is looking for international investors . 
There are more than 27,000 abandoned oil wells in the Gulf of Mexico from a host of companies including BP , according to an investigation by Associated Press , which describes the area as ` an environmental minefield that has been ignored for decades ' . 
Some of them date back to the 1940s . 
State officials estimate that tens of thousands of them are badly sealed . 
A US appeals court rejects the federal government 's effort to restore an offshore deepwater drilling moratorium , opening the door to resumed drilling in the Gulf of Mexico while the legal fight continues . 
The same appeals court is expected to hear arguments on the merits of the moratorium case in late August or early September . 
BP begin their latest attempt to seal the leak . 
Robots remove a leaking cap from the well , to allow a replacement containment system to be installed . 
With the latest attempt to stem the leak reportedly going well , BP shares rise . 
BP successfully installs a new , more tightly fitting containment cap on the ruptured wellhead . 
The next step is to test the internal pressure in the well to establish whether the flow has been stopped . 
Hillary Clinton pledges to looks into claims BP lobbied for the release of the Lockerbie bomber . 
BP stops the flow of oil for the first time in 87 days , raising hopes that it could be sealed off for good . 
The company says it will have to monitor the cap for 48 hours before it can be sure it will hold . 
Fears about the new cap are raised after engineers detect seepage and a possible methane gas leak on the seabed . 
Admiral Thad Allen , who is in charge of the US government 's response , has written to BP demanding answers to `` undetermined anomalies at the wellhead '' . 
BP has yet to respond . 
Shares in BP fall more than 5 % on the news . 
Allen grants BP a further 24 hours to test the new containment cap , but warns that the government may insist on reopening the well if concerns over seepage intensify . 
BP admits to using Photoshop to exaggerate the level of activity at the Gulf oil spill command center . 
The picture , posted on the company 's website , shows staff monitoring 10 giant video screens . 
In reality , three of the screens were blank . 
The tropical storm Bonnie forces BP to temporarily suspend drilling on its relief well . 
The 65 ships involved in the disaster response are leaving the site after the storm , which formed over the Bahamas , was predicated to reach the area by the weekend . 
It is revealed that the Deepwater Horizon alarms were switched off at the time of the explosion to allow workers to sleep undisturbed . 
As the storm passes , crews return to the site in order to finish work on relief wells before the hurricane season starts . 
The BP chief executive , Tony Hayward , is to leave the company , to be replaced by Bob Dudley , a BP veteran overseeing the clean-up . 
As BP plunges into the red , the company is to to book a $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.5 bn -RRB- tax credit against the costs of cleaning up the oil spill and is making a provision of $ 32.2 bn towards it . 
Part of the bill will be picked up by UK and US taxpayers . 
Greenpeace activists close 46 BP garages in central London in a move to force the company to become greener . 
Safety switches at the pumps were stolen in order to close them down , action that BP called `` childish and irresponsible '' . 
Tony Hayward points out that he will be too busy to attend a Senate hearing . 
He told journalists : `` I have got a busy week -LRB- in the office -RRB- '' . 
BP said it would send another representative to testify at the hearing . 
Shell refuses to rule out pursuing BP for damages . 
It suffered a $ 56m -LRB- # 36m -RRB- loss because of the moratorium on drilling in the US imposed in the wake of the disaster . 
BP offers one-off lump sum payments to claimants who waive their right to sue the company in an attempt to stem the tide of compensation claims arising from the Gulf oil spill . 
BP will attempt to stem the flow of oil with a ` static kill ' in the next 24 hours . 
The procedure involves pumping heavy drilling mud and cement into the well . 
A whistleblower group reveals scientists within the US Environmental Protection Agency raised concerns with superiors over a chemical dispersant approved for use in the Gulf . 
BP sprayed almost 2m gallons of Corexit on the slick and at the leak site on the seabed . 
Texan oil company Anadarko Petroleum , which owns 25 % of the Macondo well , is expected to reveal it has been billed $ 1bn -LRB- # 630m -RRB- by BP so far for its share of cleaning up the oil spill . 
Japanese company Mitsui , which owns 10 % , has been billed $ 480m . 
BP says the ` static kill ' attempt to stop the oil leak has been successful , though more mud may still have to be pumped into the well to close it permanently . 
The White House is accused of spinning a report about the amount of oil cleaned up from the Gulf Oil spill . 
Experts labeled their estimation that the vast majority of the oil had been removed as far too optimistic . 
BP suggests it may return for oil to the , recently leaking , Macondo well . 
Obama 's administration responds by saying such a decision would have to be made by well licensing authorities , rather than BP . 
The exchange is the latest in an ongoing struggle between BP and the US government . 
BP suspends drilling of relief well to allow a tropical storm , believed to be heading for the Gulf of Mexico , to pass . 
Barack Obama goes for a swim with his daughter in the Gulf sea . 
BP oil spill : Barack Obama dives into safety debate with Gulf of Mexico swim It is revealed that BP has yet to update its oil spill emergency plan more than three months after the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded . 
Errors include the identification of the sea walrus as an animal in need of protection , despite there being none in the Gulf , and the listing of a wildlife expert who died four years before the plan was approved . 
The Obama administration calls for environmental reviews for all new deepwater oil drilling . 
The announcement comes after a report revealed that BP received environmental exemptions based on outdated data . 
Bill Lehr , a senior scientist at the NOAA , disputes White House claims that the worst of the oil spill is over , claiming that three-quarters of the oil remains in the Gulf environment . 
Under questioning at a Congress committee hearing , Lehr contradicted an earlier report in which he had stated that most of the oil had been cleaned up . 
BP 's poor reputation , following the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , forces it to pull out of a bid to drill in the Arctic . 
BP 's share price begins to rise after a positive investment report from Credit Suisse . 
The world 's smallest seahorse faces extinction following the BP oil spill . 
The Zoological Society of London 's seahorse team warns that the destruction of so much of the dwarf seahorses ' habitat could lead to a dangerous drop in population levels . 
BP releases its own report into the Deepwater oil spill , in which it accepts some responsibility for the disaster , but claims that other companies must bear some of the blame . 
BP falls out of a major marketing consultancy 's list of the top 100 brands . 
The fallout from the Deepwater Horizon spill led to BP being left off Interbrand 's index for the first time in 11 years . 
BP falls out of index of top 100 brands after Deepwater Horizon oil spill BP 's clean-up costs following the explosion of Deepwater Horizon nears $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.4 bn -RRB- Scientists estimate that a total of 4.4 m barrels of oil were released into the Gulf of Mexico during the nearly three months the well leaked . 
Bob Dudley takes over as chief executive of BP following the departure of Tony Hayward . 
White House report finds that government scientists were blocked by Obama administration from reporting the full extent of BP oil spill in the early stages . 
BP announces that its external safety ombudsman , put in place after the fatal explosion at its Texas City refinery in 2005 , will stop taking complaints after June 2011 . 
The Obama administration 's six-month moratorium on new deepwater drilling operations ends . 
Environmental groups express concern over the decision , while supporters of offshore drilling dismiss the announcement , arguing that the moratorium is effectively still in place due to continuing uncertainty over new drilling regulations . 
BP and Halliburton accused of not taking proper measures which could have prevented Deepwater Horizon explosion . 
BP increases the estimated total cost of the oil spill to $ 40bn , $ 7.7 bn more than previously expected . 
Chair of US commission is scathing about the safety regime on board the Deepwater Horizon . 
Ex-BP boss says when oil spill hit , BP was forced to make up disaster response as it went along Ken Feinberg expects to pay out only $ 2.3 bn in emergency claims over Gulf of Mexico oil spill from $ 20bn fund The US government files a suit against BP and several of its partners in the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster . 
The action , which could potentially cost BP billions in legal costs , accuses the company of violating safety regulations and seeks unlimited damages to cover the cost of cleaning up the oil , losses suffered by local businesses and harm caused to the environment . 
A US embassy cable released by Wikileaks reveals that , 18 months before the Deepwater Horizon disaster , BP suffered a similar blowout in Azerbaijan . 
The White House oil commission concludes that the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico was the result of systematic management failure at BP , Transocean and Halliburton . 
