BP oil spill repairs face further delay with tropical storm warning Bad weather threatens to force fleet of ships assembled around stricken well to evacuate area Thursday 22 July 2010 20.40 BST Barack Obama receiving a briefing in the White House on the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Pete Souza\/AP Attempts to permanently solve the problem of the Macondo oil well that has spewed more than 4m barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico have had to be pushed back as bad weather threatens to force the fleet of ships assembled around the stricken well to evacuate the area . 
A tropical depression that formed over the Bahamas was moving in the direction of the well located off Louisiana 's coast , with warnings that it could turn into a tropical storm along the west coast of Florida . 
The route followed by the depression is unpredictable , with weather forecasters citing a 50 % chance that it reaches the Macondo well within the next two days . 
The fleet of 65 ships involved in the disaster response were preparing to quit the area and head for port , though an evacuation had not yet been ordered . 
They include vessels being used in the monitoring of the well . 
But the threat of bad weather has already delayed efforts to plug the well at its source deep beneath the sea bed . 
Engineers were obliged to suspend work on the first of two relief wells that are being drilled down to the source , setting back the final procedure to plug it . 
They had been expecting to spend this week reinforcing the last section of the relief well with concrete , which would have allowed an attempt to plug the well with heavy mud over this weekend . 
Now that will be delayed . 
Admiral Thad Allen , the Obama administration 's point man on the disaster response , said that should the evacuation go ahead the disruption to the work at the well could last as long as two weeks . 
A federal investigation panel in New Orleans continues its exploration of the causes of the disaster which began on 20 April when the Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded . 
A widow of one of the 11 workers who died , Natalie Roshto , told the hearing on Thursday that he had been anxious about conditions on the rig before it went up . 
She said that her husband Shane had called it the oil well `` from hell '' and told her : `` Mother Nature just does n't want us to drill here . '' 
Meanwhile a Senate committee has called on BP boss Tony Hayward to testify before it on whether the oil giant played any role in the release of Lockerbie bomber Abdelbaset al-Megrahi from prison in Scotland last year . 
It has been suggested BP lobbied for his release in the hope of securing a lucrative oil deal with Libya . 
