\* Helix to use same equipment from BP oil spill \* Company interest said to be high HOUSTON , Dec 8 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Helix Energy Solutions Group Inc -LRB- HLX . 
N -RRB- is putting finishing touches on a system of vessels and equipment that could be used in a rapid response to a future deepwater oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , the company said on Wednesday . 
Helix 's system , a competitor to a project led by Exxon Mobil Corp XOM . 
N -RRB- that is still in the planning stages , is built from equipment that was used to siphon oil from the sea floor after BP Plc 's -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- Macondo well ruptured on April 20 . 
Helix is lining up companies to sign on to the project , likely using a retainer-like financial structure , Stephen Powers , director of investor relations as Houston-based Helix , said . 
`` We have had very heavy interest , '' Powers said , but declined to name any companies at this stage of the negotiations . 
`` We will have a solution up and running here in very short order . '' 
Earlier on Wednesday , John Crum , co-chief operating officer for Apache Corp -LRB- APA . 
N -RRB- told investors at the Wells Fargo energy conference that his company would likely take part in Helix ' spill containment system . 
U.S. regulators , aiming to make drilling in the Gulf of Mexico safer , are requiring companies to provide worst case oil and gas flow scenarios and also asking companies if they have access to a spill containment system , Crum said . 
Helix ' `` Deepwater Containment System '' includes vessels and crews that currently operate in the Gulf and seabed components that are built in advance , the company said . 
The Helix system would involve placing a subsea shut-off device , valves and pipes atop a blowout preventer or well production equipment at the seabed . 
It would contain and channel oil and gas to production and storage vessels at the surface . 
The system includes two Helix rigs that BP used to produce or burn off about 800,000 barrels of the 4.4 million barrels of oil that spewed from the Macondo well . 
A tanker to be chartered separately would gather and store oil that could be shipped to shore . 
Exxon , Royal Dutch Shell -LRB- RDSa . 
L -RRB- , ConocoPhillips -LRB- COP . 
N -RRB- and Chevron Corp -LRB- CVX . 
N -RRB- formed a nonprofit organization in July , called the Marine Well Containment Company , to operate and maintain their $ 1 billion spill containment system . 
That system will consist of specially designed subsea containment equipment connected by manifolds , jumpers and risers to capture vessels that will store and offload any spilled oil . 
-LRB- Reporting by Anna Driver ; Additional reporting by Kristen Hays in Houston ; Editing by Tim Dobbyn -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
