WASHINGTON | Wed Dec 8 , 2010 9:34 pm EST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP and its contractors made a series of decisions that were `` breathtakingly inept '' ahead of the largest offshore oil spill in U.S. history , a co-chair of the White House oil spill commission said on Wednesday . 
Bill Reilly , who co-chairs the presidential commission set up after the BP spill , blasted the conduct of the oil giant and its partners , Transocean and Halliburton , in drilling the doomed Macondo well , . 
`` There is virtual consensus among all the sophisticated observers of this debacle that three of the leading players in the industry made a series of missteps , miscalculations and miscommunications that were breathtakingly inept and largely preventable , '' Reilly said in a prepared remarks for an oil and gas conference in New Orleans , Louisiana . 
Reilly stressed he was not speaking in his capacity as commission co-chair . 
Still , the remarks could hint at the tone of the panel 's final report to be released in January . 
The seven-member panel is charged with uncovering the root causes of the devastating explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig , as well as guide the future of offshore drilling . 
In his speech , Reilly reiterated his call for a self-regulating oil industry group that would help hold companies accountable . 
`` There is also no question ... that certain companies were well known within the industry to be laggards when it came to a safety culture , '' Reilly said . 
`` Yet the industry stood by and let disaster happen . '' 
A so called safety institute would be able to require the highest safety standards across the industry and to assess companies ' safety culture in practice , Reilly said . 
Reilly warned that another drilling accident , even a minor one , could have dire consequences for the entire oil and gas sector . 
`` If this should happen again ... the public and governmental response will be disproportionately severe , '' Reilly said . 
`` Because the American people are not going to forget the Deepwater Horizon . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
