Zaki Chehab and Kathy Gannon bring years of experience to bear on accounts of how the west has dealt with Iraq and Afghanistan , says Ewen MacAskill Iraq Ablaze : Inside the Insurgency by Zaki Chehab -LRB- 220pp , IB Tauris , # 17.99 -RRB- I is for Infidel : From Holy War to Holy Terror in Afghanistan by Kathy Gannon -LRB- 320pp , Public Affairs , # 14.99 -RRB- So many of the journalists who have covered the Iraq conflict have felt a need to write a book that publishers are becoming more selective and rejection slips have become the norm . 
Zaki Chehab is , rightly , one of the exceptions . 
As an Arab , a Palestinian brought up in one of the refugee camps of the Lebanon , he can reach places and people in Iraq denied to almost all western reporters . 
He has spent time with the Iraqi insurgents who would have been suspicious of , or might even have killed , American or European reporters , few of whom are now willing to take the risk of making contact . 
Chehab , political editor of London-based al-Hayat , has not produced a comprehensive account of the Iraqi insurgency , but it is the best yet . 
He argues convincingly that the insurgency is driven primarily by nationalism , by Iraqis resentful that their country is under occupation by a US-led force . 
Although he allows plenty of space for Abu Musab Zarqawi and other foreign fighters , he says the insurgency is primarily home-grown . 
Touring round the Sunni Muslim-dominated areas , the center of the insurgency , he concludes that 99 % of Sunnis are opposed to the occupation . 
Although the foreign fighters make up a small proportion of the fighters , they have been responsible for some of the bloodiest suicide bombings and kidnappings . 
Chehab has a long passage about Zarqawi , the Jordanian-born leader of al-Qaida in Iraq . 
The author is ambiguous about whether he met him , but probably has not , though he interviewed Zarqawi supporters in jail . 
Chehab is not a late-comer to Iraq , arriving only for the war in 2003 . 
He was sent to Baghdad in 1978 , on his very first assignment , by a Palestinian magazine . 
He is good on the events running up to the war and the interaction between the US neocons and Iraqi exiles . 
But there is little new in this and the best of the book is his descriptions of meetings with Iraqis post-war , from tribal leaders to the fighters , and chronicling the many mistakes the Americans have made since the invasion , turning even those who might have supported them into enemies . 
Like Chehab , Kathy Gannon is a reporter and , like him , she has not come late to her story , Afghanistan . 
She is unusual among the present generation of foreign correspondents . 
The tendency now , even more pronounced than before , is for foreign correspondents to spend a few years in a country and then move on . 
Gannon has spent 18 years covering Afghanistan and Pakistan for the Associated Press news agency , finally leaving this year for a posting in Iran . 
The abiding memory , at least in Britain , of the fall of Kabul in 2001 was its `` liberation '' by the BBC 's John Simpson . 
Gannon , a Canadian , had , in fact , been there all along , the only westerner in Kabul throughout the US bombing . 
She is critical of Afghanistan 's various rulers - including some in the present coalition government - and also of the Americans and the role played by Pakistan . 
She expresses repugnance at the warlords who became allies of the Americans and remain in power , recalling in detail massacres and other atrocities they were involved in , their roles either unknown or diplomatically forgotten by the west . 
She goes back over how the US , in its enthusiasm for driving the Soviets out of Afghanistan , armed and encouraged jihadists from the Afghan refugee camps as well as Muslim fighters from around the world . 
So many of the problems of the first years of the 21st century can be traced back to America 's failure to think through the consequences of encouraging jihad : both Osama bin Laden and Zarqawi are products of the Afghanistan war . 
Gannon recalls , among many incidents , the US pumping out inspirational literature of its own for the Afghan refugee camps , where US-printed school books taught the alphabet by using such examples as J for Jihad , K for Kalashnikov and I for Infidel . 
She says the west , after the fall of the Taliban , promised not to abandon Afghanistan again , but that is exactly what has happened . 
Apart from Kabul , she maintains Afghanistan today looks remarkably like it did in 1992 , with the warlords filling the power vacuum and the US unwilling to provide the funding for restructuring . 
`` Afghanistan 's tragedy , '' she concludes , `` is that to the world 's powers , it has never really mattered - or has not mattered for long . '' 
Write your review of this or any other book , find out what other readers thought or add it to your lists Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Review : Iraq Ablaze and I is for Infidel This article appeared on p10 of the Guardian review section of the Guardian on 23.56 GMT on Saturday 10 December 2005 . 
