A Conversion in ` This Storm ' Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. had a stern message for more than two dozen of the nation 's most powerful hedge fund managers gathered in the third-floor conference room near his office . 
Paulson told them it was time to begin regulating the opaque realm of hedge funds , reversing his long-held opposition . 
`` You should not be thinking about how to fight it but how to make it work , '' he recounted telling them at the meeting last month . 
One manager recalled muttering as he walked out : `` What happened to the Hank Paulson we knew ? '' 
With his 30-month tenure nearing its end , Paulson is leaving behind a legacy of federal interventionism that few would have expected from this former head of the investment giant Goldman Sachs . 
When he arrived in Washington as one of Wall Street 's most successful bankers , he was skeptical of government meddling . 
But as a regulator facing the worst financial crisis in nearly a century , he engineered a series of massive federal intrusions into the markets while persuading reluctant bank executives and influential politicians to fall in behind him . 
His evolution in thinking has extended even beyond these government programs to a set of new beliefs that he has yet to trumpet publicly or , in most cases , even share privately with colleagues on Wall Street and in the White House . 
While they , too , have changed some of their views on regulation , Paulson disclosed that he has traveled an even greater distance . 
`` My thinking has evolved a lot to the point where I 've seen regulation up close and personal , '' he said in a series of interviews . 
It was n't just the crisis that changed him . 
It was every bit as much sitting behind the desk where he fashioned new regulation . 
`` I 've realized how flawed it is and how imperfect , but how necessary it is , '' he added . 
Even though President Bush has been warning the next administration in speeches not to over-regulate the markets , Paulson said he will unveil proposals in coming weeks urging President-elect Barack Obama and the new Congress to endow the federal government with broad new authorities to take over any failing financial institution , not just banks . 
A Republican , Paulson would bring government into some of Wall Street 's most private quarters . 
He said banking regulators should have a major say in how financial firms compensate their executives and that the Federal Reserve should have the power to regulate any financial company it considers crucial , including hedge funds and private-equity firms . 
He added that the policy statement he crafted on hedge funds in January 2007 , which stated they should not be regulated , was wrong . 
In reshaping his philosophy , he has had to feel his way even as the once-familiar financial landscape shifted around him . 
Some senior government officials who worked with him said he invented much of the government 's response on the fly . 
