U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Global war crimes court to investigate Gaddafi THE HAGUE | Thu Mar 3 , 2011 10:52 pm IST THE HAGUE -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The international war crimes tribunal said on Thursday it would investigate Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , his sons and members of their inner circle for crimes committed by their security forces . 
Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo of the Hague-based International Criminal Court , pointing to a bloody crackdown on demonstrators against Gaddafi 's rule in which thousands may have died , said that no one had the authority to massacre civilians . 
He said the court would investigate `` serious crimes '' and had identified several people at the top of the command chain who could be investigated . 
`` They are Muammar Gaddafi , his inner circle including some of his sons , who had de facto authority , '' Moreno-Ocampo said . 
If opposition groups also have weapons and commit crimes , their leaders will also be investigated . 
`` We will act with impartiality , '' he said . 
The United Nations Security Council imposed sanctions on Gaddafi and his family on Saturday , and referred Libya 's crackdown on demonstrators to the court . 
Gaddafi has vowed to stay in Libya and fight to the death since protests against his 41-year rule began in mid-February , inspired by the popular uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt that ousted longstanding authoritarian rulers . 
The prosecutor said air strikes and attacks , alleged to have been made by security forces , and illegal detentions of hundreds of people would be investigated , including violence in the eastern city of Benghazi on Feb. 15 and attacks in the capital Tripoli on Feb. 20 . 
`` No one has the authority to attack and massacre civilians , '' Moreno-Ocampo said , adding that he could request the issue of arrest warrants over the atrocities in a few months ' time . 
Libyan government spokesman Musa Ibrahim called the probe `` close to a joke '' since no fact-finding mission had been sent to his country , and said it was based purely on media reports . 
`` We have armed gangs having tanks , aircraft and machineguns and attacking police stations , army camps , ports and airports and occupying Libyan cities . 
This is far away from a peaceful movement , '' he told BBC radio . 
Khaled Kaim , deputy Libyan foreign minister , told Al Arabiya `` We are not under the jurisdiction of the court , we are not signatories ... The court has no power over Libya . '' 
Other people in Gaddafi 's circle who will come under the court 's scrutiny include the commander of the 32nd brigade , foreign mercenaries , a government spokesman and the National Security Adviser , Moreno-Ocampo said . 
He did not name them but said the inner circle included some of Gaddafi 's sons . 
The 32nd brigade leader is Gaddafi 's son Khamis . 
Outside that circle , he pointed to the head of Gaddafi 's personal security , the director general of the Libyan External Security Organisation , the head of the Security Forces and other organization leaders as potential suspects . 
Earlier on Thursday , Gaddafi 's forces struck at rebel control of oil export hubs in eastern Libya for a second day as Arab states weighed a plan to end the turmoil . 
Rebels are also calling for a no-fly zone , echoing a demand by Libya 's deputy U.N. envoy , who now opposes Gaddafi . 
The ICC has no police force and has struggled in the past to have suspects arrested . 
\* Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Bashir is still at large after being charged with genocide in Darfur \* Uganda 's Lord 's Resistance Army leader Joseph Kony has eluded efforts to capture him . 
\* Former Liberian president Charles Taylor was arrested , and is now on trial for war crimes at the Special Court for Sierra Leone in The Hague . 
Bill Pace , head of a coalition of NGOs that support the work of the court , said the Security Council and member states should now stand by the referral and ensure that arrests are made . 
`` The involvement of the ICC indicates that crimes of grave concern will not be tolerated , '' Pace said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Aaron Gray-Block ; additional reporting by Stefano Ambrogi ; editing by Sara Webb and Tim Pearce -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
