DUBAI | Thu Mar 3 , 2011 12:45 pm EST DUBAI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - As Libya 's embattled leader pelts rebel strongholds with bombs near the country 's coastal oil export hubs , the risk of long-term damage to the OPEC country 's oil industry is rising . 
Libya 's battle lines are shifting daily , with rebels in tenuous control of the east , but the fighting is increasingly taking place near oil industry infrastructure on the coast . 
Since unrest began weeks ago in the North African country , which typically pumps around 1.6 million barrels a day -LRB- bpd -RRB- , around 750,000 bpd has been shut in as workers flee . 
The disruptions helped push Brent crude prices to 30-month highs this week near $ 118 a barrel . 
But so far , the conflict has spared Libya 's oil infrastructure , including its key export terminals , pipelines and well equipment , worth billions . 
As the stand-off devolves into what looks increasingly like a civil war , oil experts and analysts are seeing an increasing risk of long-lasting damage to Libya 's largely foreign-run oil sector , which could keep oil prices high for a long time . 
The stakes are clear . 
Libya holds Africa 's largest oil reserves , and crude shipments account for 95 percent of its export revenues . 
Neither Gaddafi nor rebels want to see the spoils fall into enemy hands . 
European refiners , especially in Italy , rely heavily on Libya 's prized light crude . 
But both the Gaddafi regime and rebels have said publicly they will not seek to destroy oil infrastructure . 
No damage to oil infrastructure was reported Wednesday and Thursday , when Gaddafi-loyal air force fighters attacked oil export hub town Brega . 
The town , currently in rebel hands , has passed back and forth between regime and rebel control in recent days . 
`` It has become likely that Libyan fighting will affect , and potentially destroy , oil infrastructure serving the country 's largest , central Sirte basin , which is right on the fault line between Gaddafi loyalists and rebels , '' said Samuel Ciszuk , Middle East analyst at IHS Energy in London . 
Gaddafi loyalists , who briefly captured Brega Wednesday , have since been repelled back to Ras Lanuf , another major oil terminal 600 km -LRB- 375 miles -RRB- east of capital Tripoli . 
`` Libya 's oil infrastructure has n't been damaged . 
But the risk of damage is increasing , and that could make it harder for Libya to resume oil supplies any time soon , '' said Carsten Fritsch , analyst at Commerzbank in Frankfurt . 
And after thousands of foreign oil workers have fled the country , concerns about oilfield maintenance in the remote interior are also rising . 
`` There are really two big concerns , '' said Harry Tchilinguirian , head of commodity markets strategy at BNP Paribas . 
`` Over the course of a shutdown of production to evacuate staff , wells have to be handled very carefully . 
It 's not like turning a light bulb off and on again . 
The other concern is that we will see facilities affected by the fighting . '' 
The Sirte basin holds reservoirs with over 43 billion barrels of oil , which are tapped from both east and west , but it 's at risk of being cleaved down the middle . 
A trunk pipeline supplies oil flows that end up both in Ras Lanuf , still under Gaddafi 's control , and terminals further east which are run by AGOCO , a unit of the state-run National Oil Company that is now under the control of anti-Gaddafi engineers , Ciszuk said . 
AGOCO typically ships up to 450,000 bpd . 
Reports in recent days have shown tankers are still leaving Libya , but it 's not entirely clear who gets the revenue , Gaddafi or rebels . 
Digging in its heels , AGOCO has said it may start its own marketing division to negotiate with foreign buyers . 
Gaddafi-aligned oil minister Shokri Ganem , meanwhile , has claimed Libya 's oil sector remains firmly under regime control . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
