AL-UQAYLA , Libya | Thu Mar 3 , 2011 9:59 pm GMT AL-UQAYLA , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan rebels pushed west on Thursday , extending their grip on a key coast road as Muammar Gaddafi received a warning he would be held to account at The Hague for suspected crimes by his security forces . 
Venezuela said the Libyan leader had agreed to its proposal for an international commission to negotiate an end to the turmoil in the world 's 12th largest oil exporting nation . 
But Gaddafi 's son Saif al Islam said there was no need for any foreign mediation in the crisis , a leader of the uprising rejected talks with the veteran leader , and the Arab League said cautiously the plan was `` under consideration . '' 
In Paris , French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said France and Britain would support the idea of setting up a no-fly zone over Libya if Gaddafi 's forces continued to attack civilians . 
U.S. President Barack Obama said the United States and the international community must be ready to act rapidly to stop violence against civilians or a humanitarian crisis in Libya . 
The uprising , the bloodiest yet against a long-serving ruler in the Middle East or North Africa , has torn through the OPEC-member country and knocked out nearly 50 percent of its 1.6 million barrels per day output , the bedrock of its economy . 
In eastern Libya , witnesses said a warplane bombed Brega the oil terminal town 800 km -LRB- 500 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli , for the second day , part of a struggle for control of a strategically vital coast road and oil industry facilities . 
Warplanes also launched two raids against the nearby rebel-held town of Ajbadiya , witnesses said . 
But Juma Amer , Secretary for African Affairs at the Libyan Foreign Ministry , told journalists : `` Media reports that civilian areas were bombed are false . 
Police had been and are urged to use maximum self restraint . '' 
Saif said Brega was bombed to scare off militia fighters and to gain control of oil installations . 
`` First of all the bombs -LRB- were -RRB- just to frighten them to go away , '' he told Britain 's Sky News . 
On the ground , rebels leading the unprecedented popular revolt pushed their front line west of Brega . 
They said they had driven back troops loyal to Gaddafi to Ras Lanuf , site of another major oil terminal and 600 km -LRB- 375 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli . 
They also said they had captured a group of mercenaries . 
In an angry scene at al-Uqayla , east of Ras Lanuf , a rebel shouted at a captured young African and alleged mercenary : `` You were carrying guns , yes or no ? 
You were with Gaddafi 's brigades yes or no ? '' 
The silent youth was shoved onto his knees into the dirt . 
A man held a pistol close to the boy 's face before a reporter protested and told the man the rebels were not judges . 
In The Hague , International Criminal Court prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo said Gaddafi and members of his inner circle , could be investigated for alleged crimes committed since the uprising broke out in mid-February . 
`` We have identified some individuals in the de facto or former authority who have authority over the security forces who allegedly committed the crimes , '' Moreno-Ocampo said . 
`` They are Muammar Gaddafi , his inner circle including some of his sons , who had this de facto authority . 
There are also some people with formal authority who should pay attention to crimes committed by their people . '' 
Libyan government spokesman Musa Ibrahim told BBC radio the news from The Hague was `` close to a joke . '' 
`` No fact-finding mission has been sent to Libya . 
No diplomats , no ministers , no NGOs or organizations of any type were sent to Libya to check the facts ... No one can be sent to prison based on media reports , '' he said . 
Ibrahim Mohammad Ali , a spokesman for the public security department , said Libya had told the United Nations it would allow visits by independent human rights observers . 
Libya is not a signatory of the ICC treaty , `` but we are willing to deal with the ICC and take action against anyone who has acted outside the law , '' he told a Tripoli news conference . 
A spokesman for Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez , a Gaddafi ally , said the Libyan government had accepted a Venezuelan plan to seek a negotiated solution to the conflict in Libya . 
Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa said the plan was under consideration and he was waiting for details from Caracas . 
Oil prices fell briefly on news of the plan , but traders said the fall was due to profit-taking and they were sceptical about any Venezuelan mediation . 
Brent crude fell more than $ 3 but by 2000 GMT had recovered to $ 114.82 . 
Chavez 's plan would involve a commission from Latin America , Europe and the Middle East trying to reach a negotiated outcome between the Libyan leader and rebel forces . 
An aide to Mustafa Abdel Jalil , head of the rebels ' National Libyan Council , told Reuters the rebels were open to talks only on Gaddafi 's resignation or exile to avoid more bloodshed . 
`` There is nothing else to negotiate , '' he said . 
He also called for foreign air strikes to set up a `` no-fly zone '' to help the rebels topple Gaddafi . 
Save The Children and Medecins Sans Frontieres said they were struggling to get medicine and care to Libya 's needy , with gunmen blocking roads and civilians too scared to seek help . 
The government has tried to persuade people in Tripoli that life continues as normal . 
But there were queues at banks , and residents said food prices had gone up and the street value of the Libyan dinar had fallen dramatically against the dollar . 
The official news agency said the Libyan parliament had cut car fuel prices by 25 percent to 0.15 dinars -LRB- $ 0.12 -RRB- a litre . 
A fish market near Tripoli 's Green Square was mostly empty . 
`` The situation is affecting us , '' said Ismail , a fisherman . 
`` All the Egyptian workers who run the boats have left . '' 
Just outside rebel-held Zawiyah , west of Tripoli , officials took foreign journalists to a local refinery to show it was controlled by the state . 
Officials said it was running normally . 
But in the center of Zawiyah , rebels were fully in control and said they had enough forces to repel any government attack . 
In the opposition stronghold of Benghazi , men of all ages gathered next to the courthouse engaged in fierce debates , enjoying their new-found freedom of speech . 
`` We must go to Tripoli and get rid of Gaddafi , '' shouted one , to murmurs of approval from those around him . 
`` But we have only our shirts to protect us from the cannon , '' said Ahmed el Sherif , 60 , standing on the edge of the group . 
The upheaval is causing a humanitarian crisis , especially on the Tunisian border where tens of thousands of foreign workers have fled to safety . 
But an organized international airlift started to relieve the human flood from Libya as word spread to refugees that planes were taking them home . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Ca n't they remember what happened when the hard line Shah of Iran was deposed with Western influence . 
We surely need another Iranian regime in Libya , I do n't think . 
The Arab countries have to have dictators of one sort or another as they are such an unruly lot . 
History has proven this over and over . 
I would like to plead to all sides in the current civil war in Libya : Please , do n't go mindlessly blowing up oil wells like Saddam 's forces did when they retreated from Kuwait 20 years ago . 
Cap the oil wells , if you must . 
Cut us Americans off , if you must . 
Charge whatever you want to charge for a barrel of oil . 
I realize that middle east nations do n't owe us cheap oil . 
But I earnestly believe it is wrong for humanity to waste billions of barrels of oil by blowing up oil wells . 
You remind me of those who like in the US and colonial Africa who always wrote blacks are not capable of doing anything good and relatives of monkeys . 
Sure only whites know how to start wars ? 
And do these dictators have to be appointed as before by our freedom loving governments ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
