CARACAS | Thu Mar 3 , 2011 11:45 am EST CARACAS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya 's government has accepted a plan by Venezuela to seek a negotiated solution to the conflict in the North African country , a spokesman for President Hugo Chavez said on Thursday . 
Information Minister Andres Izarra also confirmed the Arab League had shown interest in the Chavez plan to send an international commission to talk with both sides in Libya . 
Revolts in Libya and elsewhere in the Arab world are politically awkward for Chavez due to his friendships in the region . 
But his relationship with Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi has been particularly warm with the pair showering each other with gifts and awards . 
Here are some details of their friendship : \* Chavez and Gaddafi have enjoyed a long-standing alliance based on shared military backgrounds , left-wing economic ideas , antagonistic relations with the United States and membership for both their nations of the OPEC oil producer group . 
\* In 2004 , Libya awarded its annual Gaddafi International Human Rights Prize to Chavez for resisting `` imperialism '' and being a champion of the poor . 
A citation with the award praised the Venezuelan leader 's `` brave heart , intelligent mind , eloquent oratory and firm hand . '' 
\* Chavez first visited Tripoli a year after taking office in 1999 and has returned five times . 
\* In 2006 , Libya named a new 11,000-seat soccer stadium after Chavez near the Mediterranean city of Benghazi . 
The Libyan soccer federation said Chavez was being honored for his `` brave humanitarian positions , especially in support of the people of Gaza in the recent Israeli aggression . '' 
\* Making a rare visit to the Americas , Gaddafi attended a Chavez-hosted summit of Latin American and African leaders in 2009 . 
Together , they called for a new world order countering Western economic dominance . 
\* After the meeting on Venezuela 's Caribbean resort island of Margarita , Chavez presented Gaddafi with a replica of a sword of South American independence hero Simon Bolivar . 
\* Last year , Chavez said he planned to govern from a Bedouin-style tent given to him by Gaddafi , to make space for homeless Venezuelans he invited to live at his palace . 
\* At the height of recent protests in Egypt , Chavez said he had spoken to Gaddafi and Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for briefings on the situation . 
\* When the demonstrations and violence reached Tripoli , British Foreign Secretary William Hague said he had seen information suggesting Gaddafi had fled and was on his way to Venezuela . 
Libya and Venezuela 's governments denied it and Gaddafi later appeared on television to refute the rumors . 
-LRB- Reporting by Caracas newsroom , Writing by Daniel Wallis ; Editing by Bill Trott -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
