In this image taken from video provided by BP PLC at 12:23 a.m. EDT , Saturday Sept. 4 , 2010 Aug. 3 , 2010 shows the blowout preventer that failed to stop oil from spewing into the Gulf of Mexico being raised to the surface . 
The blowout preventer was n't expected to reach the surface until Saturday , at which point government investigators will take possession of it . 
AP ON THE GULF OF MEXICO -- Investigators looking into what went wrong in the Gulf of Mexico oil spill are a step closer to answers now that a key piece of evidence is secure aboard a ship . 
hours to lift the 50-foot , 300-ton blowout preventer from a mile beneath the sea . 
The five-story high device breached the water 's surface at 6:54 p.m. CDT , and looked largely intact with black stains on the yellow metal . 
FBI agents were among the 137 people aboard the Helix Q4000 vessel , taking photos and video of the device . 
They will escort it back to a NASA facility in Louisiana for analysis . 
The AP was the only news outlet with a print reporter and photographer on board the ship . 
The blowout preventer was placed into a metal contraption specifically designed to hold the massive device at 9:16 p.m. CDT Saturday . 
As it was maneuvered into place , crew members were silent and water dripped off the device . 
Crews had been delayed raising the device after icelike crystals -- called hydrates -- formed on it . 
The device could n't be safely lifted from the water until the hydrates melted because the hydrates are combustible , said Darin Hilton , the captain of the Helix Q4000 . 
Hydrates form when gases such as methane mix with water under high pressure and cold temperatures . 
The crystals caused BP PLC problems in May , when hydrates formed on a 100-ton , four-story dome the company tried to place over the leak to contain it . 
As a large hatch opened up on the Helix to allow the blowout preventer to pass through , several hundred feet of light sheen could be seen near the boat , though crews were n't exactly sure what it was . 
The April 20 explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon killed 11 workers and led to 206 million gallons of oil spewing from BP PLC 's undersea well . 
Investigators know the explosion was triggered by a bubble of methane gas that escaped from the well and shot up the drill column , expanding quickly as it burst through several seals and barriers before igniting . 
But they do n't know exactly how or why the gas escaped . 
And they do n't know why the blowout preventer did n't seal the well pipe at the sea bottom after the eruption , as it was supposed to . 
While the device did n't close -- or may have closed partially -- investigative hearings have produced no clear picture of why it did n't plug the well . 
Documents emerged showing that a part of the device had a hydraulic leak , which would have reduced its effectiveness , and that a passive `` deadman '' trigger had a low , perhaps even dead , battery . 
Steve Newman , president of rig owner Transocean , told lawmakers following the disaster that there was no evidence the device itself failed and suggested debris might have been forced into it by the surging gas . 
There has also been testimony that the blowout preventer did n't undergo a rigorous recertification process in 2005 as required by federal regulators . 
Testimony from BP and Transocean officials also showed that repairs were not always authorized by the manufacturer , Cameron International , and that confusion about the equipment delayed attempts to close the well in the days after the explosion . 
A Transocean official has said he knew the blowout preventer was functioning because he personally oversaw its maintenance , and he said the device underwent tests to ensure it was working . 
The device , he said , had undergone a maintenance overhaul in February as it was being moved to the Deepwater Horizon to be placed over BP 's well . 
Also , according to testimony , a BP well site leader performed a pressure test April 9 on the blowout preventer , and he said it passed . 
Some have cautioned that the blowout preventer will not provide clues to what caused the gas bubble . 
And it is possible a thorough review may not be able to show why it did n't work . 
That could leave investigators to speculate on causes using data , records and testimony . 
Lawyers will be watching closely , too , as hundreds of lawsuits have been filed over the oil spill . 
Future liabilities faced by a number of corporations could be riding on what the analysis of the blowout preventer shows . 
A temporary cap that stopped oil from gushing into the Gulf in mid-July was removed Thursday . 
No more oil was expected to leak into the sea , but crews were standing by with collection vessels in case . 
The government said a new blowout preventer was placed on the blown-out well late Friday . 
