Follow Tales from the Trail Should U.S. oil royalties pay for studies of BP spill 's environmental impact ? 
Oil caused the mess in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Should U.S. oil royalties pay for scientists to study what happened , and what 's still happening , to this complex environment ? 
At least one scientist thinks so . 
Ed Overton of Louisiana State University figures the billions of dollars collected in royalties by the now-defunct and much-reviled Minerals Management Service -- re-named and re-organized as the Bureau of Ocean Energy -- must have enough money to pay for research into the environmental impact of the Deepwater Horizon blowout and spill . 
Speaking at a Senate hearing last week on the effects of oil-dispersing chemicals , Overton and other experts called the BP spill an unintentional `` grand experiment '' into what deep water oil exploration can do to animals , plants , water and land in the Gulf . 
As Overton put it , the oil and dispersants are out there now . 
Best to study them over the months and years ahead to figure out what they 're doing to the environment . 
`` The Mineral Management Service has generated royalty income to the federal government of billions of dollars . 
And virtually all of that money has been spent on not understanding the environment , '' Overton said . 
While it should be the oil industry 's obligation to know how to respond to an environmental disaster like this one , Overton said , `` the government ought to have some oversight in taking some of that royalty money , a significant amount of that royalty money , and understanding how , both from an engineering perspective as well as an ecological perspective , what to do about it . '' 
There 's plenty that the engineers and ecologists do n't know , Overton said , starting with how to collect oil samples in deep water -LRB- there are sampling techniques to collect plants and animals , but not crude -RRB- . 
As he told it , when the samplers went down into the Gulf , they got coated with oil , so it was impossible to tell if the oil was just a layer they passed through or whether it was a true sample of what was there at the sea bed . 
Now that the Macondo well has been capped and a final `` bottom kill '' is seemingly within reach , it 's probably natural for everyone to want to turn the page . 
But researchers want to actually know what happened . 
Should oil royalties help pay for that research ? 
Photo credit : REUTERS\/Sean Gardner -LRB- two photos -RRB- -LRB- BP worker Randy Murry holds up a sample of water taken from the Gulf of Mexico to be tested , while working on the Swamp Queen III skimmer near Venice , Louisiana , August 1 , 2010 . 
; Oil clings to marsh grass in South Pass near Venice , Louisiana , August 1 , 2010 . -RRB- 
These so called experts already know what oil does to the environment ... just another excuse to keep their jobs , spend the money on those that have already lost theirs ... . 
So , the great oil glutton is seeking compensation for the environmental consequences of the Gulf oil disaster ; a very worthy precedent for future generations who will have to suffer a global catastrophe that will largely be sourced from this gluttony , or maybe the glutton will insist on a professional risk assessment , unlike the Gulf authorities who signally failed to assess the risk arising from drilling a mile under the sea . 
The federal government should allocate at least 50 % of its Gulf oil spill royalties to pay for continued research of the spill itself . 
While it would be extremely hard to fix the stupidity of companies willing to employ substandard drilling precautions , a simpler and more effective method of clean up and eradication is out there . 
Pictures of stagnant brown beaches , innocent animals covered in oil , and entire ecosystems destroyed by the spill should be enough to motivate those in Washington to at least attempt to understand what happened . 
Oil spills are not a common occurrence , so neither is the research behind them . 
And for one event to virtually destroy the entire Gulf of Mexico , OUR Gulf of Mexico , for years and years to come , I believe some insight into how an event such as this can be avoided or handled more properly is necessary . 
Or we can focus on simply compensating those affected and be screwed next time something like this happens . 
We are all humans and we all make mistakes , let s grow up and focus on taking care of business rather than pointing fingers . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I 've covered the Winter Olympics in Calgary and Salt Lake City , a couple wars , the State Department , White House , Pentagon , several long trials and a presidential sex scandal . 
Since 2006 , I 've been reporting on the environment and climate change . 
