International organizations are facing immense logistical difficulties in Haiti Carlos scales the wall , and checks back to see that I 'm keeping up . 
There is a small gap to jump , then onto a flat concrete roof where a man sits in an armchair . 
`` Bonjour , '' I mumble as I walk through his living room . 
We trample over the rubble , the roof slates cracking sharply under foot , concrete blocks wobbling precariously as our weight shifts on them . 
Unless the situation changes , Haiti 's crisis will deepen , and many more will die A man stops us , and points up an alley at his home - a mangled heap of bricks and slabs and metal . 
The contorted iron banisters from his staircase sit atop it all . 
Smoke from the morning fires begins to fill the nostrils , masking the smell of the dead . 
It filters the rising sun . 
A golden glow covers this little fold in the hills of Port-au-Prince , as survivors pick through their homes . 
There is a woman salvaging a plastic washbowl . 
Up a bit , in front of several demolished homes , two men stare at the ground , looking for anything of use . 
Elsewhere , a child stands and stares , a bandage over her right eye . 
And from everyone , that question that haunts and taunts the conscience : `` What can you do ? '' 
Down a lane , the wreckage of the village church hanging over them , a group of people with buckets patiently wait to get water . 
It is impossible to see how Haiti can recover from this earthquake They have managed to uncover a plastic pipe protruding from beneath the broken tarmac of the road - the first fresh drinking water to flow here in a week . 
Within a few minutes the flow stops . 
On the telegraph pole that rises next to them is a makeshift sign that says : `` Help needed . 
Water , food , medicine . '' 
There are too many of these signs in Port-au-Prince - and too many people who are waiting for someone to do what they say . 
One week on , it is impossible to see how Haiti can recover from this earthquake . 
The fund-raising effort around the world has been truly incredible . 
In the middle of one of the worst recessions in living memory , people have been giving money as perhaps never before . 
That money , though , is mostly sitting on the tarmac at the capital 's airport at the moment - it is not getting to the people in need . 
This is in part because of the immense logistical difficulties facing the aid organizations . 
Communications are very , very difficult . 
Co-ordinating who gets help and when is made all the more difficult because of what was an already poor infrastructure . 
They treat us like dogs . 
Why do n't they feed us like humans ? 
On the ground , though , it seems that more should be possible . 
In every single one of the makeshift camps I visited , large and small , people asked where the help was . 
The UN World Food Programme says that one of the big problems of distributing aid is the risk of riots . 
There have been some chaotic scenes when UN staff have tried to hand out food , but I have never felt at risk . 
It may , however , explain why outside a camp the other day some sacks of rice were left in the middle of the night . 
There is no knowing who left the food there , but the homeless people living in the camp say it was an aid organization , that the food was dumped in the road , and that by the time the people found it much of the rice had spilt across the road itself . 
`` They treat us like dogs , '' one man said . 
`` Why do n't they feed us like humans ? '' 
It is an obvious question . 
Surely with the thousands of peacekeepers here , if the fear really is that the situation really could get out of control , the UN could cordon off an area of each camp , bring in food and water and carefully and safely hand it out ? 
In a bid to speed up aid deliveries , US troops have stepped up their presence Surely the aid agencies could work with the UN and the US to do the same ? 
Surely US troops - of which there are thousands on the ground already -LRB- though it has been hard to see any at all in Port-au-Prince itself so far , apart from those that fly overhead -RRB- - could also help secure areas so that crowd control is easier ? 
But these things are not happening , and the people of Haiti can not understand why . 
I have seen some tents that clearly have come from outside , and which now are sheltering the homeless , but only a tiny number . 
In the meantime , more than a million people are living out in the open , under a sheet , or a rectangle of tarpaulin . 
The question that urgently needs answering , is why is it taking so long ? 
Because unless the situation changes , Haiti 's crisis will deepen , and many more will die . 
