What is delaying Haiti 's aid ? 
The earthquake in Haiti has left an estimated 1.5 million people homeless and tens of thousands without access to food , water and medical supplies . 
The UN says the scale of the disaster is `` historic '' , with its staff confronting devastation and logistical problems on a scale never seen before . 
Here is a look at some of the issues agencies say have hampered the aid effort and how they are being dealt with . 
The devastation has been described as ` historic ' in scale Aid agencies say Haiti is quite simply one of the worst disasters they have ever handled . 
`` In every direction the task is huge , it is an historic challenge '' UN spokesman Elisabeth Byrs told the BBC . 
`` We are trying to run an operation for three million people , the task is huge and the coordination is immense . '' 
They say that while images of the misery in Haiti can spread rapidly around the world , aid supplies and skilled people can not travel so fast . 
`` Haiti is definitely the most complex emergency to date , '' said Jean Philippe Chauzy of the International Organization for Migration -LRB- IOM -RRB- . 
He said it was difficult for those not involved in emergency aid to understand how difficult the operations can be . 
`` The fact that the reporting is immediate might give the impression that aid can be sorted out in such a fashion , but you ca n't do that because of the scale of the operation and complexity . '' 
Aid groups say supplies have been stuck at the airport While the main airport in Port-au-Prince was not put out of action by the quake , it is not equipped to deal with the volume of flights arriving . 
There have been complaints of huge backlogs , with some aircraft circling for hours or being diverted to the Dominican Republic . 
Paul Peachy of Christian Aid said it had difficult even getting emergency staff to Haiti . 
The UN says 150 planes are now landing daily in Port-au-Prince but the US Army , which has taken over control of the airport , says 1,500 planes are still scheduled to arrive . 
To speed up the process , aid flights are also coming into and out of the neighbouring Dominican Republic and in smaller airports in Haiti . 
Port-au-Prince 's main port was also badly damaged by the quake and other ports in the area could only accept smaller vessels . 
One of the two piers in the capital 's docks reopened on Thursday , allowing bulkier shipments to be delivered by sea . 
But on Thursday , Haiti 's President Rene Preval joined several aid agencies in saying it is what happens when aid arrives in the country that is the problem . 
`` People say to us : Where are the trucks to transport the aid ? 
Where are the depots to store what arrives ? '' 
`` What 's important is coordination of the aid , so that we know what we receive , in what quantity , when and how it 's distributed . '' 
Damaged roads make it harder to move resources around the country Moving aid to where it is needed has been hampered by damage to roads , piles of rubble in the streets or by the sheer volume of people trying to move out of or around the capital . 
`` Road corridors are heavy with traffic , so traveling takes hours , '' said Ms Byrs of the UN . 
Aid agencies also report a lack of trucks and a lack of fuel but said supplies were now starting to arrive . 
They also hope to start employing local people soon in rubble clearing so reconstruction can begin . 
The fact that many roads were damaged also meant that survivors have tended to gather in small groups , rather than in larger camps , he said . 
`` It is very difficult to reach out systematically when you 've got hundreds of groups of people in Port-au-Prince and the vicinity , '' he said . 
`` If you manage to get tens of thousands of displaced people in one place you obviously streamline the distribution . '' 
The US has carried out air drops of basic supplies in some areas , but this is considered a last resort as it is considered inefficient and can lead to unrest on the ground as people compete for the few supplies . 
Aid groups were unable to broadcast information to camps Phones and internet links were down in many areas of Haiti for some time after the quake , making it harder for agencies to coordinate their efforts . 
Mr Peachy of Christian Aid said it had been impossible to contact his colleagues in Haiti for the first 48 hours after the quake . 
But Mr Chauzy of the IOM said the lack of communications also meant it was hard to tell people needing aid where they could go to collect it . 
`` Now the media is up and running , local radio station have started broadcasting and the UN 's Radio Minustah has started broadcasting in Creole , '' he said . 
Many NGOs based in Haiti lost staff and equipment in the disaster , which meant the systems they had in place could not be used . 
Christian Aid was one of many to lose its entire building . 
Aside from the practical losses , many aid workers are also dealing with grief as they carry out their work . 
`` For the moment we are concentrating - and I would say escaping - with the work . 
After , we will experience the emotions , '' said Ms Byrs at the UN . 
Armed police have been deployed to deter looting and violence There has been concern about the security situation in Haiti , with fears that people not receiving aid would turn to violence . 
John O'Shea of Irish charity Goal told the Guardian newspaper he could not allow aid workers to move into Haiti from the Dominican Republican because he had `` no guarantee that the people driving them are not going to be macheted to death on the way down '' . 
But while there have been reports of looting and some incidents of violence , other agencies say they have been impressed by how Haitians have responded to the disaster . 
Ms Byrs said the capital was `` tense but calm '' and that the few examples of violence were not representative of Haitian people . 
`` We are seeing a huge solidarity between Haitian people . 
They resilient , they taken their fate into own hands from the very beginning , '' she said . 
Jean Philippe Chauzy of French agency Acted said the security issues in Haiti should neither be over-played nor used as an excuse to prevent aid deliveries . 
`` The needs are there , people are desperate , if you do n't distribute the assistance , people will be even more desperate and ready to resort to anything . '' 
On Thursday , a truck run by the US-based Catholic Relief Service was reported to have been overrun by desperate people when it arrived at a makeshift camp in the town of Leogane . 
But Adrien Tomarchio of Acted says the main safety concern has been for those people receiving aid . 
`` The best process is not to start distribution at once and announce it so everyone comes , '' he says . 
`` We make sure we can set up a proper secured distribution point , where people can come one-by-one . 
The aim is to deliver to the most vulnerable people first , then we also can focus on other groups . '' 
The US Army has been deployed in vast numbers in Haiti , both to help with the aid effort and to help maintain law and order . 
The US has tens of thousands of troops in the country Medecins Sans Frontieres -LRB- MSF -RRB- has complained that the rush to get troops into the country has been at the expense of the delivery of humanitarian supplies . 
`` Everything has been mixed together and the urgent and vital attention to the people have been delayed while military logistics - which is useful but not on day three , not on day four , but maybe on day eight - has really jammed the airport and led to this mismanagement . '' 
MSF say one of its planes carrying 12 tonnes of medical supplies was repeatedly turned away from the airport despite having prior permission to land . 
John O'Shea of Goal said the failure of the UN and US to work together was leading to `` a situation of utter chaos '' . 
The UN has dismissed such criticism , saying it `` underestimated the logistical difficulties '' and that the US was the only country in the region capable of providing logistical support on the scale needed . 
`` We are not talking about politics , this is humanitarian . 
Our goal is to delivery assistance as soon as possible and co-ordination is vital - without it you ca n't get the right aid to the most vulnerable , '' said spokeswoman Ms Byrs . 
Aid agencies are keen to stress that the response to a disaster such as Haiti must be responsible and durable . 
The last thing they want is for the mechanisms they put in place to lead to long term harm for the people they are trying to help . 
Badly managed distributions can mean the most needy go without Adrien Tomarchio , of French agency Acted , told the BBC the aim when distributing food is to get it to the right people quickly , rather than just get it out quickly . 
`` If we distribute food all at once , some people will take more then they need and there is the risk of them selling food items , rather than it reaching the people that need it , '' he said . 
`` The aim is to deliver to the most vulnerable people , then we can focus on other groups . '' 
In the case of shelter , there is little point in building a camp for displaced people without confirming they will be able to stay there , possibly for many months . 
Agencies have had to work with the local authorities to determine whether the land is suitable , whether it can be properly equipped with shelter and sanitation . 
Land rights issues also do not disappear after a disaster , so agencies have to establish who owns the land on which they hope to build . 
`` You ca n't just go there and get land , level it and start building , '' says Jean Philippe Chauzy of IOM . 
Haiti 's rainy season begins in May or June , so camps can not be placed in areas which are likely to be flooded in the next few months . 
IOM , working with troops from Minustah , have started clearing a patch of land in a suburb about 10km out of Port-au-Prince , but say further camps will almost certainly be needed . 
As recovery begins , it is important that as many Haitians that can return to work do . 
A camp which is too far away from the capital for them to be able to travel in for work will benefit no one . 
