Doctors say one of the biggest risks now is secondary infection The first planeload of medicines donated by UK drug companies has landed in Haiti , with emergency kits to treat as many as 20,000 people . 
UK drug companies have pledged # 5.6 m in donations , with more flights planned carrying antibiotics , pain killers and anti-fungals , among other supplies . 
These have been specifically requested by Haitian authorities , organisers say . 
The aid arrived as the Disasters Emergency Committee said its Haiti appeal had now raised # 38m in the UK . 
The flight took off from Newquay in Cornwall on Wednesday and landed in Haiti on Thursday afternoon . 
Anthony Dunnett is president of International Health Partners -LRB- IHP -RRB- - the organization that co-ordinates offers of medical aid to disaster zones and works closely with local and international aid bodies . 
He said : `` We have to ensure that the medicines we send to Haiti are exactly what are needed by doctors on the spot so that patients gain maximum benefit . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by calling 0370 60 60 900 `` Arrangements are in place to ensure that these supplies reach patients with the minimum of delay once the aircraft has landed . '' 
Among the UK charities operating in Haiti is Save the Children , which is working to set up a supervised children 's play area at one of the makeshift camps in Port-au-Prince now home to thousands of earthquake survivors . 
Among the children at the camp - in the grounds of a church - is eight-year-old Angelo Sideron Maillard , whose mother and seven siblings all survived but who lost their home and all their possessions . 
Describing the moment the earthquake hit , he said : `` I was looking for my mum and I was really scared . 
`` Now we do n't even have a tent to sleep in . 
I do n't have anything , not even clothes . '' 
He added : `` I would like to go back home but I know that it 's impossible now . 
I 'm not going to school any more . 
It 's a shame because I like school . '' 
Other supplies being flown in from the UK include toilet and water treatment kits sent from the Red Cross base at Warmley , South Gloucestershire , on Wednesday . 
A Red Cross spokesman said it was also including advice leaflets on how to minimize risks while cooking and other basic hygiene measures . 
Diggers are also being sent to construct latrines . 
Seven hundred ShelterBoxes are on their way from the UK to Port-au-Prince . 
The supplies include 40 tonnes of aid , with enough shelter for 7,000 people . 
Authorities in Haiti have announced plans to house 400,000 earthquake survivors in tented villages outside the capital , Port-au-Prince . 
An estimated 1.5 million people were left homeless by the 7.0-magnitude quake , which killed as many as 200,000 . 
At least 75,000 bodies have so far been buried in mass graves , the government has said . 
Many more remain uncollected in the streets . 
