Haiti earthquake : Aid outside Port-au-Prince An estimated 200,000 people died in last Tuesday 's quake in Haiti and another 1.5 million have been made homeless . 
Despite an international aid operation , supplies are slow to reach survivors . 
Haitians and their relatives have been telling the BBC News website about how aid is getting through . 
I was trying to get to my home in Jacmel from Port-au-Prince when the earthquake hit . 
I was on the mountain road . 
Rocks fell all around me . 
The road was closed off . 
A week later and the road is passable , just . 
People can get in and out of Jacmel now but large trucks ca n't . 
This means we have n't had any fuel deliveries since the earthquake . 
The lack of fuel is crippling our efforts here . 
A building in Jacmel damaged by the earthquake . 
Picture : Yael Talleyrand About 10,000 people in Jacmel lost their homes in the earthquake . 
They are now based at two camps . 
These people are now receiving food but the general population is starting to run low on food . 
We need to start a general distribution of food as soon as possible because prices have rocketed and cash is still not available because all the banks are closed . 
About three days ago we started getting a flood of items through from the US Blackhawk choppers . 
We managed to get food , bottled water and medicine . 
We also have the essentials for cooking at the camps like burners and propane tanks . 
These supplies have been a great help because the camps were running out of charcoal . 
Charcoal prices have skyrocketed here because it 's the main cooking fuel source and stocks are low . 
You have no idea how tired I am . 
Words ca n't describe it The Jacmel hospital of St Michel is not in good shape . 
There are many collapsed buildings and it 's mostly unusable . 
The Canadians are bringing in a field hospital . 
There 's a large Canadian naval vessel in the bay bringing in the supplies for this . 
The American doctors say that once this professional field hospital is in place , it will change things dramatically . 
The area is still calm but we are getting droves of refugees from Port-au-Prince who are abandoning their wasteland and this is putting more pressure on us . 
However , vegetables and fruits being harvested in rural areas are now coming here instead of Port-au-Prince because the market there has collapsed , so lots of veggies are available at good prices . 
You have no idea how tired I am . 
Words ca n't describe it . 
But when I heard that a French search and rescue team found a 15-day-old baby , I started crying . 
DAPHNEE ROLAND , RELATIVES IN CARREFOUR I am really worried about my grandmother in Carrefour . 
The last contact we had was last Thursday . 
She is 79 and since the earthquake she has been living on the street . 
Relief is not getting to that area and she is getting weak . 
Up until now my cousin who is looking out for her has been able to get a little water for her , but now they have run out of supplies . 
My cousin is really worried because my grandmother is getting weak . 
My grandmother 's brother who is 81 is also in Carrefour . 
Communication is difficult and the relief is not getting to them and I can not understand why the people there are not getting any help . 
We are hearing nothing about Carrefour . 
People are dying and these are people who survived the actual quake The little information we do get is from my cousin but it takes him days before he can get through on his phone . 
I have heard that aid is getting to Leogane and I do n't understand as you can not get to Leogane without going through Carrefour . 
We have posted so many messages on Facebook asking for aid to be sent to Carrefour to help people , because there are so many people who need help . 
People are dying ; the elderly , the children and whoever was sick before and these are people who survived the actual quake . 
My grandmother is not a strong woman . 
I have not slept since the earthquake and I am upset that I can not help my grandmother when she needs it the most . 
The embassy in Haiti is overcrowded and they wo n't pay any attention to us Ideally we would like to get both my grandmother and great-uncle out but they have no way of leaving . 
Grandmother does not have a green card and we would like to try and get her a visa to come to the US temporarily while Haiti is being rebuilt . 
The embassy in Haiti is overcrowded and they wo n't pay any attention to us . 
We do n't know what to do . 
An uncle here in the US is trying to get a flight to Haiti to take some supplies but it 's difficult getting on a flight . 
The airlines are asking so much . 
We are trying our best to not let them die but it 's going to be hard . 
I have about 50 relatives in Haiti but with the exception of my grandmother , great-uncle and cousin , everyone else is missing and unaccounted for . 
THERLINE LOUIS , RELATIVES IN LEOGANE My 29-year-old twin brothers Nikenson and Makenson Louis are in Leogane and when I spoke to them they told me that they have not seen any aid in their part of town as yet . 
They have set up a tent outside their house and are sleeping in the street . 
They were able to retrieve some supplies from inside the house which they are sharing with the neighbors but now food and water are running low . 
Aid is needed in the different parts of Haiti affected by the earthquake and not just the capital . 
My brother Mark did manage to travel from Leogane to Port-au-Prince in search of food and help for the women and children . 
While people have survived , if they do not get the help that they need they will die My mum has a nephew in Santo Domingo and she is trying to get in touch with him to see if my relatives in Leogane would be able to go and stay there for a while . 
I am not sure how possible this will be as from what I have been hearing the roads are completely devastated . 
While people have survived , if they do not get the help that they need they will die . 
