Marathon music event to help Haiti earthquake appeal A Haitian woman is helped from the rubble of a damaged building A host of top names from the Northern Ireland entertainment industry are set to take part in a marathon music event in aid of the Haiti earthquake appeal . 
Over fifty acts , including The Answer , David Holmes , General Fiasco and the Beat Poets will perform at the Belfast gig in Katy Daly 's on 31st January . 
The `` Belfast 4 Haiti '' event has been promoted almost exclusively through the networking sites Facebook and Twitter . 
The campaign 's Facebook page has so far attracted over 4,500 members . 
One of the organisers , Aaron Abernethy , said they originally had a target of # 20,000 , but given the amount of interest he said they now hope to exceed that figure . 
He explained that the idea for the fundraiser came during a conversation with other musicians on the internet . 
`` It all started last week when all the Haiti news reports came out and a few of us , local musicians , were musing on a web board , ` should there be a benefit gig for this ? ' 
and it kind of snowballed from there . 
`` Two of us got elected , as it were , to try and run these things , '' he said . 
Mr Abernethy also said that as he had been made redundant two weeks ago , he had found plenty of spare time to get involved in the organization . 
He said David Holmes , the local DJ who received an Oscar nomination for his music in the Oceans 11 film , would play in the Stiff Kitten venue , close to the main event . 
`` We 've also got The Answer playing at our gig in the Limelight , who have just come back from a worldwide tour with AC\/DC where they played to literally millions of people '' . 
`` Also , General Fiasco who are a young band who are getting lots of play on MTV at the minute ; In Case of Fire , from Portadown , who are always on all the music magazines at the minute . 
`` There are just so many of the biggest names in Northern Ireland basically who have all been very kind to offer to play , its just been fantastic , '' he said . 
