Transmission details in the Network Radio Programme Information 7-day version are not updated after publication . 
For updates , please see individual day pages . 
Skip to a day of the week : Zoe Ball sits in for Dermot O'Leary this week and welcomes guests Eels , the versatile US rockers led by a man called E , Mark Oliver Everett ; and American singer-songwriter Dylan LeBlanc , whose first album , Paupers Field -- released last month on Rough Trade Records -- features vocals from Emmylou Harris . 
Presenter\/Zoe Ball , Producer\/Ben Walker for Labora TV Welsh comic Rhod Gilbert 's audience comedy show features regulars Lloyd Langford and Greg Davies -LRB- We Are Klang -RRB- , along with Sarah Millican , who takes a weekly look at The Six Stages Of Woman . 
This third episode of six features live music from Kid British , including hits Lost In London , Winner and upcoming single Two Out Of Seven . 
The guest comedian is If.com eddie Award winner Mark Watson . 
Listeners can join Rhod for his Rant on irritating products , delve into Rhod 's Confessions , where Lloyd Langford impresses the girls with his French , and see if Greg Davies can tempt them with his Indecent Proposal involving the Chuckle Brothers . 
Presenter\/Rhod Gilbert , Producers\/Julia McKenzie and Lianne Coop for the BBC Ricky Ross , of Deacon Blue fame , sits in for Bob Harris this week . 
Joining him are Roddy Hart And The Lonesome Fire , who perform in session for tonight 's show . 
Glaswegian singer\/songwriter Roddy Hart 's self-recorded demo Home Tapes brought him to the attention of Kris Kristofferson , who invited Roddy to open for him on his UK tour . 
Kristofferson then added vocals to Hart 's Bookmark , his debut studio album , alongside former Fairground Attraction vocalist , Scottish singer Eddi Reader . 
Hart has opened for other artists including Ray Davies , Jeff Beck , John Prine , Ray LaMontagne , Teddy Thompson , Rosanne Cash , Glen Campbell and Deacon Blue . 
This year has so far seen Hart touring to promote his most recent album , Sign Language , and more recently producing Hello ! 
I 'm Tommy Reilly -- the second album by Tommy Reilly . 
Presenter\/Ricky Ross , Producer\/Mark Simpson for the BBC Lucie Skeaping introduces highlights of a concert recorded in Greyfriar 's Kirk as part of this year 's Edinburgh International Festival . 
Ensemble Florilegium are joined by a quartet of young Bolivian singers in music recently unearthed from the Christian missions of Chiquitos and Moxos Indians in Eastern Bolivia . 
Mezzo soprano Joyce DiDonato sings Idamante in Mozart 's masterpiece Idomeneo Donald Macleod presents Mozart 's Idomeneo from the Edinburgh International Festival with a star-studded cast and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra and Chorus conducted by Sir Roger Norrington . 
The dramatic Idomeneo is one of Mozart 's earlier masterpieces , revealing a gloriously dramatic struggle of love versus duty , an insoluble love triangle and the intervention of a sea monster and Neptune himself . 
Tenor Kurt Streit takes the title role , with mezzo soprano Joyce DiDonato as Idamante , soprano Rosemary Joshua as Ilia , soprano Emma Bell as Elettra , tenor Rainer Trost as Arbace , tenor Keith Lewis as Sacerdote and bass Jan Martinik as La Voce . 
This vivid account of an adolescent boy 's struggle with acne and grief is written by Chris Wilson , winner of the Alfred Bradley Radio Bursary Award . 
In this quirky and touching play , Andrew Logan has a terrible and frightening relationship with his acne , as well as an increasingly distant relationship with his father and an unsettling and dismal view of his `` evil Auntie Jeanette '' -- who sometimes resembles a man in drag . 
The cast is yet to be confirmed . 
Clare Balding takes a walk on Hampstead Heath with a group of inner-city Londoners who are being encouraged to discover the green places of their city , many for the first time , in the first of the new series of Ramblings . 
The residents of the Harrow Road are part of an initiative called It 's My Country , designed to help them discover the joys of walking . 
Presenter\/Clare Balding , Producer\/Lucy Lunt for the BBC Steve Punt turns super sleuth once again , taking possession of the keys to BBC Radio 4 's very own detective bureau and bringing mystery and intrigue back to Saturday mornings . 
In the first program , Punt looks into the phantom settlement of Argleton . 
Search the web for this quintessentially English place name and internet maps show that it lies just outside the town of Ormskirk in Lancashire . 
But when the super sleuth travels to locate it on the ground , all he finds is an empty field . 
It turns out that Argleton does n't actually exist ! 
Punt sets out to crack the mystery of how a non-existent place can appear in online maps . 
From the Domesday Book to Google Headquarters , Punt 's quest takes him through a thousand years of history and into the murky world of plagiarism . 
He questions all the key players -- and as he zeroes in on the truth , he discovers that in the cartographic realm nothing is quite as it seems . 
Also in this series , Punt travels to the Polish-Czech border to investigate one man 's theory that the Nazis had developed flying saucer technology . 
And he scrutinises a wax cylinder which is reputed to carry the only recording of Queen Victoria 's voice . 
Presenter\/Steve Punt , Producer\/Laurence Grissell for the BBC The White Man 's Burden is a radio adaptation of Paul Theroux 's stage play about the young Rudyard Kipling 's humiliating final months as an American resident . 
The great English writer plans to settle in Vermont with his American wife , but a clash with his brother-in-law results in death threats , a court case and public scandal . 
The drama stars Nicholas Boulton as Rudyard Kipling ; Teresa Gallagher as Carrie Kipling ; Nathan Osgood as Beatty Balestier ; Sasha Pick as Mary Hackett ; David Rintoul as Howard and Hitt ; Paul Marinker as Conland and Judge Newton ; and John Guerrasio as Fitts . 
The White Man 's Burden has been directed and adapted for radio by Emma Harding . 
Producer\/Emma Harding for the BBC Dr Brian Cox presents a tribute to fellow physicist Richard Feynman Following on from his archive portrait of Carl Sagan , physicist Dr Brian Cox presents a tribute to Richard Feynman in this week 's Archive On 4 . 
Widely regarded as the finest physicist of his generation and the most influential since Einstein , Feynman did much to popularize science through lectures , books and television , including his dramatic revelation before the world 's media in which he demonstrated the exact cause of the Challenger Shuttle explosion in 1986 . 
Described as the `` Mozart of physics '' , Feynman 's amazing life and career seemingly had no end of highlights including a shared Nobel Prize for his unique contribution to the field of Quantum Electrodynamics . 
He became the most celebrated , influential and best known American physicist of his generation -- something that would continue until his death from cancer in 1988 . 
At the same time as his scientific reputation was building , Feynman 's unconventional attitude and behavior were helping to create his reputation for eccentricity . 
When bored of writing equations on chalk boards or lecturing in his lab , he would go off in search of inspiration down at the local strip club , watching the go-go girls and scribbling his calculations on napkins . 
His eccentricity would at times infuriate his colleagues but it was simply a natural consequence of how he thought . 
Brian explores how , though few ever understood mathematics or physics like Feynman , he truly believed that science was simply too important to be left exclusively to scientists , and his energy and humor was essential in getting the public interested and inspired . 
Presenter\/Dr Brian Cox , Producer\/Rami Tzabar for the BBC 9.00-11 .00 am BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Danny Baker serves up his original mix of Saturday morning sports entertainment featuring fans and special guests , providing the perfect warm-up to the day 's sporting action . 
Presenter\/Danny Baker , Producer\/Clare Davison for Campbell Davison Media BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 11.00am-12 .00 noon BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Colin Murray presents from Gateshead 's Sage Theatre , as a panel of experts win points for punditry in front of a live audience . 
12.00noon-6 .06 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Pougatch presents all the build-up to the day 's sport and Premier League action . 
From 12.45 pm there is live coverage from Stoke City versus West Ham United from the Britannia Stadium , plus updates from Inverness CT versus Hearts in the Scottish Premier League . 
At 3pm the team gear up for more live coverage from the top-flight kick-offs including Everton versus Newcastle . 
There is also more coverage from the Scottish Premier League as Rangers take on Dundee United at Ibrox ; plus regular rugby union updates from Wasps versus Leicester and cricket from the ECB 40-Over final at Lord 's . 
At 5pm Mark presents the hour-long Sports Report with news and reaction from all the day 's big games , the classified results read by the legendary James Alexander Gordon , and updates from the Premier League 's late kick-off , Sunderland versus Arsenal -LRB- 5.30 pm -RRB- . 
6.06-8 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Derby County midfielder Robbie Savage joins Mark Chapman direct from the pitch following Derby 's match with Barnsley to present the nation 's most popular football phone-in , 606 . 
Darren Fletcher provides updates from Sunderland versus Arsenal in the Premier League as Mark and Robbie take calls on the day 's big talking points from the Premier League , Championship and Football League matches . 
Plus the team read out the best tweets , texts and Facebook comments . 
Presenters\/Mark Chapman and Robbie Savage , Producer\/Jo Tongue for Somethin' Else BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 2.30-9 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Uninterrupted commentary on the final of the 40-Over League comes live from Lord 's with the Test Match Special commentary team . 
Craig Charles devotes the show to Soundway Records , specialists in African and South American music . 
Craig talks to compiler Hugo Mendez about working for a niche label and how he sets out to rediscover forgotten musical gems from the Sixties and Seventies . 
Presenter\/Craig Charles , Producer\/Hermeet Chadha for Demus The 2010 Worldplay season -- an annual collection of plays from broadcasters around the world all based on the theme of money -- continues with this LA Theatre Works ' production recorded in front of a live audience . 
Hollywood star Nathan Lane plays Davis Mizlansky , a cunning movie producer with a slippery conscience who faces a classic Hollywood dilemma : what happens when the art of the deal turns into a battle for the ultimate double-cross ? 
Playwright Jon Robin Baitz drew upon years spent in the seedy underbelly of Hollywood to create the hilarious and unsavoury characters in his play , Mizlansky\/Zilinsky . 
The play also stars Paul Sand as Sam Zilinsky , with Harry Shearer , Richard Masur , Rob Morrow , Grant Shaud , Robert Walden and Kurtwood Smith . 
The director is Ron West . 
Producing Director\/Susan Albert Loewenberg for LA Theatre Works Sara Cox returns from maternity leave today , following the birth of her daughter earlier this year , to her regular Sunday morning show on BBC Radio 1 . 
As one of the UK 's most popular female broadcasters with a career spanning 10 years across TV and radio , Sara 's eagerly anticipated return promises to be as entertaining as ever . 
Reggie Yates chats to man of the moment , Example , in this week 's Official Chart show . 
Following his chart success with hits such as Kickstarts and Wo n't Go Quietly , Example is back and talking to Reggie about his new single , Last Ones Standing , and much more . 
Reggie also catches up with multi-platinum singer , songwriter and rapper Iyaz , who has risen to stardom over the past year . 
To mark the historic visit of Pope Benedict XVI to Britain , the first papal visit since 1982 , Aled Jones celebrates the occasion with guests former Prime Minister Tony Blair , who converted to Catholicism soon after leaving office , and singer Dana , whose Catholic Music ministry takes her all over the world . 
The program will feature live inserts from Cofton Park for the Beatification Mass of Cardinal John Henry Newman . 
Presenter\/Aled Jones , Producer\/Hilary Robinson for the BBC Excitement mounts as thousands gather to greet the Pope in London 's Hyde Park . 
Sunday Half Hour 's Brian D'Arcy meets and talks with visitors and pilgrims from all corners of the country and introduces music from the event celebrating the life of faith . 
The Papal Vigil provides Catholics in England , Scotland and Wales the chance not only to celebrate their faith but also to explain it and demonstrate how it influences their lives and the lives of those around them . 
Hymns , psalms , worship songs , gospel -- a huge variety of music and musicians accompany the crowds gathered there . 
People representing each parish from across the UK carry banners in procession alongside members of Catholic organizations . 
Cardinal Newman 's phrase `` Heart speaks unto heart '' inspires a presentation called The Heart Of The Church . 
Christian organizations use that phrase to illustrate their work as a heart that sees , a heart that understands , a heart that serves and a heart that seeks justice . 
The Vigil Liturgy that follows consists of readings , prayers and an address by the Pope and concludes with Benediction . 
The visit of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI has been described by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office as an `` unprecedented opportunity to strengthen ties between the UK and the Holy See on global initiatives , and to emphasise the important role of faith in creating strong communities '' . 
Presenter\/Brian D'Arcy , Producers\/Clair Jaquiss and Mark O'Brien for the BBC Prize-winning Scottish novelist and poet Jackie Kay talks to Michael Berkeley about her favorite music , from Bach and Schubert to Janek , Richard Strauss and Nina Simone . 
Kay 's musical favorites begin with one of Janek 's Lachian Dances -LRB- two of her stories were influenced by works by Janek -RRB- , and then move on to the Baroque era with an extract from Pergolesi 's Stabat mater and a movement from a Bach cello suite played by Pablo Casals . 
Stephen Johnson explores Holst 's The Planets , with extracts and a complete performance of the work performed by the BBC National Orchestra of Wales , conducted by David Atherton . 
Originally titled Seven Pieces For Large Orchestra , Gustav Holst 's The Planets was a remarkably original composition when it was written . 
The first movement , Mars , the Bringer of War , was conceived in 1914 , just before the outbreak of the First World War ; almost foreseeing rather than reacting to war . 
The work was forward-looking in many ways -- Holst scored the work for a huge orchestra , creating extraordinary sounds and colors from this vast orchestral palette , and each movement has strikingly original characteristics . 
Samuel West plays Faust in Goethe 's classic drama Samuel West , Sir Derek Jacobi , Toby Jones and Anna Maxwell Martin star in Goethe 's Faust , one of the pillars of Western literature , here presented in a version dramatised and directed by David Timson . 
In part one of tonight 's drama , following an agreement between Mephistopheles and The Lord , the scholar Faust is tempted into a contract with the Devil . 
His life is changed and he plunges into the enjoyment of sensuality until his emotions are stirred by a meeting with Gretchen , leading to a tragic outcome . 
Part two of Faust , written much later in Goethe 's life , presents a series of episodic scenes in which the poet places his eponymous hero in a variety of surprising circumstances reflecting the predicament of humanity . 
Funny , reflective and moving , this dramatisation shows why Goethe 's Faust had such a massive influence on Western culture . 
Samuel West stars as Faust with Toby Jones as Mephistopheles , Sir Derek Jacobi as The Lord and Anna Maxwell Martin as Gretchen . 
The cast also includes Stephen Critchlow , Joannah Tincey , Peter Kenny , Emily Raymond , Gunnar Cauthery , Sean Barrett , Hugh Dickson , Anne-Marie Piazza , Gerard Horan , Auriol Smith , Peter Kenny , Emily Raymond and Daniel Mair . 
Producer\/Nicholas Somes for Ukemi Productions Edward Stourton presents a special edition of the Sunday Programme live from Cofton Park , Birmingham , where Pope Benedict XVI will beatify Cardinal Newman . 
There will be news and analysis of the Pope 's first state visit to Britain , and experts explain why the beatification of Newman is of personal importance to the Pope . 
Presenter\/Edward Stourton , Producer\/Amanda Hancox for the BBC This week 's Sunday Worship marks the Pope 's visit and Papal mass . 
In preparation for the beatification of Cardinal Newman taking place at Cofton Park in Birmingham , thousands are expected to gather on the grassy slopes near Newman 's oratory church . 
They will gather to celebrate the life of one of the greatest English theologians of the 19th century and prepare for the forthcoming Papal Mass. . 
The service is led by Mike Stanley and Jo Boyce who are joined by school choirs from Coventry and Birmingham . 
Producer\/Philip Billson for the BBC Sue MacGregor reunites people involved with the classic children 's TV program Play School , which ran from 1964 to 1988 in the final program of this series of The Reunion . 
Devised by Joy Whitby , former producer of the Listen With Mother slot on BBC Radio , Play School was a direct response to concerns about the perceived poor standard of British pre-school education . 
Play School was ground-breaking in more ways than one as it accidentally became the first program to be shown on BBC Two after a power cut halted the opening night 's programming . 
Its enthusiastic presenters came from diverse backgrounds and became household names and , along with the iconic three shaped windows , clock and toys , formed an integral part of many early childhoods . 
Sue is joined around the table by Joy along with Play School presenters Floella Benjamin , Brian Cant , who also fronted the spin-off series Play Away , and Johnny Ball , and musical director\/pianist Jonathan Cohen . 
Presenter\/Sue MacGregor , Producer\/Chris Green for Whistledown Productions In Emile Zola 's love story , The Ladies Delight , business , ambition and fashion collide . 
It is set in the hustle and excitement of the expansion of one of Paris 's first department stores . 
When innocent provincial girl Denise arrives in Paris , she quickly catches the eye of the notorious seducer of women , Octave Mouret . 
Despite her uncle 's disapproval , Denise accepts a job at Mouret 's department store , The Ladies Delight . 
The cast features David Hargreaves as the Narrator ; Georgia King as Denise ; Lee Williams as Mouret ; Conrad Nelson as Bourdoncle ; Nicholas Blane as Baudu ; Will Tacey as Old Bourras , Baron and Vincard ; Stephen Hoyle as Jean and Bauge ; Michael Hugo as Deloche and Colomban ; Clare Beck as Mme Aurelie and Mme Baudu ; Melissa Jane Sinden as Mme Desforges ; Maeve Larkin as Mme Marty and Pauline ; Chantelle Dean as Clara ; and Polly Lister as Genevieve , Margueritte and Mme de Boves . 
The Ladies Delight has been adapted by Carine Adler and directed by Stefan Escreet . 
Producer\/Charlotte Riches for the BBC As the final major event of the Pope 's historic visit to the UK , one of the most distinguished English Catholics of the 19th century , Cardinal Newman , was declared `` Blessed '' at a major open-air ceremony in Birmingham 's Cofton Park near to Newman 's home and oratory church . 
According to the Catholic Bishops ' Conference of England and Wales and the Bishops ' Conference of Scotland , Newman 's search for truth , his commitment to education and his moderation in debate all point to a man of faith in God , who cared for people and refused to pursue arguments without touching hearts . 
As the Pope 's visit draws to its conclusion , Edward Stourton presents highlights of this Beatification , commentating on the ceremony and explaining the process of making a saint . 
In particular , he discusses Newman 's own journey towards sainthood . 
Presenter\/Edward Stourton , Producer\/Philip Billson for the BBC 6.00-9 .00 am BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Rachel Burden presents from the start of the race as the 30th Great North Run commences from Newcastle , with BBC Radio 5 Live 's Phil Williams and George Riley preparing to run . 
BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 9.00am-12 .00 noon BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Stephen Nolan introduces live coverage of the Great North Run while Shelagh Fogarty follows the Pope 's visit to the UK from Coventry . 
Stephen presents coverage of the world 's largest half marathon as part of BBC Radio 5 Live 's Septemberfest . 
He brings all the stories from the start line on the 30th anniversary of the Great North Run , and commentary of the elite races comes from Mike Costello and Allison Curbishley . 
Reporters along the course will bring alive the atmosphere among the fun runners . 
Presenters\/Stephen Nolan and Shelagh Fogarty , Producer\/Francesca Bent BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 12.00noon-6 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Colin Murray presents Sunday Roast ahead of this afternoon 's Premier League games , with a live audience of fans . 
Colin and his audience debate the football stories and results of the weekend . 
From 1.30 pm Colin continues the football debate from the Match Of The Day 2 office with pundits from tonight 's show as well as the build-up to this afternoon 's game between Chelsea and Blackpool . 
There 's also coverage from Manchester United 's game against Liverpool in the Premier League , Kilmarnock versus Celtic in the Scottish Premier League and London Irish versus Gloucester in the rugby union Premiership . 
From 3pm there 's live commentary of the match between Wigan and Manchester City followed , at 4pm , by coverage of the second half of the game between Chelsea and Blackpool at Stamford Bridge . 
6.00-7 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Alan Green takes calls and reacts to all the big footballing issues of the weekend , and reads out listeners ' texts , emails , tweets and Facebook comments . 
Presenter\/Alan Green , Producer\/David McGuire for Somethin' Else BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 7.00-8 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE John Pienaar presents a new politics show for BBC Radio 5 Live , sharing his keen political observations . 
The program features news and interviews from key political figures in Westminster . 
8.00-9 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Declan Curry presents this new show featuring lively analysis of the big business stories making the headlines . 
Adrian Goldberg presents this new show dedicated to cutting-edge investigative journalism . 
He also takes on listeners ' campaigns and consumer issues . 
10.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE BBC Radio 5 Live looks back over the past four days of coverage of Septemberfest , celebrating the best of the network 's programming from Newcastle and the North East . 
BBC Radio 5 Live Publicity 10.30pm-1 .00 am BBC RADIO 5 LIVE The final live show of BBC Radio 5 Live 's Septemberfest hears Stephen Nolan rounding up a special four days of programming from Newcastle and the North East . 
He takes calls from listeners and also brings all the news from today 's Great North Run . 
6.00-9 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA The Major League Baseball season continues with live commentary from the game of the day . 
The program also features all the latest news from the week in baseball , with Jonny Gould and Josh Chetwynd . 
9.00pm-1 .00 am BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra brings live commentary from the New Meadowlands Stadium in New Jersey as the New England Patriots visit the New York Jets . 
There are also updates from all the rest of the action around the NFL . 
Cerys Matthews returns from holiday to present a musical road-trip from old school blues to African funk -LRB- and back -RRB- . 
In a remarkably wide-ranging , candid and emotional interview , Bernard Sumner recalls his youth ; the formation of Joy Division ; and , with searing honesty , the day the group 's iconic singer , Ian Curtis , committed suicide . 
He also talks about the band 's musical rebirth as New Order ; how they embraced technology and the emerging dance culture ; their financial troubles ; how he extricated himself from their famously bacchanalian lifestyle ; and the formation of his later bands Electronic and Bad Lieutenant . 
More than any other form of show business , the musical needs to have something new to say -- or has to find a new way of saying something old , as Michael Ball explains as he presents Breaking The Mould , the third program in a special season of documentaries celebrating The Musical . 
As the series of programs , each presented by a leading name from the world of musical theater , continues , Michael shows that the musical is a vulnerable medium in that it 's made of so many ingredients -- story , words , music , dance , costume and setting , all of which must come together in a perfect mix if the whole show is to succeed . 
But one of the constants about musical theater is its ability to evolve . 
Over the years , a number of shows have broken new ground -- even smashed the mould of what was or was n't a musical -- and have been rewarded with commercial and critical success . 
Examples in this program include Jesus Christ Superstar , Show Boat , Cats , Chicago and Oklahoma ! 
Contributors include : Stephen Sondheim , Joel Grey , Maury Yeston , Tim Rice , Elaine Paige , Sandy Wilson , Elaine Stritch , Cameron Mackintosh , Michael Grandage , Gillian Lynne , Ruthie Henshall , Ted Chapin , Mary Rodgers , Marge Champion and Richard Stilgoe . 
Presenter\/Michael Ball , Producer\/Malcolm Prince for the BBC Jools Holland 's special guest on this week 's show is American singer-songwriter Jesse Dee , who joins Jools and his band on an impromptu version of Nothing Can Change This Love . 
Presenter\/Jools Holland , Producer\/Sarah Gaston for the BBC Although he 's responsible for some of the best-known Spanish guitar pieces , Isaac Albniz did n't actually write any of them originally for that instrument . 
They are all transcriptions and arrangements of some of the wealth of piano music he produced throughout his career . 
Donald Macleod this week introduces a selection of Albniz 's piano music , both in its original form and in a variety of other guises , including his masterpiece , Iberia . 
There 's also a chance to hear Albniz 's two pieces for piano and orchestra , his only purely orchestral work , and extracts from his rarely performed operas , which came to fruition thanks to an intriguing collaboration with an English businessman with a passion for poetry . 
From an early age , Albniz made a good living as a highly respected pianist in his native Spain , and it was n't long before his reputation spread to France and Britain . 
At first , composition followed in the wake of his performing career , though not for long . 
As well as producing a large quantity of elegant salon music , Albniz began writing more Spanish-style pieces , in which he adapted traditional dances with their characteristic rhythms and tunes . 
In this first program , Donald introduces a selection of these works from Albniz 's formative years , including his Rapsodia Espaola . 
Sean Rafferty introduces a live recital from London 's Wigmore Hall by brilliant young Russian violinist Ilya Gringolts , who is joined by fellow former BBC Radio 3 New Generation Artist , pianist Ashley Wass , for sonatas by Grieg and Schumann . 
They pair Grieg 's youthful First Sonata , written on holiday in Denmark , with Schumann 's darker and fiery Second Sonata . 
Monday 20 to Friday 24 September Neil MacGregor explores the impact of Western European travel , trade and conquest between 1450 and 1600 in this week 's A History Of The World In 100 Objects . 
He begins with an exquisite miniature version of the sort of high-tech vessel that was to take Europeans right around the world . 
Today 's object is a small clockwork version of the type of galleon that the Spanish sent against England in the Armada , and which they also sent across the high seas . 
This one was made for a grand dinner table -- it could move , make music , tell the time and fire tiny cannons . 
Neil discusses the significance of this new breed of sailing ships and describes the political state of which this galleon is a symbol -- the Holy Roman Empire . 
Marine archaeologist Christopher Dobbs compares the tiny galleon to the Mary Rose in Portsmouth and historian Lisa Jardine considers the European fascination with mechanics and technology throughout the 16th century . 
Presenter\/Neil MacGregor , Producer\/Anthony Denselow for the BBC Against the background of rising hysteria in Middlesbrough over the murders of prostitutes , Denise 's dreams of a happy second marriage , even a family at 40 years old , are challenged as circumstantial evidence seems to point the finger at her husband , Phil . 
Developed at the Bore Place workshop with the aim of telling a contemporary story with a small cast , Hysteria by Steve Chambers addresses the fragile dynamics of a marriage and the taboo subject of men paying for sex and how a community can so easily be whipped into a suspicious frenzy . 
Christine Kavanagah plays Denise , Michael Hodgson plays Phil , Celia Hewitt plays Kath , Colleen Prendergast plays Sheree , Sean Baker plays Jimmy , Jude Akuwudike plays John , Sally Orrock plays Nurse and Michael Shelford and Tony Bell play the policemen . 
Producer\/David Hunter for the BBC The Last Tudor tells the story of a reality show contestant who decides that he has a greater claim to the throne than the current Royal Family . 
This improvised drama , told in a documentary format , charts his rise and fall in a satire on celebrity , delusion and spin . 
The story is based on the true story of Anthony Hall , a former policeman who in 1931 started to give public speeches claiming that he was the descendant of an illegitimate son of Henry VIII and therefore the last Tudor . 
The drama supposes that Anthony Hall 's great grandson , Murray Gray , a local government employee at Bristol City Council , discovers his family history and decides to exploit the royal claim as part of his bid to win a television talent show called The Fame Factor . 
He dresses up as Henry VIII to raise money for charitable causes , and seeks pop stardom to escape his boring job dealing with parking fines . 
Initially the case of Murray Gray is simply one story in a history documentary about Royal pretenders , but as Murray becomes more and more successful in The Fame Factor , events , and the `` documentary '' , spiral out of control . 
The documentary is presented by real-life presenter and producer Jolyon Jenkins , who devised the drama with Abigail Youngman . 
Murray Gray is played by Jonathan Alden and his girlfriend Chantelle by Nadia Williams . 
Murray 's PR agent , Memphis Garfield , is played by real-life music promoter Conal Dodds . 
Producer\/Jolyon Jenkins for the BBC Ivan Hewett explores the question of why certain musical keys have become associated with particular moods in a new series of Key Matters . 
A major , for example , has almost always been employed by composers to write optimistic , even ecstatic music , while in contrast E minor has become the key of choice for portraying menace and tragedy . 
In Monday 's program , pianist and conductor Jonathan Cohen discusses the open optimism of A major . 
On Tuesday , Ivan is joined by pianist Kenneth Hamilton to explore the treacherous and obscure world of F sharp . 
Cellist and composer Philip Sheppard defines the qualities of E minor on Wednesday . 
On Thursday , French horn player Roger Montgomery explains why F major is traditionally associated with pastoral and hunting sounds . 
And Ivan ends the week talking with violinist Daniel Hope about the majesty and glory of D major . 
Presenter\/Ivan Hewett , Producer\/Rosie Boulton for the BBC In Exit Strategy -- Choosing A Time To Die , Jenny Cuffe visits an Exit International workshop to explore the issue of assisted dying for the old . 
The question of whether society should permit assisted suicide is n't going away . 
But while the gray areas of the British legal system are floundered over , a radical Australian doctor has found a loophole . 
As physically helping someone to die is illegal , he is providing information to paying participants on how to `` peacefully and painlessly '' kill themselves . 
Dr Phillip Nitschke runs Exit International , an organization that distributes information on end-of-life methods . 
Banned from holding seminars in his own country , he is taking his workshops on the road , including to the UK . 
Jenny gains exclusive access to an Exit International workshop . 
She talks to the people present about their reasons for attending and investigates whether Exit is acting in the interests of humanity , or irresponsibly by offering dangerous information without safeguards . 
Talking with geriatricians , psychologists , campaigners and elderly people , Jenny explores society 's last great taboo : death . 
Presenter\/Jenny Cuffe , Producer\/Gemma Newby for All Out Productions Rosamund Luton 's first novel , Sister , is a suspenseful thriller about the bond between two sisters . 
When Beatrice hears that her younger sister , Tess , is missing , she leaves her job in New York and returns home to London on the first available flight . 
Having already lost her little brother to cystic fibrosis as a child , Bee can not bear the thought of losing her sister . 
When she tells the police that Tess had been getting nuisance calls and that she was pregnant by a lecturer at her college , who had n't wanted her to have the baby , the police decide to set up a reconstruction of Tess 's last known movements . 
Sister is abridged by Lauris Morgan Griffiths and read by Hattie Morahan . 
Reader\/Hattie Morahan , Producers\/Sara Davies and Christine Hall for the BBC 7.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Chapman introduces tonight 's edition of 5 Live Sport and is joined , from 7pm , by special guests to discuss the latest major footballing talking points in The Monday Night Club . 
At 9pm Mark Clemmit joins Mark in the studio for a round-up of the weekend 's action and stories from the Football League . 
Then , from 9.30 pm , Mark is joined by Dave Vitty for Football Express , a quick-fire comic look at the weekend 's action . 
12.45-9 .15 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA The Test Match Special commentary team are in the Lord 's commentary box to provide full , uninterrupted coverage of the fourth One Day International between England and Pakistan . 
Andrew Collins sits in for Lauren Laverne and is joined by Edwyn Collins for a live session as he releases Losing Sleep , his first album since his illness five years ago . 
Marc Riley meets Musee Mecanique , who take their name from a collection of vintage arcade games , player pianos and novelties found on San Francisco 's Fishermen 's Wharf and who are based in the musical hotbed of Portland , Oregon . 
Appropriately , their home studio is full of extraordinary instruments , antiques and second-hand flotsam , from musical saws to hand-cranked ice cream makers . 
As well as visiting the Riley studio , band leaders Sean Ogilvie and Micah Rabwin also double as the backing band for Laura Gibson . 
Joined on record by multi-instrumentalists Matthew Rubin Berger , Jeffery Boyd and Brian Perez , Musee Mecanique 's debut album , Hold This Ghost , was released in February . 
Gideon Coe 's archive selection of concert recordings revisits Mark E Smith 's ever-changing line-up of The Fall , as well as a 1978 set from Midlands-based progressive rock combo Gentle Giant . 
BBC Sessions tonight come from US slacker group Drop Nineteens , plus a set from Indie darlings the Three Johns from 1983 and a 1991 John Peel recording by indie-electro pioneers the Shamen . 
What goes on in the brain when we recognize a friend , feel the position of our limbs , or reach for a cup of coffee ? 
How many senses do we use to taste a potato chip ? 
Why do some people see numbers as colored ? 
This new four-part series , presented by Barry Smith , director of the Institute of Philosophy , examines the surprising answers that contemporary neuroscience is providing to these questions and how these answers are changing our sense of ourselves . 
The series examines how the experiences we most take for granted are due to the silent and hidden workings of several co-operative systems in the brain . 
It explores the way these intricate systems create our sense of ourselves and the world around us , and the strange experiences that result when some of these systems stop working . 
The series includes interviews with some of the world 's leading neuroscientists . 
Internationally renowned vocalist Jos James and Belgian pianist Jef Neve are in session at the BBC 's Maida Vale studios as Jamie Cullum continues to showcase his love for all types of jazz and music rooted in jazz , from its heritage to its future . 
The duo perform tracks from their new album For All We Know , which was released recently . 
They also chat about working together and how the album came about -- and Jamie might even join them at the piano . 
Presenter\/Jamie Cullum , Producer\/Karen Pearson for Folded Wing Jerry Hall considers the legacy of guitar legend Jimi Hendrix Jerry Hall marks the 40th anniversary of the death of Jimi Hendrix -LRB- 18 September 1970 -RRB- by considering his legacy as one of the most creative and influential musicians of the 20th century . 
Recollections from musicians who experienced the thrill of seeing Jimi play live provide an eyewitness account that captures the chaos and excitement of Hendrix 's career . 
The program charts a chronological path through Jimi 's most important performances , beginning with his career as a backing musician for some of the biggest names in soul music and R&B including Ike and Tina Turner , Little Richard , Sam Cooke , the Isley Brothers , BB King and Jackie Wilson . 
By 1966 Jimi was performing with his own band , Jimmy James and the Blue Flames , in the Caf Wha ? 
in New York 's Greenwich Village when he was spotted by Keith Richard 's girlfriend , Linda Keith . 
She mentioned Jimi to the Animals ' bass player , Chas Chandler , who was so impressed that he signed Jimi to a management deal and brought him to London that September . 
One of Jimi 's first gigs was to jam on the track Killing Floor with Cream at the Regent Polytechnic on London 's Regent Street . 
Eric Clapton was particularly impressed and that week took Pete Townshend to see Jimi play at the Scotch of St James club in Westminster . 
Jimi 's showmanship and virtuosity was a massive influence on dozens of the leading names in British rock and those who flocked to see him play included David Gilmour , David Bowie , Marc Bolan , Paul McCartney , John Lennon , George Harrison , Brian Epstein , Roger Daltrey , Phil Collins , Spencer Davis , Jeff Beck , Brian Jones , Donovan and Lulu . 
In early 1967 Jimi supported the Walker Brothers on their farewell tour and set fire to his guitar at the Finsbury Park Astoria -- a stunt he would repeat several times in the following years . 
Later that year Paul McCartney persuaded the organisers of the Monterey Pop Festival to book Jimi ; his performance was acclaimed as a high point , leading to him being booked for every major music festival including Woodstock and Isle of Wight . 
Contributors to this program include Eric Clapton , David Gilmour , Pete Townshend , Paul McCartney -LRB- who saw Jimi 's London gig on the weekend that Sgt Pepper was released and Jimi played the album 's title track -RRB- , Monterey Festival organiser Lou Adler , Andy Fairweather Low , Tom McGuinness , Michael Wadleigh -LRB- who filmed Jimi at Woodstock -RRB- , Donovan -LRB- who was on stage with Jimi at the Isle of Wight festival in 1970 -RRB- , Eric Burdon , Phil Manzanera , Marsha Hunt , Eddie Kramer , Nigel Kennedy , John Giddings , Michael Lydon , David Crosby , Keith Altham and roadie `` Tappy '' Wright . 
There are also archive interviews with Mitch Mitchell , Noel Redding and Chas Chandler . 
Presenter\/Jerry Hall , Producer\/Des Shaw for 10 Alps Bringing a slice of Californian Americana to Janice Long 's show tonight are Delta Spirit . 
The band play live in the studio , performing tracks from their latest album , History From Below . 
Presenter\/Janice Long , Producer\/Mark Plant for the BBC Former Prime Minister Gordon Brown Political commentator Steve Richards tells the inside story of Gordon Brown 's time as Prime Minister , based on revealing interviews with his close colleagues . 
Interviewees include former ministers Peter Mandelson , David Miliband , Ed Balls , Harriet Harman , Jack Straw , Douglas Alexander , Alan Johnson , Hazel Blears , Peter Hain and Shriti Vadera ; and several former Downing St staffers -- including those responsible for policy , political strategy and polling -- who speak publicly for the first time about what went on within Gordon Brown 's Downing Street . 
Presenter\/Steve Richards , Producer\/Martin Rosenbaum for the BBC Monday 20 to Friday 24 September This week Neil MacGregor describes the impact of the European age of discovery , between 1450 and 1600 . 
Today he is with some of the best examples of African art -- the great plaques of Benin . 
Neil looks at what happened when Europeans started trading in West Africa and first came upon the ancient culture of Benin , in present-day Nigeria . 
He describes the world of this hugely successful warrior kingdom and the culture that produced such exquisite artwork , and recounts what happened when the British raided Benin at the end of the 19th century . 
He describes the effect that these bronze portraits had when they first arrived in London . 
Artist Sokari Douglas Camp reflects on the sculptures as art , while Nigerian poet and playwright Wole Soyinka reacts to the violent history of Benin and the loss of part of their great heritage . 
Presenter\/Neil MacGregor , Producer\/Anthony Denselow for the BBC Brett Westwood introduces a special report by Saba Douglas-Hamilton from Samburu National Park in Kenya as the series examining the world of nature and the challenges of wildlife conservation continues . 
Owing to its unique Earth history Africa is regarded as the cradle of much of the world 's wildlife , when millions of years ago the world 's land mass was concentrated around it . 
The continents have all moved but Africa , on the same scale , has remained in the same place . 
It is a vast continent , larger than the USA and Europe combined , with iconic wildlife . 
Saba reports from Samburu national park where she and her family have studied the elephants and lions for decades . 
They see pressures of climate , local people and a new tide of foreign hunters impacting on the wildlife . 
Saba 's report suggests it is the local tribespeople who hold the key to looking after their precious wildlife . 
The program also looks at the work of Earth Watch in the same national park and reports on a controversial project to reintroduce lions back into Zimbabwe . 
Presenter\/Brett Westwood , Producers\/Sheena Duncan and Julian Hector for the BBC Tuesday 21 to Thursday 23 September To mark the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik , BBC Radio 4 commissioned Nick Walker to write a short story that recaptured the spirit of American Fifties B-movies . 
What followed , to enormous acclaim , was The First King Of Mars , the story of the first manned mission to the red planet . 
Unfortunately , the extreme isolation of space had a negative affect on the commander and his plans to become the all-powerful king of the red planet led to the first of many insurrections by his crew . 
In The Further Adventures Of The First King Of Mars , Nick 's five stories which came hard on the heels of the initial adventure , the king arrived on the planet . 
After a landing that could have gone better , the king discovered that there appeared to be no subjects for him to rule over . 
The progressive disappearance of his crew only made matters worse . 
Only in the final episode did the intrepid cosmonaut discover that monkeys had already colonised Mars underground , creating a well-ordered and tranquil society -- a Nirvana in fact , so seductive that the crew had never been happier . 
In this new series , The Revenge Of The First King Of Mars , which continues on Wednesday and Thursday this week , the eponymous hero takes on the monkey kingdom and its ruler , the rather aggressive Roger . 
Producer\/Karen Rose for Sweet Talk Productions Limited Matthew Parris presents Great Lives with this week 's edition looking at the life of French writer Michel de Montaigne . 
Michel de Montaigne is one of the most influential writers of the French Renaissance . 
He is known for popularizing the essay as a literary genre and became famous for his ability to fuse intellectual speculation with casual anecdotes and autobiography . 
Montaigne 's work continues to influence writers to this day . 
Championing his life is surgeon , scientist , broadcaster and politician Professor Robert Winston and providing expert witness is writer Sarah Bakewell , whose recent biography , How To Live -- A Life Of Montaigne In One Question And 20 Attempts At An Answer , was published to great acclaim . 
Presenter\/Matthew Parris , Producer\/Paul Dodgson for the BBC Communities across the UK are being asked to volunteer to host permanent deep storage of the country 's most dangerous radioactive waste . 
Tonnes of higher level nuclear waste are currently stored at Sellafield in Cumbria , but government policy -- in line with international scientific consensus -- is to find permanent storage , deep underground in a geological repository . 
But so far , only communities around Sellafield have said they might be interested , and if they have second thoughts , or if the geology of the area is found to be unsuitable , then it 's back to square one . 
As one of the pioneers of nuclear power , Britain has a mountain of historic waste to deal with , yet -- despite the scale of the UK problem -- other countries are already decades ahead in identifying and developing storage sites hundreds of metres down into the rock . 
BBC environment correspondent Richard Black visits the Onkalo site in Finland , where the world 's first geological repository , 420m underground , is due to open for business in 10 years ' time . 
He finds out why the Finns were so enthusiastic about volunteering , even competing , to host this nuclear waste store and considers how the same process , to identify a site here in the UK , could unfold over the crucial next 12 months . 
Presenter\/Richard Black , Producer\/Fiona Hill for the BBC 7.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Pougatch presents live coverage from the third round of the League Cup , including arguably the stand-out tie , Tottenham Hotspur versus their north London arch-rivals Arsenal at White Hart Lane . 
Marc Riley is joined by Everything Everything , returning for their fourth session , and guest curator , poet Simon Armitage . 
Everything Everything debuted in Manchester in 2007 . 
The band musically fuse `` three-part harmonies with scalding post-punk guitars ; floor-filling bass lines with syncopated rhythms '' and lyrically range from Naomi Klein to Edward Lear . 
Their debut album , Man Alive , finally emerged in August . 
Multi-award-winning Yorkshire-born Simon Armitage is one of Britain 's foremost poets , with nine volumes of poetry to his name as well as numerous writing credits for radio , television , film and stage . 
He also won an Ivor Novello Award for his song lyrics for the Bafta-winning film Feltham Sings . 
The program also features Rob Hughes 's lowdown on Americana . 
Gideon Coe breaks out concerts from the Penguin Caf Orchestra and Scotland 's Delgados , as well as a session from Scottish indie satirists the Pooh Sticks , an early Happy Mondays session , a rare John Peel recording of US art pop band Unrest and an early 1972 session from the Sutherland Brothers Band . 
On 4 February 1977 , an album was released that would go on to be one of the best-selling albums of all time . 
Paul Sexton tells the remarkable and intriguing story behind the making of Fleetwood Mac 's Grammy Award-winning album , Rumours . 
The Story Of Rumours is told through new interviews with Mick Fleetwood and Lindsey Buckingham , as well as some studio tales from producer Ken Caillat . 
The other band members feature through archive interviews . 
The documentary is interspersed with classic hits from the album , including The Chain , Dreams , Do n't Stop and Go Your Own Way . 
Presenter\/Paul Sexton , Producer\/Anna Harrison for Unique Broadcasting Trevor Nelson invites listeners to explore the depths of his record collection , presenting an hour of the best in timeless soul , rare funky treats and modern classics . 
Trevor 's Album Of The Week is ABC , the 1970 release on Motown Records from the Jackson 5 . 
This was the group 's second studio album and featured the No. 1 singles ABC and The Love You Save . 
Presenter\/Trevor Nelson , Producer\/Dan Cocker for Somethin' Else Monday 20 to Friday 24 September The history of humanity told through one hundred objects from the British Museum in London returns to South America for today 's item . 
Discussing a double-headed serpent made from tiny pieces of turquoise -- one of the star exhibits of the British Museum -- Neil MacGregor describes the Aztec world and the Spanish conquest . 
Aztec specialist Adriane Diaz Enciso discusses the role of the snake in Aztec belief , while conservator Rebecca Stacey describes the scientific detective work prompted by the serpent . 
Presenter\/Neil MacGregor , Producer\/Anthony Denselow for the BBC For Ever England by Tom Green follows a man trying to get to know his estranged son , who has been killed while serving in Afghanistan . 
Steve reads about his son Matt 's death in an online newspaper in South Africa . 
He had n't seen him since leaving England to escape his debts in 1989 and did n't even know Matt was in the army . 
Steve returns to Britain to find out more about the son he lost but the more he discovers , the more he wants to know . 
Standing immovably in his way is Matt 's mother , Holly , although Steve gains an unexpected ally in the form of her daughter Amber . 
At the heart of this drama is the story of a man trying to get to know his son in death to compensate for the wasted years when he was alive ; a man trying to create something from the mess he has made of his own life ; a man who discovers a deep pride to accompany his sense of loss . 
Gerard Horan plays Steve , Claire Harry plays Amber , Tracie Bennett plays Holly , Alison Pettitt plays Karla and Carl Rice plays Jason . 
Producer\/Toby Swift for the BBC As the parenting wars escalate and politicians and childcare gurus lock horns over how best to raise children , Mariella Frostrup and her guests debate the dilemmas of modern parenting in a new series of Bringing Up Britain . 
Some of the issues up for discussion in this series include the experience of growing up as an only child , how best to break bad news and the hard choices at the heart of the care system . 
As they explore the theory and practice of 21st-century parenting , Mariella and her guests share advice and some very different views on how best to bring up the next generation . 
Presenter\/Mariella Frostrup , Producer\/Julia Johnson for the BBC Ben Macintyre explores the tricky world of diplomatic gift giving in Gift Horses And Gaffes , casting an eye over the presents given and received by governments and asking whether it 's really worth the bother . 
Ben hears of the trials of making that right selection and considers the awkward giving of gifts where the recipient does n't know what they are for , the painstaking selection of bespoke gifts that are discovered to be culturally insensitive and the issue of what to do with all the gifts that are given . 
Presenter\/Ben Macintyre , Producer\/Lucy Adam for the BBC 7.00-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Mark Pougatch presents live coverage of tonight 's third round of the Football League Cup . 
2.15-10 .30 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA As England and Pakistan clash in the fifth One Day International , the Test Match Special team presents uninterrupted commentary , live from Hampshire CCC 's Rose Bowl ground . 
Cult celebrity and star of the Ricky Gervais Show , Karl Pilkington , joins Shaun Keaveny this morning to talk about his new TV travel show , An Idiot Abroad . 
Andrew Collins is joined by supermodel-turned-singer Karen Elson for a live session in the BBC 6 Music studios . 
Her critically acclaimed debut album , The Ghost Who Walks , was produced by her husband Jack White of the White Stripes . 
Tonight 's program is Marc Riley , some CDs and a session from Ottawa-based band Timber Timbre . 
Gideon Coe disinters archive concerts from Hull 's finest , the Housemartins , from 1987 , plus a 1972 outing from Canterbury proggers Soft Machine . 
Sessions include Brave Captain for John Peel in 2000 , and there 's a 1986 recording by obscure Scottish indie pop group Jesse Garon And The Desperadoes . 
Iran is facing a media revolution through blogs , social networking sites , mobile phones and Bluetooth . 
Ideas and pictures reach screens across the globe , every day , in a matter of seconds . 
However , Iran has faced a media revolution before . 
Across the country , in the late Seventies , families and friends would sit down in the comfort of their living room to listen to , read and share subversive material . 
Then , it was in the form of cassettes , pamphlets and whispers behind closed doors that spread the message of the Islamic Revolution quickly and effectively across the country and beyond . 
This documentary features old and new revolutionaries , as they explore how the two movements compare . 
Bob Harris 's guests tonight are Gillian Welch and Dave Rawlings , with session music from their new project -- Dave Rawlings Machine . 
Made up of Gillian , Dave and members of The Old Crow Medicine Show , Dave Rawlings Machine received multiple nominations at the recent Americana Music awards in Nashville , including best album , group and song . 
Rawlings and Welch have one of the most influential musical partnerships in American roots music . 
Since meeting at music college in Boston in the early Nineties , the two have released four critically acclaimed albums under Gillian 's name , including Grammy nominated Revival and Time -LRB- The Revelator -RRB- . 
Gillian Welch also featured heavily on the hugely successful O Brother , Where Art Thou ? 
She 's currently working on a new studio album to be released next year . 
Presenter\/Bob Harris , Producer\/Al Booth for the BBC Monday 20 to Friday 24 September This week , Neil MacGregor is exploring the world at the time of European discovery , between 1450 and 1600 . 
Today Neil is with a pair of white elephants the size of small dogs . 
They come from Japan , are made of fine porcelain and take Neil on a journey that connects Japan to Korea and China and to a growing trade network in Western Europe . 
He discovers the specific technique of this porcelain style , traces it to a Japanese potter called Kakiemon , and follows other examples of this same pottery to an English country house . 
Miranda Rock describes the Kakiemon collection at Burghley House ; a present-day Kakiemon potter discusses his work ; and Korean porcelain expert Gina Ha-Gorian explains how the detailed technology for porcelain production spread . 
Presenter\/Neil MacGregor , Producer\/Anthony Denselow for the BBC 11.30am-12 .00 noon BBC RADIO 4 -LRB- Schedule change 8 September -RRB- Stuart Maconie looks at how to end a piece of music and asks why most classical music has a clear ending , but so much pop music just fades out . 
An early exception is Haydn 's Farewell Symphony of 1772 , which ends with the players leaving the stage one by one until there are only two players left . 
Haydn wrote it as a hint that the players needed a break . 
Holst 's Planets Suite -LRB- written 1914-16 -RRB- ends with a chorus of women 's voices fading into nothing -- perhaps one of the first true examples of a fade in music . 
At the same time , recording technology was developing and fades could be created by moving away from the recording horn . 
Record companies began imposing endings for commercial reasons or to fit onto a side of a 78rpm record , sometimes with quite brutal results . 
With the advent of modern recording techniques it became easy to create a fade electronically , and from the Fifties onwards this became commonplace . 
But it was in the Sixties when the fade came into its own , particularly with the iconic two-minute fade of The Beatles ' Hey Jude . 
Stuart , drawing on his own experience as a DJ , talks to Stephen Johnson , presenter of BBC Radio 3 's Discovering Music ; Jacob Smith , a lecturer in Film and Television Studies ; and re-mastering engineer Roger Beardsley . 
Martyn Ware of Heaven 17 also features to talk about ending live songs that faded out in the studio versions . 
Presenter\/Stuart Maconie , Producer\/Nick Holmes for the BBC The Second Mr Bailey is a haunting drama about John , a young gay man living in Edinburgh in 1967 . 
Homosexuality is about to be legalised in England , but not in Scotland . 
When John takes up lodgings with the enigmatic Mrs Margaret Bailey , he begins to experience what life as a conventional straight man could be like . 
But Margaret is no ordinary housewife -- she 's slowly turning John into a replica of her husband . 
And John 's beginning to like it ! 
The drama stars Sam Swann as Young John ; Richard Greenwood as Older John ; Owen Whitelaw as Brian ; Gerda Stevenson as Margaret ; Gabriel Quigley as Hilary ; and James Bryce as the policeman . 
The Second Mr Bailey is written by Andrew Doyle and directed by Lu Kemp . 
Producer\/Kirsty Williams for the BBC Eleanor Oldroyd presents all the latest sports news . 
At 8pm there is a live report from the Commonwealth Games in Delhi with a look ahead to some of the competitors and sports that will feature in the Olympic Games in 2012 . 
At 10pm The Ryder Cup Years looks back at key moments from Europe 's rivalry with the USA in the Ryder Cup . 
Tonight it 's psyche folk-a-go-go when Marc Riley is enticed into the Parallel Universe by Rob Hughes and kings of freaky folk , Erland And The Carnival . 
Orkney-born Erland Cooper , Simon Tong and David Nock took their name from the Jackson C Frank tune My Name Is Carnival , which they 've also covered . 
Their current single is The Derby Ram -- which apparently has little to do with sheep -- and they 're touring throughout the UK in September . 
Gideon Coe gets his hands on a pre-Millennium concert from American art-rockers Sonic Youth , recorded in 1998 , and Canvey Island boys Dr Feelgood from the Hammersmith Odeon . 
There 's also a selection of sessions from sub-pop records group Tad from 1990 , and 1998 session from US post-rock legends Tortoise , recorded for John Peel , and Bright Eyes , with a recording captured for The Evening Session in 2001 . 
On the eve of BBC Radio 1Xtra Live , the network 's flagship live music event , Westwood and Target present their shows live from London 's Wembley Arena , warming up for what will be a spectacular night of live music on Saturday 25 September . 
This year 's 1Xtra Live features performances from an incredible line-up of chart-topping UK and international artists , including headliners N-Dubz , Tinchy Stryder , Tinie Tempah , Jason Derulo and B.o.B. Ten thousand lucky listeners will get the chance to attend the concert , which is the UK 's largest free urban music event -LRB- paying for postage on tickets only -RRB- . 
Westwood kicks off proceedings at 4pm with a special show live from the venue as it gets transformed from an empty arena into the setting for 1Xtra Live . 
The Big Dawg aims to get all the backstage scoop from those involved in setting up the event -- catching up with everyone from the artists soundchecking to lighting technicians and the cleaners . 
Presenter\/Westwood , Producers\/Lee Edmenson and James Clark Target really gets the party started at 7pm , live from London 's Wembley Arena , with PAs from Loick Essien , Talay Riley , Scorcher , Bashy and Mz Bratt , as they warm up for tomorrow 's flagship music event , BBC Radio 1Xtra Live . 
Claudia Winkleman meets actor Henry Goodman , who 's starring in the West End premi re of Jonathan Lynn and Antony Jay 's play Yes , Prime Minister on the London stage , following its successful run at Chichester Festival Theatre . 
Goodman plays Sir Humphrey Appleby starring alongside David Haig as Prime Minister Jim Hacker . 
Plus , film critic Xan Brooks reviews this week 's movie releases and Sue Steward has the latest from the world of photography . 
Presenter\/Claudia Winkleman , Producer\/Jessica Rickson for the BBC Monday 20 to Friday 24 September Neil MacGregor 's world history , as told through things that time has left behind , continues its look at the European age of discovery , between 1450 and 1600 . 
Today Neil is with pieces of eight -- little silver coins that by 1600 could have been used in many countries around the world . 
He describes Spain 's dominance in South America and their discovery of a silver mountain in Potosi in present-day Bolivia . 
He also explains the process by which pieces of eight turned into the first truly global money . 
The Bolivian former head of a Unesco project in Potosi describes the conditions for workers there today , and financial historian William Bernstein looks at how these rough silver coins were the catalyst for a shift in the entire balance of world commerce . 
Presenter\/Neil MacGregor , Producer\/Anthony Denselow for the BBC Recalling her own experience as the only black child in her Newport classroom in the Eighties , Josie d'Arby looks at the introduction of Black History Month into British schools and asks whether it has been a help or hindrance to the way children understand the past , and to how black people relate to the way history is taught in classrooms . 
Josie examines whether the focus of Black History Month has changed much over 23 years and why there is such an emphasis on American figures such as Martin Luther King and Muhammad Ali . 
She asks about other groups who feel marginalised by not having time dedicated to them . 
Speaking with teachers , pupils , parents , politicians and academics , Josie finds out what Black History Month means and meets some unlikely critics and supporters . 
Presenter\/Josie d'Arby , Producer\/Rachael Kiddey for the BBC It is a quiet Saturday morning in the Hinchcliffe home , in this wonderfully perceptive comedy of manners and international relations by David Nobbs -- celebrated writer of The Fall And Rise Of Reginald Perrin and A Bit Of A Do . 
Tony and Sal are tired after a week of work , and there is nothing , blessedly , in the diary . 
They have time on their hands , but not for each other . 
Middle-aged and middle-class , they have n't had kids and they still feel that emotional vacuum . 
It is an American couple , Monty and Janey -- a rather loud duo they stayed with in Delaware years ago . 
They said : `` If ever you happen to be passing ... '' To Tony 's horror Sal invites them to stay . 
Then the doorbell rings again . 
It is Jan and Hilda , a Flemish Belgian couple from Bruges who kindly helped when Janey had a migraine . 
In gratitude Sal and Tony said , `` If ever you happen to be passing ... '' Then the doorbell goes again -- it is Pierre and Colette , French Belgians who helped them in Namur when Sal was sick . 
In gratitude they said : `` If ever you happen to be passing ... '' The Americans are loud and pompous and the Belgians loathe each other . 
But when Colette and Jan find themselves drawn to one another , the ensuing , messy crisis precipitates a reassessment of all the couples ' pattern of behavior . 
The cast features James Nickerson as Tony , Olwen May as Sal , Kerry Shale as Monty , Melissa Jane Sinden as Janey , Malcolm Raeburn as Jan , Maggie Fox as Hilda , Hugo Chandor as Pierre\/French chef and Szilvi Naray-Davey as Colette . 
Producer\/Gary Brown for the BBC 7.00-10 .00 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE Kicking Off With Colin Murray teams the presenter with regulars Pat Nevin and Perry Groves as they look forward to the weekend 's Premier League and Championship fixtures . 
10.55am-12 .35 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA 2.25-4 .05 pm BBC RADIO 5 LIVE SPORTS EXTRA Motor racing fans can enjoy uninterrupted commentary on the first practice session , from 11am , and the second practice session , from 2.30 pm , from the Singapore Grand Prix . 
7.00-9 .00 pm BBC 6 MUSIC Tom Robinson is joined by rap artist Roots Manuva for an in-depth discussion of his career , based around five of his tracks -- spanning his 1999 debut album Brand New Second Hand through to his latest release , Duppy Writer , a collection of his songs re-worked by producer Wrong Tom . 
Presenter\/Tom Robinson , Producers\/Adam Hudson and Tom Billington A tale of flying carpets , rockets and dreams , this program examines why people still care about magic in an age of techno-wizardry ... and how it feel when science threatens to make magical objects real . 
Web-dreaming one day , writer Cathy FitzGerald stumbled on a site belonging to a museum in Iran . 
It purported to tell the `` true history '' of the flying carpet and detailed its many uses -- military , as a means of aerial attack ; commercial , as a vehicle for the transport of goods ; and cultural , as a device to help readers in the library at Alexandria reach the high books . 
The article appeared across the web , rarely with any caveat or credit . 
In search of a `` real '' flying carpet , Cathy tracks down the article 's author , Azhar Abidi , who helps her separate carpet fiction from carpet fact . 
She goes on to meet a physicist working on levitation in the quantum world , and a Japanese astronaut who took a carpet ride in space . 
Cathy FitzGerald explores the past , present , and future of the magic carpet and wonders what our desire to defy gravity tells us about ourselves . 
