Get Wonkbook delivered to your inbox or mobile device every morning . 
It 's like reading it on the blog , only much more convenient . 
Your essential source for the latest news on the intersection of Wall Street and Washington . 
Michael Leachman of the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities argues that the stimulus has created more jobs than recovery . 
Bruce Katz , Emilia Istrate , and Jonathan Rothwell note that rising exports would do a lot for metropolitan areas . 
The Sustainable Defense Task Force proposes cuts to the defense budget . 
Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temin compare the Gold Standard and the Euro . 
Flavio Cunha and James Heckman revew research suggesting that non-cognitive skills are important for young people 's life prospects . 
Does The Financial Sector Pollute ? 
I liked this point by Financial Times columnist Martin Wolf : A market works well if , and only if , decision-makers confront the consequences of their decisions . 
This is not and probably can not be the case in finance : certainly , people now sit on fortunes earned in activities that have led to unprecedented rescues and the worst recession since the 1930s . 
Given this , the industry has become too big . 
If implicit and explicit guarantees and externalities , including volatility , were fully charged , the sector would surely shrink . 
A number of commentators with the same insight have argued that better regulation is required . 
That 's not Wolf 's solution . 
Rather , he argues that this problem is intrinsic to finance . 
It will not go away . 
You can not grow regulators so wise that they scrutinize it away . 
You can not craft regulations so elegant that they rule it out of existence . 
The financial sector , he says , must simply be smaller . 
How do you manage an inherently problematic sector ? 
`` The answer is : in the same way as any polluting activity . 
One taxes it . '' 
This is usefully radical : The climate change activists propose to tax coal power plants , they 're not doing it so coal power plants become a bit cleaner . 
They 're doing it so we have fewer of the plants . 
I 'm pretty much in agreement with this point , and I 'll just add a graph I rather like . 
This was drawn up by Adam S. Posen and Marc Hinterschweiger and it tracks the rise of derivatives against the rise in actual capital . 
The basic takeaway : Fake money grew a lot faster than real money . 
And as Wolf says , the people who gave us that rapid rise in fake money still , in general , have their fortunes . 
Or at the least , they have a lot more money than the people who became teachers and did n't blow up the world economy . 
The problem is that if you want less `` bad '' finance , you ca n't go in after the fact and separate the good from the bad . 
You have to have less finance in general . 
You have to stop the bad before it happens . 
By Ezra Klein | May 27 , 2009 ; 10:04 AM ET Using notional value is very misleading -LRB- I do n't know whether Ezra is doing this intentionally or unintentionally -RRB- . 
Rather than close out a position a trader would just open a new position on the opposite side of his original contract to net out the profit or loss . 
Though the position would be `` closed '' the notional value would have doubled . 
This issue of `` new money '' supply is actually very interesting in regards to monetary policy but it deserves a serious look , rather than a breezy `` just so '' type story from Ezra to back his political beliefs . 
Klein continues to attempt to delude the less astute . 
If we look at the home speculators as the underlying creators of this , many were stuck with large losses , but they were highly leveraged . 
It is the excessive home buying leverage offered to speculators and the artificially low interest rates they were able to get that are the root causes of this mess . 
Without Fannie\/Freddie buying over leveraged loans , Mortgage interest deductions , and Fed policy this mess does n't happen . 
There is a separate problem of aligning equity speculators with the longer term interests of the firm - and a much higher short term capital gains tax goes a long way to address that . 
You can not craft regulations so elegant that they rule it out of existence . '' 
I do n't know anyone who actually claims this . 
What I 'm reading from this statement is that people will always game whatever system of regulatory rules you come up with , so concentrating on regulation is n't a solution . 
I 'd point out that , for the most part , those calling for regulation do n't disagree about the tendency for the system to get ` gamed ' , but this is n't a point in favor of ` giving up ' . 
The underlying truth of the need for regulation is that there are huge collective action problems for an un-regulated economy . 
Any regulatory scheme created to mitigate these problems will inevitably be circumvented by the adaptive behavior of individuals gaming the system . 
But the prima-facia need for a working regulatory environment combined with adapting individual financial players leads one to conlcude that what is required is a strong and adaptive regulatory environment ... not a captitulation that regulation ca n't work . 
Now this leads me to my next point . 
One of the reasons our efforts at regulatory adaptation have been so bad -LRB- or non-existent -RRB- is the influence of fincancial players on our political system that our campaign finance laws allow . 
So while it may be true that `` You can not craft regulations so elegant that they rule it out of existence . '' 
, it may also be true that such things can not be crafted because they get cut off at the pass . 
Indeed , has the US ever been able to engage in honest-to-god regulatory work under circumstances that do n't have our political leaders undermining it ? 
Another 1\/4 of the needed correction would come from taxing capital gains income the same rate as wages . 
The remaining 1\/12 should be left to enforcing the existing laws aggressively and electing good Presidents . 
