Get Wonkbook delivered to your inbox or mobile device every morning . 
It 's like reading it on the blog , only much more convenient . 
Your essential source for the latest news on the intersection of Wall Street and Washington . 
Michael Leachman of the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities argues that the stimulus has created more jobs than recovery . 
Bruce Katz , Emilia Istrate , and Jonathan Rothwell note that rising exports would do a lot for metropolitan areas . 
The Sustainable Defense Task Force proposes cuts to the defense budget . 
Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temin compare the Gold Standard and the Euro . 
Flavio Cunha and James Heckman revew research suggesting that non-cognitive skills are important for young people 's life prospects . 
Politics , politicians , big business and the economy This is What Regulatory Capture Looks Like During the stress tests , an administration official told me that some of the most aggressive pushback was coming from , of all people , career regulators . 
The banks are fine , they said . 
That 's not necessarily surprising : If the career regulators were to admit a systemic problem , they 'd be admitting their own failure . 
Even so , this was apparently a real problem given that the actual work of the stress tests had to be carried out by regulators who were churlish over their very existence . 
Today , Steve Pearlstein gives these intransigent bureaucrats a name and a face : John Dugan , the comptroller of the currency , who thinks big banks are getting a bad rap these days , and has the gall to argue that they should be celebrated because so few of them have failed -LRB- so few of them have failed , of course , because the government has funneled hundreds of billions of dollars into keeping them alive -RRB- . 
This is what regulatory capture looks like . 
For a bit more on how it works , however , I 'd suggest two sources . 
Daniel Hardy , an IMF economist , wrote a paper called '' Regulatory Capture in Banking , '' which has a good overview of the standard literature in the introduction -LRB- the rest of the paper does n't hold up as well -RRB- . 
More interesting is the contribution of William Buiter , a former member of the European Central Bank , who published a long analysis of the '' Lessons from the North Atlantic Financial Crisis '' -LRB- pdf , of course -RRB- , which has a nice discussion of regulatory capture as a function of small-group dynamics beginning on page 36 . 
By Ezra Klein | May 27 , 2009 ; 2:00 PM ET Posted by : albamus | May 27 , 2009 2:29 PM | Report abuse Excellent tips Ezra . 
Kudos to the Post for hiring you -- one of the best decisions they 've made recently . 
Bair through her own incompetence was one of the main accelerants of the financial crisis . 
See John Bronte for the explanation . 
