The article misspelled the name of Jay Shepherd , the chief executive of Shepherd Law Group in Boston . 
Rethinking Legal Fees for Lean Times The economic crisis is giving the prosecution a boost in the case of Fixed Fee v. Billable Hours . 
Corporate legal department officials say fees to outside law firms have risen faster than energy costs , salaries and other expenditures . 
Some senior partners in the most prestigious firms charge up to $ 1,000 an hour and require their associates to bill up to 2,000 hours a year . 
Since becoming commonplace in the 1970s , hourly billing has been the subject of criticism by clients and debates by legal experts , who say they give lawyers incentive to work inefficiently . 
But law firms have been slow to embrace alternative billing . 
`` I think the financial crisis will exacerbate everybody 's pain point , '' said Pam Rothenberg , managing member of Womble Carlyle Sandridge & Rice 's D.C. office . 
Rothenberg said the firm , which has 550 lawyers in 11 offices , works within a budget that the client and firm set ahead of time . 
`` There will still be firms resistant to change , '' she said . 
`` But those that embrace change will likely gain more market share . '' 
New efforts to jettison hourly billing are being driven by in-house corporate lawyers , who say they have grown frustrated seeing fees to outside firms soar even as they slash their own costs . 
They said they want more certainty in their legal budgets and worry that outside firms are spending unnecessary amounts of time on their matters . 
Some lawyers say they resent that assessment . 
`` An honest lawyer works efficiently and does not charge clients for inefficient use of time . 
If I go to a meeting and learn it 's the wrong day , I 'm not going to charge the client for that , '' said Joel P. Bennett , who handles employment cases in a solo practice in the District and supports hourly billing . 
In a recent survey conducted by the Arlington-based Corporate Executive Board , a for-profit organization that does research on best practices , 800 in-house lawyers said they spent 50 percent more last year on large outside law firms than in 2002 . 
They said the hourly rates they paid jumped 70 percent between 1996 and 2005 . 
Steven Williams , managing director of the Corporate Executive Board 's General Counsel Roundtable , said those increases ca n't continue : 57 percent of the corporate lawyers he surveyed this month said they plan to cut their budgets for outside legal help next year . 
The Association of Corporate Counsel , which represents 23,000 in-house corporate lawyers , last month launched the `` Value Challenge , '' an initiative aimed at spurring corporate lawyers and outside law firms to develop alternative pricing plans , including fixed rates , volume discounts and lower rates in exchange for performance bonuses . 
`` When we started looking at this project , we were thinking , ` How do we make people realize now is the time ' -LRB- to stop charging by the hour ? -RRB- 
, '' said Susan Hackett , the association 's general counsel . 
`` Then the economic crisis happened . 
There 's going to be a heck of a lot of directives for folks at the firms to lower their costs . '' 
Law firms are divided over the calls to abandon hourly billing . 
Joseph E. Lynch , a partner at King & Spalding 's Healthcare Practice Group in the District , said he would work under fixed fees only in rare circumstances . 
It 's often difficult to assess how much work a project will actually need , he said . 
`` Counsel does n't want a fee arrangement that 's insufficient to cover the work that 's necessary , '' Lynch said . 
Jay Shepard , chief executive of Shepard Law Group in Boston , said his 2007 revenue doubled after switching from his firm 's $ 250 - to $ 500-an-hour rates to fixed and negotiated fees the previous year . 
`` Before the financial crisis happened , I thought in 10 years the billable hour would be on the way out . 
I now think that will be sped up , '' said Shepherd , who has represented Adobe , Samsonite and Costco in labor cases . 
`` A lot of clients are saying , ` Enough is enough , ' '' he said . '' 
