The financial crisis is by no means over , but the urge to extract lessons from it already is irresistible . 
The Europeans have pressed successfully for a new Bretton Woods summit , modeled after the 1944 gathering that inoculated the world against a repeat of the Great Depression . 
Although the original Bretton Woods took place years after the Depression , Britain and France are bent on staging the new version within weeks . 
`` Europe wants it . 
Europe will get it , '' French President Nicolas Sarkozy said before jetting off to Camp David , where President Bush meekly gave in to him . 
The Bretton Woods analogy is contrived , to put it mildly . 
That summit created the World Bank to reconstruct Europe after the ravages of World War II . 
Today , bombed-out infrastructure is hardly the issue . 
Bretton Woods also created the International Monetary Fund , to support a system of fixed exchange rates . 
But the world has largely abandoned that system , and today 's chief exchange-rate challenge is to move even further from Bretton Woods by persuading China to float its currency . 
Bretton Woods boosters assert that a global financial system needs global regulatory fixes . 
This claim deserves scrutiny . 
The fix that rightly commands widest support is moving the swap contracts between financial institutions onto centralized exchanges , so the collapse of one large player does not threaten others that entered into swaps with it . 
But this reform can be achieved with a minimum of international coordination . 
Countries can unilaterally establish swaps exchanges , and financial institutions all over the world can use them . 
The second fix on most reformers ' lists is to shrink the pyramids of debt in the financial system . 
When a bank or a hedge fund buys $ 100 million of assets with $ 5 million in capital and $ 95 million in debt , a 5 percent loss is enough to wipe it out , forcing liquidation of the remaining $ 95 million worth of stocks or bonds in its portfolio . 
Such fire-sale liquidation has driven part of the recent market turmoil ; it forces prices down and damages other debt-laden players , which then join in the selling . 
Although such debt , or `` leverage , '' is certainly dangerous , a new Bretton Woods summit is not going to tame it . 
We know this because we 've tried already . 
It took five years , not a handful of photo-op summits , to negotiate the so-called Basel II standards that govern leverage at banks , and the resulting deal proved ineffectual anyway . 
Daniel Tarullo , who has just published a Peterson Institute book on Basel , points out that the next attempt to control leverage may need to be broader . 
After the events of recent months , that is surely right . 
Given AIG 's failure , the next round should probably encompass insurers . 
Given the vast growth of hedge funds , it should also cover some of them . 
Creating sensible leverage rules for such disparate institutions will be fiendishly complex , perhaps even impossible . 
So what might a new Bretton Woods conference usefully do ? 
Well , it could reform the IMF , which has evolved from its original role into a rescue fund for collapsing currencies . 
During the emerging market crises of a decade ago , the IMF was central to all the bailouts . 
Its status has since dwindled . 
As my Council on Foreign Relations colleague Brad Setser notes , the Chinese have tried to muscle in on the IMF 's turf by helping Pakistan . 
The Russians have tried to help Iceland . 
The European Union has helped Hungary . 
Reestablishing the IMF as the agreed provider of bailouts would be a worthwhile project . 
The IMF puts economic conditions on its loans while governments place political ones ; we do n't want to revive the cronyism of the Cold War , when countries from Cuba to Zaire could pursue absurd policies and know they would be bailed out because they were strategically useful . 
The irony is that Britain and France will be the first to resist a serious effort to revive the IMF . 
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown talks vacuously about giving the organization the role of creating an early-warning system for crises , even though this is what thousands of economic forecasters already try to provide . 
What Brown does not stress is that serious IMF reform needs to begin with the modernization of its board . 
Rising powers such as China and India deserve more say . 
Declining powers need to give up some influence -- and that includes France and Britain . 
Of course there is a role for global cooperation . 
The coordinated interest rate cuts and bank rescues of recent days have been constructive . 
But it 's worth remembering that after the last global crisis , in 1997-98 , there was lots of grand talk about a new international financial architecture . 
In the end , the only important reforms were national ones . 
Governments ran budget surpluses and built up foreign reserves to protect themselves from the next shock . 
That shock has arrived , and we are about to find out if those changes were enough . 
One thing is certain : They were not the result of any international conference . 
