BP oil spill clean-up delayed by high winds and choppy seas Ten-foot waves as hurricane season hits Gulf of Mexico , halting tests of crucial new crude-sucking super skimmers Monday 5 July 2010 11.28 BST TMT Shipping Offshore 's converted super tanker , A Whale , 14 miles northwest of the BP oil spill site in the Gulf of Mexico Photograph : Lyle Ratliff\/Reuters A whale of an oil skimmer is being put through its paces tested in the Gulf of Mexico , but high wind and choppy seas due to the hurricane season means it may be longer than first hoped before officials know if it can work full-time sucking crude from the sea . 
TMT , the shipping firm that owns the vessel , had hoped to test a containment boom system designed to direct greater volumes of oily water into the 12 vents or `` jaws '' the ship uses to suck it in , said spokesman Bob Grantham . 
But choppy seas have made that impossible , and have also prevented a flotilla of smaller skimmers from working offshore along the coasts of Alabama , Mississippi and Florida . 
`` As was the case yesterday , the sea state , with waves at times in excess of 10 feet , is not permitting optimal testing conditions , '' Grantham said . 
The skimmers , which have been idle off the coasts since a spell of bad weather last week kicked up by Hurricane Alex , were on the water along the Louisiana coast over the weekend . 
Officials with the US coast guard are waiting for the weather to improve before sending them elsewhere . 
`` We 've got our guys out there and they 're docked and ready , but safety is a huge concern for us , especially with the smaller vessels , '' said Courtnee Ferguson , a of the Joint Information Command in Mobile , Alabama . 
On Sunday , huge barges used to collect oil from skimming vessels were parked at the mouth of Mobile Bay , waiting for waves to subside offshore . 
The current spate of bad weather is likely to last well into next week . 
On the shore , beach clean-up crews were making progress on new oil that washed up because of the high tides generated by last week 's bad weather . 
In Grand Isle , Louisiana , about 800 people were removing tar balls and liquid oil from seven miles of beach , coast guard commander . 
`` In a day or two , you would n't be able to tell the oil was even there , '' he said . 
By Wednesday , Ogrydziak said they should have a machine on the beach that washes sand where the oil washed ashore . 
Crews have also been working to put containment booms thrown around by the storms back into place , he said . 
So far , weather has not slowed drilling on two relief wells that could be the best hope of finally plugging what has become the worst oil leak in Gulf history . 
BP officials have said they 're running slightly ahead of schedule on the drilling , but expect weather or other delays . 
Early to mid-August is still the estimate for the completion of the drilling . 
The capture and burning of oil and gas at the site of the leaking well has continued without interruption from the weather . 
But the choppy seas have delayed the operation of another vessel that officials say will roughly double the amount of oil being collected or burned . 
