Demands sent to Deepwater Horizon partners Anadarko and Japan 's Mitsui Oil Exploration as total bill passes $ 3bn BP has sent a $ 400m bill to its partners for the Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
Photograph : KPA\/Zuma\/Rex Features The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico has so far cost BP $ 3.12 bn -LRB- # 2bn -RRB- , the company said this morning as it emerged that the oil giant is demanding that its partners in the well pick up at least part of the bill . 
Last month , BP sent out demands for almost $ 400m to Anadarko and Japan 's Mitsui Oil Exploration Company , both of whom are minority shareholders in the well . 
That is equivalent to 40 % of the $ 1bn BP said it spent in May . 
Anadarko owns 25 % of the well and Mitsui has 10 % . 
Details of the demands were contained in documents released by a Senate subcommittee last week . 
BP is demanding payment within 30 days , meaning that the two companies have roughly until the weekend to pay up . 
Anadarko , however , has refused to accept any blame for the disaster . 
Last month its chairman and chief executive , Jim Hackett , said BP 's actions probably amounted to `` gross negligence or wilful misconduct '' . 
If proved in court , that could allow Anadarko to escape its responsibilities under its joint operating agreement . 
Mitsui , meanwhile , has said it is too early to conclude what happened on the Deepwater Horizon . 
News that BP is trying to recoup some of its losses comes as the company updated investors on Monday morning about the scale of the salvage and clean-up exercise . 
Since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on 20 April , the cost of the response to date amounts to approximately $ 3.12 bn , including the cost of the spill response , containment , relief well drilling , grants to the Gulf states , claims paid , and federal costs . 
The news follows BP 's agreement on 16 June to put $ 20bn into a special clean-up fund for the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster after company executives met Barack Obama . 
Approximately 44,500 personnel , more than 6,563 vessels and some 113 aircraft are now engaged in the response effort . 
BP said on Monday that almost 95,000 claims for compensation have been submitted and more than 47,000 payments have been made , totalling almost $ 147m . 
BP said two containment systems continue to collect oil and gas flowing from the Deepwater Horizon 's failed blow-out preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- and transport them to vessels on the surface . 
The first cap , installed on 3 June , takes oil and gas to the Discoverer Enterprise where oil is collected and gas flared . 
The second system , which began operations on 16 June , takes oil and gas to the Q4000 vessel on the surface where both oil and gas are flared . 
As of 3 July , a total of approximately 25,198 barrels of oil were collected or flared by the two systems and 57.0 m cubic feet of gas were flared . 
To date , the total volume of oil collected or flared by the containment systems is approximately 585,400 barrels . 
Preparations continue for the next step in containment operations , BP added , but work on a first floating riser containment system designed to allow more rapid disconnection and reconnection of the system thereby reducing the time that collection is halted by inclement weather has been delayed by heightened sea states caused by Hurricane Alex as it passed through the Gulf of Mexico . 
It is currently anticipated that the first floating riser system will be available to begin operations towards the end of the week , BP said . 
Plans also are being developed for additional containment capacity and flexibility . 
These are currently anticipated to begin operations around mid-to-late July . 
Work on the first relief well , which started 2 May , continues . 
The well reached a depth of 17,725 feet on 4 July . 
The second relief well , which started 16 May , has now reached 13,871 feet . 
Both wells are still estimated to take approximately three months to complete from the start of drilling . 
Operations to skim oil from the surface of the water were suspended for approximately three days because of Hurricane Alex. To date , these operations have recovered , in total , approximately 673,497 barrels of oily liquid . 
In addition , a total of 275 controlled burns have been carried out to date , removing an estimated 238,000 barrels of oil from the sea 's surface . 
The total length of containment boom deployed as part of efforts to prevent oil from reaching the coast is now almost 2.9 m feet . 
