The presidential oil spill commission said Tuesday that the federal government should impose higher fees on oil and gas firms to finance a more robust and independent regulatory system , recommendations that could face an uphill battle in the new , more conservative Congress . 
Former senator Bob Graham -LRB- D-Fla . -RRB- 
, co-chairman of the commission , said that the Deepwater Horizon accident was `` both foreseeable and preventable , '' and that Congress and the administration need to enact reforms in order to prevent a repeat of the massive BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico last year . 
`` I am sad to say that part of the answer is the fact that our government helped let it happen , '' Graham said . 
`` Our regulators were consistently outmatched . '' 
The panel proposed several safeguards aimed at strengthening regulators ' control over the oil and gas industry , including establishing an independent safety agency within the Interior Department . 
It would be headed by someone for a fixed term in order to insulate the appointee from political interference . 
Graham said such a person should have `` a background of both science and management . '' 
It also called for funding the regulatory agency that oversees offshore drilling , the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement -LRB- BOEMRE -RRB- , with fees from the companies who are tapping into the nation 's petroleum reserves . 
William K. Reilly , the commission 's other co-chairman , emphasized that it would be a mistake to focus just on the three companies involved in last year 's accident . 
`` The solution to the problem has to be industrywide , '' he said . 
Several influential Republicans said Tuesday they would oppose measures that could curb domestic exploration . 
Rep. Doc Hastings -LRB- R-Wash . -RRB- 
, chairman of the House Committee on Natural Resources , said in an interview that any new funding for federal oversight `` should come from the existing revenues that are created by offshore drilling '' rather than new industry fees . 
Rep. Fred Upton -LRB- R-Mich . -RRB- 
, chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee , warned in a statement : `` Neither this nor any investigation should be used as political justification for a pre-determined agenda to limit affordable energy options for America . '' 
Sen. Mary L. Landrieu -LRB- D-La . -RRB- 
said `` the really big takeaway '' of the report was that the commission `` examined a horrible incident that occurred -LRB- and -RRB- basically concluded that deepwater can be done safely . '' 
The Obama administration has already changed the way the government oversees offshore drilling . 
It has created an investigations-and-review unit to probe wrongdoing within the agency as well as the petroleum industry ; separated leasing revenue collection from safety , environmental and regulatory enforcement ; and temporarily stopped issuing '' categorical exclusions , '' which exempt drilling proposals from detailed environmental reviews , as it evaluates the entire procedure . 
Reilly , who said this overhaul is `` not enough , '' briefed Obama , several Cabinet secretaries and the rest of the commission members Tuesday . 
The president did not specify which recommendations he would adopt , Reilly said , and urged the panel members `` to engage industry support for some of these recommendations . '' 
Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
, who helped lead a probe of the BP spill on the Energy and Commerce Committee , said Tuesday he will introduce legislation encapsulating the commission 's recommendations along with some provisions that passed the House last year but failed to move in the Senate . 
Sen. David Vitter -LRB- R-La . -RRB- 
said he thought one factor would determine whether Congress passed an energy bill that could include some of these reforms : `` It 's really going to be the price at the pump , and that 's heating up again . '' 
Any such bill , he suggested , would not curb offshore drilling . 
Environmental groups immediately protested that the recommendations do not go far enough , and industry groups argued that the government should stop standing in the way of offshore drilling and production . 
While calling for tougher government regulation , the commission also called for the oil and gas industry to establish a `` self-policing '' organization that would set and enforce safety standards . 
In addition , it endorsed a system used in the North Sea that calls on drilling companies to assess the risks involved in a particular well and tailor their operations accordingly . 
University of Maryland law professor Rena Steinzor , president of the Center for Progressive Reform , said such deference to the companies would be `` tragedy compounded , '' adding , `` If there ever was an industry that did n't deserve to write its own plans , it 's this one . '' 
The panel recommended boosting the liability cap on oil spills , which is $ 75 million for environmental and economic damage , though the commissioners could not agree on a specific number . 
BP has said that it would disregard the cap . 
The commission 's report said that Interior should also include the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the decision-making process about where and how to conduct oil and gas leasing . 
If Interior officials were to reject NOAA 's recommendations , they would have to say in writing why the action would be in the national interest . 
