It may be the oddest tale to emerge from the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina . 
Armed dolphins , trained by the US military to shoot terrorists and pinpoint spies underwater , may be missing in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Experts who have studied the US navy 's cetacean training exercises claim the 36 mammals could be carrying ` toxic dart ' guns . 
Divers and surfers risk attack , they claim , from a species considered to be among the planet 's smartest . 
The US navy admits it has been training dolphins for military purposes , but has refused to confirm that any are missing . 
Dolphins have been trained in attack-and-kill missions since the Cold War . 
The US Atlantic bottlenose dolphins have apparently been taught to shoot terrorists attacking military vessels . 
Their coastal compound was breached during the storm , sweeping them out to sea . 
But those who have studied the controversial use of dolphins in the US defense program claim it is vital they are caught quickly . 
Leo Sheridan , 72 , a respected accident investigator who has worked for government and industry , said he had received intelligence from sources close to the US government 's marine fisheries service confirming dolphins had escaped . 
` My concern is that they have learned to shoot at divers in wetsuits who have simulated terrorists in exercises . 
If divers or windsurfers are mistaken for a spy or suicide bomber and if equipped with special harnesses carrying toxic darts , they could fire , ' he said . 
` The darts are designed to put the target to sleep so they can be interrogated later , but what happens if the victim is not found for hours ? ' 
Usually dolphins were controlled via signals transmitted through a neck harness . 
` The question is , were these dolphins made secure before Katrina struck ? ' 
The mystery surfaced when a separate group of dolphins was washed from a commercial oceanarium on the Mississippi coast during Katrina . 
Eight were found with the navy 's help , but the dolphins were not returned until US navy scientists had examined them . 
Sheridan is convinced the scientists were keen to ensure the dolphins were not the navy 's , understood to be kept in training ponds in a sound in Louisiana , close to Lake Pontchartrain , whose waters devastated New Orleans . 
The navy launched the classified Cetacean Intelligence Mission in San Diego in 1989 , where dolphins , fitted with harnesses and small electrodes planted under their skin , were taught to patrol and protect Trident submarines in harbor and stationary warships at sea . 
Criticism from animal rights groups ensured the use of dolphins became more secretive . 
But the project gained impetus after the Yemen terror attack on the USS Cole in 2000 . 
Dolphins have also been used to detect mines near an Iraqi port . 
