GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The World Health Organization recommended on Friday that oral rotavirus vaccines be included in all national immunization programs to avert half a million diarrhoeal deaths and 2 million hospitalizations a year . 
Children in Europe and the Americas have had access to the rotavirus vaccine for three years but it had previously not been tested in and approved for low-income settings where the dehydrating disease is most lethal . 
The U.N. agency 's new global guidance is expected to boost demand for Merck 's RotaTeq , GlaxoSmithKline 's Rotarix vaccines in Africa and Asia , and from health charities . 
`` This WHO recommendation clears the way for vaccines that will protect children in the developing world from one of the most deadly diseases they face , '' said Tachi Yamada of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation . 
Rotavirus is a leading cause of severe gastroenteritis , including vomiting and diarrhea , in infants and young children . 
The contagious infection kills an estimated 1,600 children under the age of 5 every day , mostly in Africa and Asia . 
The first vaccine developed to fight rotavirus , sold by Wyeth , was pulled from the market in 1999 after it was linked to a rare , life-threatening type of bowel obstruction known as intussusception . 
The Merck and Glaxo vaccines do not have that problem . 
The WHO said clinical trials in poor communities in South Africa and Malawi showed the new oral vaccines significantly reduced severe diarrhea episodes related to rotavirus . 
Trials are continuing in Bangladesh , Vietnam , Ghana , Mali and Kenya , but the guidance was issued ahead of those full results `` since available evidence indicates that efficacy data can be extrapolated to populations with similar mortality patterns regardless of geographic location , '' the WHO said . 
Developing countries wanting help to distribute the rotavirus vaccine can seek assistance from the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization -LRB- GAVI -RRB- , a Geneva-based international procurer and WHO partner . 
GAVI , the WHO and the U.N. children 's agency UNICEF are now working to develop `` a new accelerated and integrated approach '' to tackle rotavirus diarrhea and pneumonia together . 
Those two vaccine-preventable diseases account for more than 35 percent of the world 's child deaths each year , the vast majority in poor countries , the WHO said . 
It also stressed that `` there are many causes of diarrhoeal disease , '' meaning that efforts to improve water quality , sanitation standards and access to rehydration salts must continue despite the expansion of the vaccine . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
