By the CNN Wire Staff Former members of Libya 's national soccer team arrive in the rebel stronghold of Zintan on Saturday . 
NEW : Libyan state TV reports new NATO strikes in Gharyan , a city in western Libya NEW : An opposition spokesman faults Gadhafi for civilian deaths NATO airstrikes were also conducted in al-Brega The African Union will discuss avenues for peace Sunday Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- NATO airstrikes hit a bakery and a restaurant in the Libyan city of al-Brega Saturday , killing 15 civilians , a Libyan government official told CNN , though the alliance countered that claim . 
NATO said it had struck key command-and-control centers . 
The alliance said there was `` no indication of civilian casualties in connection with these strikes . '' 
Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's forces have occupied buildings in an abandoned area of al-Brega from where they are launching attacks on civilians , a NATO statement said . 
The alliance monitored the buildings and said it determined them to be clear military targets . 
`` This continues to show Gadhafi 's reprehensible tactics of placing military assets and operations at the heart of civilian neighborhoods , '' said Lt. Gen. Charles Bouchard , NATO commander for the Libya campaign . 
`` We have meticulously monitored these developments for a significant period and it was time to remove this threat , '' he said . 
Al-Brega is a key oil refinery town about 500 miles east of Tripoli that has been the scene of heavy fighting between pro-Gadhafi forces and rebel fighters . 
Abdul Hafiz Ghoga , a spokesman and deputy chairman of the opposition 's Transitional National Council , said Gadhafi bears a lot of the responsibility for civilian casualties in the fighting as the Libyan leader keeps weapons near where people live , echoing the comments of the NATO commander . 
Also Saturday , Libyan state TV said NATO strikes hit Gharyan , a city in the west . 
The report cited an unnamed military source who said a number of people were killed and wounded in the attack . 
CNN could not independently confirm the claim . 
Despite the airstrikes , an armed rebel movement and several high-profile defections , Gadhafi has held onto power . 
Seventeen prominent soccer players in Libya have defected , plus 38 military officers , including six high-ranking officers , according to Ghoga . 
Hopes for a political solution are at a stalemate over opposition conditions that Gadhafi must leave the country before any negotiated settlement can take hold . 
Libyan government officials have said repeatedly that Gadhafi 's departure can not be a prerequisite to talks . 
The African Union will try again Sunday to discuss a road map to quell the Libyan crisis . 
The African Union 's special committee on Libya , established in March , will convene in Pretoria , South Africa , to discuss avenues for peace . 
Over the last three months , panel members have met with both Gadhafi and opposition leaders . 
Ahead of the meeting , human rights activists urged the African Union to prioritize the issue of the plight of civilians caught in armed conflicts , including Libya . 
Both Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International have blamed the Gadhafi regime for violations of human rights , including indiscriminate fire on civilians , the use of internationally banned cluster bombs and the torture and executions of captured fighters . 
CNN 's Raja Razek , Yousuf Basil and Ingrid Formanek and journalist David Adams contributed to this report . 
