By Peter Bowes BBC News , Los Angeles The high profile trial in Los Angeles has attracted supporters of both Dr Conrad Murray and Michael Jackson More than two years after Michael Jackson 's sudden death , the singer 's personal physician has appeared in a Los Angeles court . 
Dr Conrad Murray , 58 , denies involuntary manslaughter . 
If convicted , the maximum sentence is four years in prison . 
It was a hot midsummer day in Los Angeles on 25 June , 2009 . 
Hollywood was mourning the loss of the actress Farrah Fawcett , as fans and celebrities paid tribute to the TV star , who had died from cancer , aged 62 . 
But that day will be remembered for another , altogether unexpected death and for the extraordinary outpouring of grief it provoked . 
Pop star Michael Jackson , a month shy of his 51st birthday , was rushed to hospital and pronounced dead , his brother Jermaine confirming the news to stunned fans in a hastily-arranged press conference . 
Jackson had recently stepped back into the limelight . 
He was rehearsing at the Staples Centre arena in Los Angeles for This Is It , his hugely anticipated concert series , which was due to start at the O2 in London on 13 July . 
The night before his death , he worked until after midnight . 
The next day , shortly after noon , he was discovered unconscious in his bedroom by his physician Dr Conrad Murray . 
Dr Conrad Murray faces up to four years in prison if convicted What happened in the time between those two events remains a mystery . 
At a preliminary hearing , several witnesses gave detailed accounts of the frenzied activity at Jackson 's home after the singer was found to be unresponsive . 
The singer 's death , according to the Los Angeles County Coroner , was a homicide caused by `` acute Propofol intoxication . '' 
Propofol is a sedative that is normally used in hospitals to induce or maintain anaesthesia during surgical procedures . 
It will be up to the jury to decide whether the actions of Dr Murray , during the frantic efforts to revive the singer and in the hours before , caused his death . 
`` We 're finally going to get a full airing of all the facts , '' says Steven Cron , a legal analyst . 
`` In order to be guilty of a crime one has to be grossly negligent , not just minimally negligent , and that 's what they 're trying to prove , '' says Mr Cron . 
Dr Murray has strongly defended himself against the charge of involuntary manslaughter . 
He has insisted that nothing he did should have killed Jackson . 
`` I think the forensic evidence is going to be really important , '' says Mr Cron . 
`` There were only two people in the room and one of them is no longer with us . 
The other is accused . '' 
The jury will hear testimony from dozens of witnesses , including some of those who were first on the scene , such as Jackson 's security guards and paramedics . 
Experts will also be called upon to answer questions about Propofol , which will be at the heart of the case . 
It has been suggested by Dr Murray 's lawyers that the publicity surrounding the case could rise to the levels seen during the murder trial of the former American footballer-turned movie actor OJ Simpson in 1995 . 
But the judge has refused a request to have the jury sequestered , or confined to a hotel , to shield them from outside influences , as they were during the Simpson trial . 
Jermaine Jackson said he is prepared for a media `` circus '' Instead , Judge Michael Pastor has advised them not to `` read , listen to or watch any news report or any other commentary about this case from any source '' and to `` keep an open mind throughout '' . 
`` I think the Conrad Murray trial will be the trial of the year -LRB- but -RRB- it will not be the trial of the century , '' says Linda Deutsch , a special correspondent with the Associated Press , and a veteran reporter at high profile cases in California . 
While the defendant , Dr Murray , is not a celebrity , the trial will receive global attention because the alleged victim is Jackson , the superstar who is still worshipped by fans around the world . 
The proceedings , like the Simpson trial , are being televised . 
Media outlets from around the world set up makeshift studios near the court building . 
Hundreds of Jackson fans lined the street . 
There will be a lottery every morning to allocate seats in the public gallery . 
`` The fact that it is Michael Jackson puts an entirely different profile on this case Michael Jackson was a fascinating man and he still fascinates even in death , '' says Ms Deutsch . 
The singer 's parents and famous siblings are all expected to make an appearance at LA 's Criminal Court building , taking it in turns to fill the eight seats the family has been allocated in the courtroom . 
Jackson 's three children will not attend the trial . 
`` We 're ready , '' says his brother Jermaine Jackson , `` We 're always ready for whatever . 
We 've been raised and taught to take it as it comes . '' 
`` I 'll be strong . 
Very , very strong - because I know when the system works for you and I know when it works against you , '' he adds . 
`` I know the truth and I 'm prepared for a circus . '' 
Judge Pastor has estimated that the trial , up to the point that the jury starts its deliberations , will last for five weeks . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
