Wednesday , August 25 , 2010 ; 8:49 PM HOUSTON - The Macondo well gushes no more , but the lawyers are just getting started . 
They go wall to wall in a Hilton hotel conference room , sitting at long tables that face the outnumbered investigators assigned to find the cause of the April 20 Deepwater Horizon disaster . 
The thermometer may be hitting 100 outside , but the room is kept perfect for the men and women in power suits , many from Washington , Chicago , New Orleans and Dallas . 
The investigation , a joint operation by the Coast Guard and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , is supposed to help the government determine what went wrong and recommend reforms . 
But the hearings have largely been taken over by lawyers for the major players in the disaster - including BP , rig owner Transocean and the contractor for the cement job , Halliburton - who are trying to prepare for what are sure to be many civil trials to come . 
They are generally civil to one another , but their clients have conflicting interests , with billions of dollars at stake and a Justice Department probe shadowing everything . 
`` The 900-pound gorilla in the room is the criminal investigation , '' said Pat Fanning , the attorney for one of the top Transocean managers on the rig . 
Testimony this week has focused on usual suspects : the construction of the well and maintenance of the blowout preventer . 
But who 's to blame , what piece of equipment or procedure proved fatally deficient , or to what degree the calamity could have been foreseen are issues the lawyers will likely tangle over for years to come . 
In a new twist , BP has declared that a Halliburton employee , Jesse Gagliano , who warned that the cement job on the Macondo well might not function properly , should have stopped the operation outright if he had real doubts about safety . 
Gagliano testified Tuesday that he told BP engineers on April 15 that if BP proceeded with the cement job as designed , it would have a gas-flow problem . 
Three days later , he wrote that , with only seven centralizers to center the casing , `` this well is considered to have a SEVERE gas flow problem . '' 
Gagliano said he and the BP engineers worked together , late into the night of April 15 , trying to resolve the problem . 
He recommended that BP use 21 centralizers to keep the casing properly positioned . 
But even though an additional 15 were flown to the rig , BP chose not to use them . 
The cementing job proceeded with six . 
Under cross-examination by BP lawyer Rick Godfrey , Gagliano acknowledged that in some documents , as well as during several conference calls with BP and Transocean managers , he did not cite the gas-flow potential or raise other alarms . 
`` BP had made their decision , '' Gagliano said . 
`` They had decided not to follow my recommendation . '' 
After he testified , BP released a pointed statement : `` If Halliburton had significant concerns about its ability to provide a safe and high-quality cement job in the Macondo well , then it had the responsibility and obligation to refuse to perform the job . 
To do otherwise would have been morally repugnant . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
