How the Fed Failed to Tell Obama About The Bonuses Federal Reserve officials knew for months about bonuses at American International Group but failed to tell the Obama administration , according to government and company officials , exposing problems in a relationship that is vital to addressing the financial crisis . 
As pressure mounted on AIG employees to return the bonuses , new details emerged yesterday about what the Fed , the Treasury Department and the White House knew regarding the payments and when . 
AIG executives said the Fed was informed three months ago by the company that it would pay $ 165 million by March 15 to employees working at its most troubled division . 
The Treasury and White House said they learned of the payments from Fed officials only days before they were due . 
Close coordination between the Fed and the administration is now more important than ever as they near the launch of two signature programs to rescue the financial system , which together could reach $ 2 trillion and are aimed at reviving consumer lending and purchasing soured assets and loans from ailing banks . 
Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner , a central figure in the decision to bail out AIG last fall as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York , said in an interview yesterday that he had not been aware of the size of the bonuses and the timing of the payments . 
`` I was stunned when I learned how bad this was on Tuesday -LRB- March 10 -RRB- , '' Geithner said . 
`` I should n't have been in that position , but it 's my responsibility and I accept that . '' 
Two days later , Geithner told the White House . 
The last-minute disclosure irked some of the president 's senior advisers , but they refuse to point fingers now , saying the timing had little impact on the outcome or the president 's public statements this week . 
`` Would I have liked an earlier warning system on this ? 
Yeah , '' said David Axelrod , a senior White House adviser . 
`` Would it have markedly changed things ? 
The legal constraints are the legal constraints . '' 
One source familiar with the discussions said the company had provided details about the bonuses to senior Treasury officials at least a month ago . 
A Treasury spokesman said last night that was not true . 
Democrats and Republicans in Congress are increasingly questioning how Geithner could not have known about the bonuses , given his past role in AIG 's bailout , which has totaled more than $ 170 billion . 
`` I 'm sick and tired of hearing the administration and the Secretary of the Treasury say , ' I just found out about it , ' '' Rep. Paul E. Kanjorski -LRB- D-Pa . -RRB- 
The dispute over AIG 's payouts represents the most pressing controversy confronting the administration as it addresses the financial crisis . 
Some private firms say the furor has made them wary of joining the federal initiatives to help save the economy . 
Government officials add that the newly charged political environment will make it difficult to ask Congress for more rescue funds . 
When the government rescued AIG in mid-September , no one was more central to the decision than Geithner . 
