Dispersant ` may make Deepwater Horizon oil spill more toxic ' Scientists fear chemicals used in oil clean-up can cause genetic mutations and cancer , and threaten sea turtles and tuna Wednesday 5 May 2010 19.52 BST Oil blobs and sheen remain in the waters of Chandeleur Sound , Louisiana . 
Illustration : Eric Gay\/AP -LRB- This caption was amended on 6 May 2010 . 
The original caption sited Chandeleur Sound ` near Los Angeles ' . -RRB- 
Chemicals used to break up the Deepwater Horizon oil spill before it reaches shore could do lasting damage to the waters of the Gulf of Mexico , environmental scientists say . 
By BP 's own account , it has mobilised a third of the world 's supply of dispersant , so far pouring about 140,000 gallons -LRB- 637,000 litres -RRB- of the cocktail into the Gulf as of today . 
Some of the dispersant has been injected directly into the source of the spill on the ocean floor , a technique never deployed before , deepening concerns about further damage to the environment . 
The dispersants are designed to break down crude into tiny drops , which can be eaten up by naturally occurring bacteria , to lessen the impact of a giant sea of crude washing on to oyster beds and birds ' nests on shore . 
But environmental scientists say the dispersants , which can cause genetic mutations and cancer , add to the toxicity of the spill . 
That exposes sea turtles and bluefin tuna to an even greater risk than crude alone . 
Dolphins and whales have already been spotted in the spill . 
The dangers are even greater for dispersants poured into the source of the spill , where they are picked up by the current and wash through the Gulf . 
The high demand for dispersant carries an additional risk . 
As BP runs through stocks of the chemical , called Corexit , scientists fear it will fall back on older stockpiles in the developing world that are more toxic than those approved for use in the US . 
`` You are trying to mitigate the volume of the spill with dispersant , but the price you pay is increased toxicity , '' said Richard Charter , a scientific adviser to Defenders of Wildlife . 
`` There are no good answers in a mess of this size . '' 
A version appeared on p25 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 10.47 BST on Thursday 6 May 2010 Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
