Congressmen raised concerns about BP safety before Gulf oil spill Letter pointed out that three BP pipelines on Alaska 's North Slope had ruptured or clogged , leading to a risk of explosions The explosion and sinking of BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig drew the world 's attention once more to the oil industry 's safeguards . 
In that letter , dated Jan. 14 , 2010 , Reps. Henry Waxman , D-Calif . 
, and Bart Stupak , D-Mich . 
, noted that the company 's efforts to cut costs could imperil safety at BP facilities . 
Between September 2008 and November 2009 , three BP gas and oil pipelines on Alaska 's North Slope ruptured or clogged , leading to a risk of explosions , the letter said . 
A potentially cataclysmic explosion was also avoided at a BP gas compressor plant , where a key piece of equipment designed to prevent the buildup of gas failed to operate , and the backup equipment intended to warn workers was not properly installed . 
The letter was addressed to BP 's president of Alaskan operations , John Ming . 
The congressmen have been investigating BP 's safety and operations since 2006 , when a 4,800-barrel oil spill temporarily shut down the Prudhoe Bay drilling field pipeline . 
Neither Waxman nor Stupak returned calls for comment , and it was n't clear from the letter how they obtained the information . 
The pipeline problems were mentioned in trade and local press , but the compressor plant incident does not appear to have been previously reported . 
In 2006 , after a string of highly-publicized accidents , BP publicly committed to improving its safety record , and by many accounts it made progress . 
But this letter suggests concerns about the safety of BP operations persisted in the months leading up to the accident in the Gulf this April , which killed 11 workers and has lead to the largest U.S. oil spill in recent history . 
In the letter the congressmen say the '' serious safety and production incidents '' could affect the operation of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System , a `` vital energy security asset '' that supplies one fourth of the nation 's daily oil needs . 
BP announced strong profits on April 27 . 
According to a banking analyst report , the company benefited from having cut some 5,000 jobs and saving $ 4 billion in operating expenses . 
A BP spokesman in Alaska did not respond by the time of publication after requesting and receiving detailed questions from ProPublica . 
The revelation of the incidents comes as BP is battling to stop the 210,000 gallons of oil that are gushing each day from a broken well pipe into the waters of the Gulf . 
In that accident , a shut-off valve that Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer for exploration and production described Monday as `` failsafe , '' failed to close , and the company had not installed a remote control backup valve that also might have stopped the spill . 
According to the letter , in the most dangerous of the incidents last year in Alaska , safety backstops also failed . 
On Oct. 10 , 2009 , a staging valve stuck closed at a large central compressor station in Prudhoe Bay where gas is captured for re-injection back underground . 
According to the congressional letter , the blockage caused gas to back up on another series of valves . 
A backup flare meant to burn off that collection of gas was not lit at the time , and cameras , installed so BP staff could monitor the flare 's functions in real time , were not pointed in the right direction . 
There was no explosion ; the gas vented out before anything could ignite it . 
Robert Bea , a professor at University of California Berkeley 's department of civil and environmental engineering who has worked for both Shell and BP on Alaska 's North Slope , said the situation at the compressor station sounded like a ticking bomb . 
`` It 's hard to describe these explosions in terms that people can understand , '' he said . 
`` It would rival the biggest ones that we have ever had in the history of the oil and gas industry . '' 
Bea said a blast zone could reach 300 feet and leave a crater 90 feet wide . 
He likened the potential scenario to a gas valve error that led to the massive explosion of an offshore drilling platform called Piper Alpha in the North Sea in 1988 , in which 167 workers were killed . 
In a Sept. 29 , 2008 incident according to the congressional memo , a high pressure gas line blew apart without igniting , sending a 28-foot long piece of metal 900 feet through the air and spewing gas . 
`` Let 's just call them lucky , '' Bea said . 
`` Even the steel bouncing around can ignite sparks to erupt the gas . '' 
The letter stated that on Jan. 15 , 2009 a cleaning pig -- a bullet-shaped device that runs diagnostics inside the pipeline -- got stuck and let large amounts of gas leak into a pump station . 
And on November 29 , 2009 an 18-inch pipe carrying a mixture of oil , natural gas and waste water ruptured , spraying its flammable contents . 
BP has a recent history of disasters stemming from incomplete maintenance and faulty equipment , including the 2005 blast at a refinery in Texas City , Texas , where 15 workers died after a fuel tower was powered up without following protocol . 
Then there was the 2006 Alaskan pipeline spill , which occurred four years after BP had been warned about corroded pipelines . 
The company pleaded guilty to felony counts in the first incident and a misdemeanor charge in the second , tallying fines in excess of $ 62 million . 
The Committee on Energy and Commerce , now chaired by Waxman , has oversight authority for the Trans-Alaska pipeline . 
In congressional hearings after the 2006 Prudhoe Bay spill , BP management was accused of making `` draconian '' budget cuts that affected safety and health , including limiting the use of a corrosion inhibitor inside the pipeline , a step that could have prevented the deterioration that led to the 2006 spill . 
In his most recent letter , Waxman repeats the concern that the company is cutting corners . 
Last weekend BP 's CEO Tony Hayward told the BBC that the company 's latest spill in the Gulf had no relation to the past . 
`` I do n't think it 's a trend , '' he said . 
`` This has got nothing to do with what went on at Texas City . '' 
In a 2006 interview with this reporter after the refinery fire and Prudhoe Bay pipeline spill , BP America 's former CEO , Bob Malone , said `` I can not see a systemic problem in BP America . '' 
cents ProPublica 's Ryan Knutson contributed reporting to this story . 
cents This is a guest post by ProPublica for the Guardian Environment Network Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Congressmen raised concerns about BP safety before Gulf oil spill This article was published on guardian . 
