BP stems one of three Deepwater Horizon oil leaks , US coastguard says Work unlikely to reduce overall oil flow into the Gulf of Mexico , but will ease efforts to contain the slick Wednesday 5 May 2010 16.20 BST Boats with oil booms try to contain oil spilled from the explosion and collapse of the Deepwater Horizon rig in the Gulf of Mexico Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP The US coastguard says BP has managed to cap one of three leaks from its stricken deepwater oil well , but the work is not expected to reduce the overall flow of oil into the Gulf of Mexico . 
The work should reduce the number of leak points that need to be fixed on the ocean floor , making it easier to drop a containment dome to bottle up the disastrous oil spill threatening sealife and livelihoods along the Gulf Coast . 
Since an explosion on 20 April , 50 miles off the coast of Louisiana , the Deepwater Horizon well has been spewing at least 800,000 litres a day . 
Experts say the best short-term solution is to drop a specially built giant concrete-and-steel box designed to siphon the oil away over the breach . 
Crews for Wild Well Control , a contractor , are putting the finishing touches on the 100-ton containment dome , which is expected to be taken to the leak site today . 
John Curry , a BP spokesman , said it would be deployed on the seabed by tomorrow . 
It 's the latest attempt by BP engineers to stem the oil from the rig , which killed 11 workers when it exploded . 
It sank two days later , and oil started pouring into the Gulf . 
BP is in charge of the cleanup and President Barack Obamasays the company is responsible for the costs . 
Officials said that capping one of the three leaks was a step towards stemming the flow . 
`` It does n't lessen the flow , it just simplifies the number of leak points they have to address , '' David Mosley , a coastguard petty officer 1st class , said . 
A rainbow sheen of oil has reached land in parts of Louisiana , but the gooey rafts of coagulated crude have yet to come ashore in most places . 
Forecasts showed the oil was n't expected to come ashore until at least tomorrow . 
`` It 's a gift of a little bit of time , I 'm not resting , '' said Mary Landry , a US coastguard rear admiral . 
In their worst-case scenario , BP executives told members of a congressional committee that up to 9.5 m litres a day could spill if the leaks worsened , though it would be more like 6.5 m litres . 
The worst oil spill in US history resulted from the 1989 grounding of the Exxon Valdez oil tanker in Alaska . 
It leaked nearly 11m gallons -LRB- 41 million litres -RRB- of crude . 
Containment domes have never been tried at this depth , about 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 m -RRB- because of the extreme water pressure . 
The dome , if all goes well , could be fired up early next week to start funnelling the oil into a tanker . 
It was not clear whether the equipment would work , said Bill Salvin , a BP spokesman . 
`` What we do know is that we have done extensive engineering and modelling , and we believe this gives us the best chance to contain the oil , and that 's very important to us . '' 
Yesterday seas calmed allowing more conventional methods to contain the spill to get back on track as businesses and residents kept an eye on the ocean currents , wondering when the sheen washing ashore might turn into a heavier coating of oil . 
Crews put out more containment equipment and repaired some booms damaged in rough weather over the weekend . 
They also hoped to again try to burn some of the oil on the water 's surface . 
Chemical dispersants piped 1,500 m to the main leak have significantly reduced the amount of oil coming to the surface , BP said . 
The company also hoped to shut off one of the smaller of three leaks , though it may not reduce the flow very much , said Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer . 
From the air yesterday , the site of the Deepwater Horizon explosion looked similar to a week ago , except for the appearance of a massive rig brought in to drill a relief well to shut off the spewing oil . 
However , that would take months . 
People along the Gulf Coast have spent weeks living with uncertainty , wondering where and when the oil may come ashore , ruining their beaches and their livelihoods . 
The anxiety is so acute that some are seeing and smelling oil where there is none . 
And even though the dead turtles and jellyfish washing ashore along the Gulf of Mexico are clean , and scientists have yet to determine what killed them , many are sure the flow of crude is the culprit . 
The rig was owned by Transocean . 
Some of the 115 surviving workers aboard when it exploded are suing the company and BP . 
In lawsuits filed yesterday , three workers say they were kept floating at sea for more than 10 hours , while the rig burned uncontrollably . 
They are seeking damages . 
Guy Cantwell , a spokesman for Transocean , defended the company 's response , saying 115 workers got off alive . 
Two wrongful death suits have also been filed . 
While officials worked on the cleanup , the long wait took its toll on the surrounding coastline . 
Perdido Key , a Florida barrier island between Pensacola and the Alabama state lined with sugar-white sand and studded with condominiums , could be the first place to be affected by the oil spill . 
`` You could smell it , real heavy petroleum base , '' said Steve Ownesby , 54 , a maintenance man at the Flora-Bama Lounge . 
The air cleared later , but Owensby 's 28-year-old daughter , Stephanie , who tends a bar at the lounge , said some visitors had complained of feeling ill from the fumes . 
`` It 's very sad because I grew up out here , '' she said . 
`` I remember growing up seeing the white beaches my whole life . 
Every day I 've been going to the beach a lot of people are out watching and crying . '' 
