Arnold Schwarzenegger ends support for California oil expansion as political backlash against oil industry takes hold Oil reaches the Chandeleur Islands , east of Louisiana . 
The spill has set off a political backlash against the industry . 
Photograph : Daniel Beltra\/Greenpeace\/EPA The catastrophic spill in the Gulf of Mexico set off a backlash against the oil industry yesterday , with a demand for a ban on future offshore drilling . 
The anger came as BP executives admitted in a private briefing for members of Congress that the gusher on the floor of the Gulf of Mexico could reach 40,000 barrels a day eight times higher than the current estimate if they can not cap the flow . 
It also carries the risk of a financial sting , with the White House yesterday backing a proposal by senators that would put oil companies on the hook for up to to $ 10bn -LRB- # 6.5 bn -RRB- for the cost of a spill . 
The White House spokesman , Robert Gibbs , said the administration supported a proposal to make liability retroactive . 
The cap would be 133 times greater than the $ 75m bill that BP , which operated the Deepwater Horizon rig , faces under existing US laws following its explosion on 20 April . 
`` It 's time to believe our eyes and accept the obvious risks of drilling , '' Robert Menendez , a Democratic senator from New Jersey , told a press conference . 
`` This is about making Big Oil responsible for its excesses . '' 
Arnold Schwarzenegger , California 's governor , had arrived at a similar conclusion , reversing his support for expanded drilling to help the state 's $ 20bn budget crisis . 
`` You turn on the TV and see this enormous disaster ; you say to yourself , why would we want to take on that kind of risk ? '' 
he told a press conference . 
The spill does not appear to have forced a change of heart for the former governor of Alaska , Sarah Palin , who popularized the Republican `` drill , baby , drill '' slogan in the 2008 election . 
She told an audience in Kansas City that offshore drilling should continue . 
`` I want our country to be able to trust the oil industry . '' 
But BP and other oil firms face further intense scrutiny in Congress . 
Company officials briefed members of Congress in a closed session yesterday afternoon , with a public grilling scheduled for next week . 
BP 's position that there had been no need for a backup system for the blowout preventer , whose failure led to the multiple spills , came in for harsh criticism yesterday afternoon . 
`` I 'm of the opinion that boosterism breeds complacency , and complacency breeds disaster , '' said Ed Markey , who helped write the climate bill which passed in the house last year . 
`` That in my opinion is what happened . '' 
The backlash against oil firms is dangerous for Barack Obama , who angered many Democrats and environmentalists in March when he announced a plan to expand offshore drilling , seen as a ploy to win support in the Senate and from oil firms , for climate and energy legislation . 
But Bill Nelson , a Democratic senator from Florida , said that strategy would have to be abandoned . 
`` I will make it short and to the point , '' Nelson told reporters . 
`` The president 's proposal for offshore drilling is dead on arrival . '' 
And in a new advert , with images of a burning rig and oil-encrusted wildlife , the liberal Moveon.org group asks : `` President Obama , will you lead our country into a clean energy future ? 
Or will we see more of this ? '' 
The gulf explosion put the Obama administration on alert , scrambling to demonstrate full engagement with the spill , which threatens ecologically fragile areas from Louisiana through to Alabama and Mississippi and Florida , and could damage livelihoods of millions of people . 
After Obama 's visit to Louisiana at the weekend , the White House said a number of cabinet officials would return to the gulf coastline this week . 
The proposals unveiled by three senators yesterday would raise the legal cap on damages that oil firms must pay after a spill from $ 75m to $ 10bn . 
They would also do away with a $ 1bn per incident cap on an industry fund . 
The existing limits on liability are 20 years old , dating from the Exxon Valdez spill off Alaska . 
However , those limits do not apply if it is found that BP was negligent or had violated government regulations at the time the Gulf of Mexico rig exploded . 
Tony Hayward , BP 's chief executive , refused to comment on the proposal yesterday . 
He has said the company will bear the costs of the clean-up and any `` legitimate '' claims arising from those who have lost their livelihoods . 
`` We will absolutely be paying for the clean-up operation . 
There is no doubt about that . 
It 's our responsibility we accept it fully . '' 
He said the firm would also be prepared to pay individuals . 
`` Where legitimate claims are made , we will be good for them . '' 
But Menendez and others argue that $ 75m will not begin to pay for the lost livelihoods of shrimpers and others in the fisheries industries . 
`` We 're glad that the costs for the oil clean-up will be covered , but that 's little consolation to the small businesses , fisheries , and local governments , '' he said . 
Environmental activists are also looking closely at how to recover costs relating to the spill . 
To date , BP faces 20 lawsuits arising from the spill . 
In Mississippi , attention has focused on the high number of sea turtles washed up dead along the state 's beaches in the past three days . 
The Institute for Marine Mammal Studies in Gulfport has done necropsies on the turtles , but the first round found no visible traces of oil . 
A spokeswoman said more examinations were being done on tissue samples to see if there were hydrocarbons at a microscopic level . 
Though experts have been struck by the large number of turtles , `` at least 31 in latest counts '' , they point out that now is the season when the animals come close to shore and can get caught in fishing nets and suffocate . 
Moby Solangi , director of the institute , said the heightened degree of public alertness in the wake of the oil crisis might also explain why more dead turtles were reported this year . 
BP said the oil slick was not expected to reach land for a few more days . 
`` It 's still offshore ... Right now we 're not showing landfall for three days , '' its chief operating officer Doug Suttles said yesterday . 
