Moscow 's UN envoy , Vitaly Churkin , told reporters the resolution was one-sided and supported the armed opposition . 
Western nations praised the resolution , which passed by 133 votes to 12 with 31 abstentions . 
It criticises both the UN 's own Security Council and the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad . 
The assembly debated the resolution , which was proposed by Saudi Arabia , shortly after the resignation of UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan and the failure of his six-point peace plan . 
In Syria , government forces backed by tanks launched a new assault in Damascus while shelling continued in the country 's largest city , Aleppo . 
Barbara Plett BBC UN correspondent The resolution condemning the Syrian government and calling for a political transition is not legally binding , but its Arab and Western sponsors see the overwhelming `` Yes '' vote as proof that they have world opinion behind them , despite the deadlock in the Security Council , which they harshly criticised . 
Even so , the massive majority came at a price : the text had to be watered down in an attempt to win over many states , dropping explicit calls for Bashar al-Assad to step down and for member states to support Arab League sanctions . 
And even though the opposition was small , it again included China and Russia . 
Moscow opposed the resolution as unbalanced , making clear that it believes the UN is taking one side in a civil war . 
So the General Assembly intervention will do nothing to bridge the fundamental divides in the Security Council , and may widen them . 
Activists say more than 20,000 people - mostly civilians - have died in 17 months of unrest . 
Russia voted `` no '' on Friday along with China , Syria , Cuba , Iran , North Korea , Belarus , Bolivia , Nicaragua , Burma , Zimbabwe and Venezuela . 
Among those states abstaining were India and Pakistan . 
Mr Churkin told the UN that the Saudi-drafted resolution concealed `` blatant support for the armed opposition '' . 
He said his country regretted the resolution which `` only aggravates confrontational approaches to the resolution of the Syrian crisis , doing nothing to facilitate dialogue between the parties '' . 
It was `` written as if no armed opposition existed at all '' , he added . 
Mr Churkin pointed out that the resolution called on the UN envoy to work towards a transition to democracy in Syria , yet the envoy 's task had been to arrange dialogue , not regime change . 
Chinese deputy UN ambassador Wang Min said pressuring Syria 's government would `` cause further escalation of the turmoil '' and allow the crisis to spread to neighbouring countries . 
Russia and China have blocked three attempts in the UN Security Council to impose sanctions against Damascus . 
Syria 's UN ambassador Bashar Jaafari spoke of '' blatant hypocrisy '' by those who co-sponsored the draft resolution Syria 's UN ambassador , Bashar Jaafari , suggested Saudi Arabia and fellow resolution sponsor Qatar were trying to act as both `` a fireman and an arsonist at the same time '' . 
The resolution expresses `` grave concern '' at the escalation of violence in Syria and deplores `` the failure of the Security Council to agree on measures to ensure the compliance of Syrian authorities with its decisions '' . 
It says it is up to the Syrian government to take the `` first step in the cessation of violence '' . 
Susan Rice , the US envoy at the UN , welcomed the passing of the resolution . 
The UN General Assembly `` sent a strong message today : the overwhelming majority of nations stand with the people of Syria '' , she wrote on Twitter . 
Britain 's UN ambassador Sir Mark Lyall Grant said a `` colossal majority '' had supported the resolution . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague said : `` This resolution ... sends a clear signal that the world stands together in condemning the Syrian regime 's systematic human rights violations and in calling for accountability . '' 
During the assembly 's session , UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said the conflict in Syria had become a `` proxy war '' and called on powers to overcome their rivalries in an effort to end the violence . 
Fighting raged in the Tadamon district of Damascus for a second day on Friday , with opposition activists saying government troops had regained control of the area . 
Eyewitnesses and activists say government forces used dozens of tanks and armored vehicles to attack what had been seen as the rebels ' last stronghold in the capital . 
The result of the vote was announced by UN General Assembly President , Nassir Abdulaziz al-Nasser Troops killed `` several '' rebels and wounded many more , Syrian state media reported . 
`` The bombs are back , I have been hearing explosions all day , '' a resident of central Damascus told the Associated Press news agency , asking to remain anonymous for fear of reprisals . 
Fighting has also continued in Aleppo , where government forces have been trying to reclaim areas seized by the Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- in the past two weeks . 
Hundreds of people gathered in the al-Shaar neighborhood to chant `` The people want the execution of Bashar ! '' 
and `` The people want freedom and peace '' , AFP news agency reporter at the scene says . 
UN peacekeeping chief Herve Ladsous told the Security Council that UN observers in Aleppo were seeing `` a considerable build-up of military means , where we have reason to believe that the main battle is about to start '' . 
Are you in Syria ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below . 
Send your pictures and videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to 61124 -LRB- UK -RRB- or +447624800100 -LRB- International -RRB- . 
If you have a large file you can upload here . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
