Monday 27 June 2005 01.32 BST The US defense secretary , Donald Rumsfeld , yesterday warned that the insurgency in Iraq could go on for at least a decade and confirmed that the army had been in contact with some of its leaders in an attempt to quell the violence . 
He spoke after insurgents launched coordinated suicide bomb attacks which killed at least 33 people and wounded dozens more in the northern city of Mosul . 
Mr Rumsfeld said that Iraqis , not US troops , would eventually bring an end to attacks that have killed thousands of civilians and 1,730 American soldiers . 
His downbeat assessment , during a television interview , was in stark contrast to a claim at the end of May by the vice presiden , Dick Cheney , that the insurgency was `` in its last throes '' . 
Mr Rumsfeld said : `` We 're not going to win against the insurgency . 
The Iraqi people are going to win against the insurgency . 
That insurgency could go on for any number of years . 
Insurgencies tend to go on five , six , eight , 10 , 12 years . '' 
Mr Rumsfeld confirmed that US officials were taking part in talks with insurgent leaders in Iraq . 
Asked about a report of two such meetings in yesterday 's Sunday Times , he told Fox News : `` Well , the first thing I would say about the meetings is they go on all the time . '' 
He added that Iraq had a sovereign government which could choose its own relationships with different groups of insurgents . 
`` We facilitate those from time to time , '' Mr Rumsfeld said . 
Al-Qaida in Iraq and another Sunni extremist group , the Ansar al-Sunnah army , both issued statements on militant Islamic websites yesterday denying having held talks with US or Iraqi government officials . 
Mr Rumsfeld made it clear that the talks had been with Iraqi insurgents rather than foreign fighters led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi , a Jordanian extremist . 
He told NBC television 's Meet the Press program : `` It is n't a matter of negotiating with terrorists . 
There 's no one negotiating with Zarqawi or the people that are out chopping people 's heads off . '' 
General John Abizaid , the commander of US forces in the Middle East said that both US and Iraqi officials were `` looking for the right people in the Sunni community to talk to ... and clearly we know that the vast majority of the insurgents are from the Sunni Arab community . '' 
Amid steadily declining support for the war in the US and conflicting signals from the Bush administration , Mr Rumsfeld went out of his way to lower American expectations of a quick victory . 
He said : `` We 're going to create an environment that the Iraqi people and the Iraqi security forces can win against that insurgency . '' 
US war objectives have been ratcheted down in recent months from establishing stability in Iraq to training sufficient numbers of Iraqi government troops to fight the insurgency independently . 
The policy of lowering expectations however was thrown into confusion by Mr Cheney 's claim that the insurgency was `` in its last throes '' . 
The claim appeared to take other administration officials by surprise and forced them into a string of semantic contortions to explain it . 
`` The fact is that if you look at the context of his remarks , last throes could be a violent last throe , just as well as a placid or calm last throe . 
Look it up in the dictionary , '' Mr Rumsfeld said yesterday . 
He added : `` There 's no question but that the enemy is a thinking enemy , that their attacks are more lethal than they had been previously . 
They 're killing a lot more Iraqis . '' 
The defense secretary 's back-to-back television appearances were part of a concerted administration campaign to convince the American public it has a winning strategy in Iraq amid falling home support . 
That public relations campaign will reach its peak tomorrow night with a prime-time address to the nation by President George Bush , who will call for popular resolve in support of the nation 's 135,000 troops still in Iraq . 
