Storms in the Caribbean are the latest threat to the frustratingly slow effort to contain and clean up the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Meteorologists say Tropical Storm Alex , which is brewing in the western Caribbean , is not on pace to hit the oil well , but it has prompted the team overseeing the spill site to heighten emergency planning . 
If a storm with gale-force winds comes within five days of reaching the gushing oil well , crews would begin packing up to return to shore , said Coast Guard Adm. Thad W. Allen , who is overseeing the crisis for the government . 
A full evacuation could stop containment activities for two weeks . 
`` We are watching the storm track , and if we think it is turned in such a way that it would cross the site , we would activate the plans , '' Allen said Saturday on a call with reporters . 
`` We are engaged constantly with the National Hurricane Center ... We all know that the weather is unpredictable . '' 
Allen and his team might be forced to make tough and consequential predictions anyway . 
More than 30,000 people and 6,000 ships are working on the spill , and they will need several days ' warning to get out of a storm 's way . 
If a storm pops up in the gulf suddenly , people can be evacuated in a tighter time frame , but those contingency plans risk damaging key equipment . 
`` The safety of life is the number one priority , '' Allen said . 
BP is working to shorten the time needed to secure or move all of its equipment from five days to two , company spokesman Bill Salvin told the Associated Press . 
The equipment includes the ships processing the oil sucked up by the containment cap on the well and the rigs drilling the two relief wells . 
A full evacuation would force BP to disconnect the ships from the containment cap now funneling half or more of the leaking oil to tankers waiting above the well a mile below the surface . 
Allen said the workers would return to shore , wait out the storm and then reconnect the complicated equipment . 
BP is working to develop a containment system that would be easier to disconnect and hook back up . 
The construction of the two relief wells , projected to be done by mid-August , would also be impeded by stormy weather . 
Those relief wells are the best hope of halting the oil that has been gushing into gulf waters since April 20 in the biggest offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
BP is capturing 20,000 to 28,500 barrels -LRB- 840,000 to 1.2 million gallons -RRB- of oil a day . 
Worst-case government estimates say 59,500 barrels -LRB- 2.5 million gallons -RRB- a day are leaking from the well , although that number is a rough approximation . 
Alex , which was rated a tropical storm early Saturday , is the first of many expected this hurricane season . 
It was headed to the Yucatan Peninsula at 9 mph with winds of 45 mph , according to the hurricane center . '' 
