The Mississippi-bred , wispy-haired Dudley has been paraded through the Gulf Coast , the White House and press corps as the new face of BP 's fight to contain the damage the oil spill has unleashed on U.S. shores -- and the company 's reputation . 
One week after BP chief executive Tony Hayward endured a tongue-lashing at a House committee hearing , returned to England and made headlines by going sailing on his yacht , Dudley stepped in to speed up plans for a free-standing BP unit that will be devoted entirely to repairing the Gulf environment . 
But it will take more than Dudley 's calm demeanor and American accent to clean up BP 's image , which has been blackened by the relentless video of oil gushing into the Gulf of Mexico , the widening damage to the environment and reams of damning documents about the rig accident that triggered the spill . 
Even Dudley realizes that . 
`` We can understand why the nation is angry with BP , '' he told a group of reporters Thursday . 
He added , `` until we close the well off , I think there 's a period here where its going to be very difficult to restore BP 's reputation . '' 
For now , Dudley 's task is more concrete . 
Since the April 20 blowout , hundreds of BP employees have been rushed to the Gulf coast to do everything from consulting on ways to plug the leak to coordinating cleanup . 
Now BP wants some of them to go back to their regular jobs , while hiring outsiders who might be better suited to running a cleanup operation . 
Fixing up disasters , Dudley said , `` is not a core competency with us . '' 
He said that he hoped to bring in James Lee Witt , who was director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency under President Bill Clinton . 
`` Our intention is to restore the Gulf to the way it was before this happened , '' he said . 
It is a task that many environmentalists say might not be possible . 
Dudley will report to Hayward , who will return to running the rest of the company after devoting the past two months to the spill . 
`` BP is a big organization around the world , and it needs guidance , '' Dudley said . 
Hayward is supposed to travel soon to Russia , where BP has a large , lucrative joint venture . 
`` I 'm sure he 'll be back to the U.S. , '' Dudley said . 
`` I just ca n't tell you when . '' 
Dudley said that by setting up a dedicated division for the oil spill , BP was making a long-term commitment , not limiting its liabilities . 
He said all 33 claims offices would remain open and be used by Kenneth Feinberg , administrator of the new $ 20 billion escrow fund set up at the White House 's behest last week . 
He said he would support changes such as adding blimps to help guide skimming boats to oil sheens in the Gulf and paying business claims a month in advance rather than retrospectively so businesses in the region could function better . 
He also said that BP had `` reached out '' to the family of a fishing boat captain who committed suicide . 
Calling it `` shocking '' and `` terribly tragic , '' he said the company would provide financial support . 
Although BP announced three weeks ago that it intended to set up an oil spill unit , administration officials at the White House meeting last Wednesday asked that the plan be put into effect immediately , Dudley said . 
He will be a key link between BP and the administration . 
In a meeting Thursday , Environmental Protection Agency administrator Lisa Jackson told Dudley that she wanted additional tests near the spill site . 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar talked about what progress was required before the deepwater drilling moratorium is lifted . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
