NEW ORLEANS -- They came here seeking refuge , but the past few years have brought unexpected hardship to the tightly knit Vietnamese fishing community . 
They arrived after the fall of Saigon in 1975 , lured by the city 's tropical climate and strong Catholic heritage . 
Shrimping and fishing in the Gulf Coast 's bountiful bayous was one of the few familiar touchstones for these mostly unskilled laborers with little English . 
An estimated 20,000 Vietnamese fishermen and shrimpers live along the Gulf Coast -- about half of the total fishing community -- and many more work at the seafood processing plants , wholesalers and po-boy shops found at every traffic light . 
Now the sanctuary they found and the lives they built -- and rebuilt after Hurricane Katrina -- are threatened by the hemorrhaging oil in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Many Vietnamese worry they will not have the energy to start over yet again . 
`` When I came to Louisiana , this was how people here made a living . 
I had to follow , '' 50-year-old shrimper Dung Nguyen says in Vietnamese . 
`` I do n't know how I 'm going to live . '' 
Nguyen says he has no idea whether life is harder for him than for American shrimpers ; he does n't know any to ask . 
All he knows is that his wife , their five daughters , his mother-in-law and his granddaughter -- all of whom live with him in a modest rented home in the industrial eastern edge of New Orleans -- are counting on him for survival . 
That 's why he got up before dawn last week to stand in line for a food voucher with dozens of other out-of-work Vietnamese fishermen and shrimpers in the concrete alley in front of Mary Queen of Vietnam Catholic Church 's community office . 
The wait can last five , six , even seven hours . 
Oversleepers are turned away before they even make it inside . 
`` If you 're a little bit late ... , '' Nguyen warns in Vietnamese , shaking his head . 
He knows because he showed up after 5 a.m. for two days and missed out on a $ 100 grocery store gift certificate , 20 of which are handed out every morning . 
It is 8:30 a.m. and the office has yet to open , but he is hoping the third time is the charm . 
Besides , he says , he has nothing to do all day but sit around and think -- about having no work , no money and no options . 
Normally Nguyen is on a boat this time of year , coming ashore for a home visit about once a month . 
His wife , Ut , makes shrimp nets , and his oldest daughter , Lisa , 20 , fixes trawls and cleans boats . 
Now they are all unemployed . 
`` Get in a straight line , please , '' a woman calls out in English to the group , mostly men , milling about the alley as staffers open the office door . 
The Vietnamese quickly flatten themselves along the wall as aid workers hand out numbered tickets for vouchers to the first in line . 
Dung secures one , as does his wife , even though the vouchers are technically limited to one per family . 
Because so many Vietnamese share the same last name and the community is so intertwined , the rule is tough to enforce . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
