The announcement of a Michael Jackson tribute concert in Cardiff in October . 
Two of Michael Jackson 's brothers have criticised a planned tribute concert to the pop superstar in Cardiff as `` inappropriate '' and `` ill-timed '' . 
Jermaine and Randy Jackson are unhappy that it will clash with the trial of Conrad Murray , the doctor charged in relation to their brother 's death . 
The 8 October gig at the Millennium Stadium was announced by producers Global Live Events on Monday . 
But the event has won the backing of the late singer 's mother Katherine . 
Jackson died in June 2009 aged 50 while rehearsing for his This Is It tour . 
When plans for the concert were announced it was reported that Mrs Jackson , and the singer 's sister La Toya and brothers Tito , Marlon and Jackie , were in support of it . 
At a press conference Mrs Jackson said : `` Michael gave his entire life to the world through his love , his music and his devotion to healing the planet . '' 
She said she was positive that the event would `` form a worthy celebration of Michael 's life . '' 
Jermaine and Randy Jackson said there would come a time and place for such a tribute She revealed that `` as many members of my family that are available '' would attend the event . 
However following the press conference the two brothers released a statement saying that while they supported `` the spirit '' of a tribute concert , in choosing the timing of it the promoter had `` disrespected '' their opinions and wishes . 
`` In light of this , we feel it is inappropriate to be involved with such an ill-timed event and its promoter , Global Live , '' the statement said . 
No acts have been announced for the concert yet but a notice on the event 's website promises `` the world 's greatest performing artists '' will appear . 
STATEMENT BY JERMAINE AND RANDY JACKSON `` Today 's press conference in Los Angeles announced a tribute concert to Michael to be attended and supported by the Jackson family . 
`` However , we want to make clear that this does not reflect the position of the entire family . 
`` While we wholeheartedly support the spirit of a tribute that honors our brother , we find it impossible to support an event that is due to take place during the criminal trial surrounding Michael 's death . 
`` As everyone knows , those proceedings commence September 20th , and this Michael Forever concert takes place in Cardiff , Wales , on 8 October . 
`` In light of this , we feel it is inappropriate to be involved with such an ill-timed event and its promoter , Global Live . 
`` Furthermore , the decision to proceed with this concert disrespects opinions and wishes expressed in the strongest terms to Global Live during conversations in April when this event was presented to the majority of the family as an idea already in its advanced stages . 
`` There will come a time and place for an amazing and deserving tribute to Michael . 
But we feel that the most important tribute we can give to our brother at this time is to seek justice in his name . '' 
There are plans for the concert to be broadcast around the world to 30 countries in 2D and 3D . 
It will raise money for three charities including the Los Angeles-based Aids Project . 
Announcing the concert on Monday , Roger Lewis , group chief executive of the Welsh Rugby Union , which owns and operates the stadium , said the `` extra special '' concert would pay tribute to one of the world 's greatest pop icons of all time and benefit US and UK charities . 
He added it was `` fantastic news for music fans all over the world '' and that it would be `` a huge boost for Wales to host this spectacular one-off show . '' 
Global Live Events LLP has worked with a range of artists including Abba , The Beatles , Eric Clapton , Madonna , Placido Domingo , and Jackson himself . 
When the concert was revealed Chris Hunt , the firm 's president , said : `` We wanted to do something decent and worthy of Michael 's musical genius yet something fun and authentic that you would envision Michael attending with excitement and joy surrounded by talent that he respected and loved . '' 
Meanwhile , a Los Angeles judge has ruled that footage of Jackson rehearsing for a concert just days before his death will not be show in court . 
Prosecutors wanted to show several hours of unedited tapes filmed for the movie This Is It in an effort to prove Jackson was healthy before he died of a drug overdose in 2009 . 
The footage was not actually included in the movie , which was released four months after the singer 's death in 2009 . 
Sony Pictures , the studio behind the film , argued that showing the unseen footage in a public court may hurt its potential commercial value . 
Sony Pictures said it screened more than 100 hours of raw footage for the lawyers and the judge in the case . 
Judge Michael Pastor concluded on Monday that it would not help the defense and that `` it was a waste of my time . '' 
But the jury will be shown clips that were used in the film which show the star rehearsing for a series of comeback concerts in London . 
12th August 2011 - 23:07 This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the house rules . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
