Page last updated at 08:03 GMT , Tuesday , 26 July 2011 09:03 UK -LRB- an error occurred while processing this directive -RRB- Katherine Jackson has announced a tribute concert for Cardiff on 8 October A judge in Los Angeles has ruled a film of Michael Jackson rehearsing before his death can not be used in the trial of the doctor accused of killing him . 
Lawyers for Conrad Murray say the footage is not a fair representation of the singer 's health in the days before he died . 
Prosecutors had wanted to show around 12 hours of recordings from This Is It . 
Conrad Murray has pleaded not guilty to the involuntary manslaughter of Jackson at his rented LA mansion in June 2009 . 
He faces up to four years prison if convicted at a trial that is scheduled to begin in September . 
Sony Pictures , the studio that released the documentary film , screened more than 100 hours of raw footage in private court sessions . 
But Judge Michael Pastor ruled on Monday that the film would not help the defense team and was a waste of his time . 
The jury will , however , be shown clips that were used in the movie showing 50-year-old Michael Jackson rehearsing for a series of comeback concerts in London . 
Meanwhile , divisions have emerged in Michael Jackson 's family after his mother announced a UK tribute concert for the star . 
Katherine Jackson says the show will take place at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff on 8 October . 
She said : `` Michael gave his entire life to the world through his love , his music and his devotion to healing the planet . '' 
Statement from Jermaine and Randy Jackson But in a statement , Michael 's brothers Jermaine and Randy Jackson said the timing of the concert was `` inappropriate '' and `` ill-timed '' . 
It is two weeks after the start of Conrad Murray 's trial in Los Angeles . 
The brothers said : `` While we wholeheartedly support the spirit of a tribute that honors our brother , we find it impossible to support an event that is due to take place during the criminal trial surrounding Michael 's death . 
`` As everyone knows , those proceedings commence -LRB- on -RRB- 20 September and this Michael Forever concert takes place in Cardiff on 8 October . 
`` In light of this , we feel it is inappropriate to be involved with such an ill-timed event . '' 
If the concert goes ahead it will be shown in 30 countries around the world and will raise money for three charities including the Los Angeles-based Aids Project . 
