It 's crunch time for corn . 
Grain traders are anxiously waiting USDA 's weekly crop progress report late Monday as it will tell the story of how U.S. corn was planted this season . 
As of May 24 , American farmers still had 15 million corn acres of a projected 85 million yet to plant as heavy spring rains in the eastern Corn Belt delayed planting by at least 10 days to two weeks in many areas . 
Midwest acres seeded after mid-May usually lose more than a bushel a day on yield . 
`` Analysts are wondering how many of the remaining 15 million acres will be planted to soybeans rather than corn , '' Mike Woolverton , Kansas State University grain economist , said in his weekly newsletter . 
`` The consensus guess is one million acres if it immediately stops raining in the eastern Corn Belt and Mid-south ; up to two million acres if it stays wet , '' he said . 
Oil is a multi-billion dollar , multi-million barrel serious business . 
But OPEC ministers hounded by a ravening press pack can be masters of jocularity when the mood takes them . 
The relaxed tenor of this week 's OPEC meeting , which could cheerfully roll over existing output targets given the market was intent on rising whatever , was reflected in a high quota of light-hearted brush-offs . 
Libya 's Shokri Ghanem , renowned for his impishness , told one reporter he was going `` to have a cup of coffee '' when asked on the day of the meeting what his agenda was . 
It was n't quite the `` keep output steady '' the reporter had been after . 
Questioned about the oil price , Nigerian Oil Minister Rilwanu Lukman said : `` Could be better , but I ca n't complain . '' 
He could just as easily have been talking about the weather or his state of health . 
The most senior minister of them all Saudi Arabian Oil Minister Ali al-Naimi was in particularly sporting mood as he sped through Viennese hotel lobbies , jogged around the Vienna Ring and declared all was right with the world . 
`` The price is good , the market is in good shape , recovery is under way . 
What else could we want ? '' 
As the oil price climbed above $ 65 a barrel , its highest for more than six months , sceptical reporters asked whether the rally could be sustainable when oil inventories were still very high . 
But Naimi was confident the great healer would take care of excess supply . 
`` Time takes care of everything , '' he said and no-one could disagree . 
Tony Hayward did it at BP in 2007 and Peter Voser , due to step up to the top job at Royal Dutch Shell Plc on July 1 , did it on Wednesday . 
May 26 , 2009 20:21 UTC OPEC 's president Angola might well be asking himself why he is paying nearly 2 million euros to belong to the oil producers ' club when the World Bank has told the nation it would be better off without it . 
The Angolan energy minister , who currently holds the group 's rotating presidency , has yet to arrive in Vienna for this Thursday 's meeting of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries , which is expected to keep existing output targets unchanged . 
Member countries have already agreed to lower production by 4.2 million barrels per day since last September and have been delivering around 80 percent of the promised curbs . 
Now the oil price has climbed back above $ 60 a barrel , almost double the lows of last December , members like Angola might well sigh with relief and pump even more above their OPEC output target than they are already doing . 
Last week , the World Bank said Angola 's economy would perform far better this year if the country did not limit production , as OPEC has requested , and that was n't taking account of the OPEC membership fee , which is heard to be the same for all members , whether they are the smallest producer Ecuador or the biggest Saudi Arabia . 
Oil ministers might have saved a night or two on hotel accommodation , however , as several were expected to arrive later than originally stated and also to disappear immediately after Thursday 's meeting . 
Delegates predicted it would be short and to the point , provided Angola and others unhappy with output targets did not open a Pandora 's Box of a debate on production goals . 
The controls are aimed at supporting oil prices as the market is already well-supplied , but some argue a better way to boost OPEC earnings would have been to call the meeting off . 
It would not be good business for Vienna hotels or struggling airlines , but it would cut the expenses and carbon emissions of the OPEC delegations and the pursuing press pack , as one weary analyst observed . 
`` We are forced to mention that there is an OPEC meeting this Thursday in Vienna , although there is so little to expect out of it that OPEC could have made a gesture to save its and the media 's carbon footprint by calling it off , '' said Olivier Jakob of Petromatrix . 
\* Grain prices , led by soybeans , have been up since March . 
\* South America 's crop is expected to be a disappointment . 
Crops in both Brazil and Argentina have a poor outlook . 
In fact , the U.S. Agriculture Department steadily lowered its forecast for Argentina 's soybean crop throughout the year . 
\* Many will be looking to the United States to come through with a big crop . 
But U.S. soybean stocks began the 2009\/10 marketing year at a five year low . 
That means there 's not a lot of surplus to keep prices level if there 's any type of disruption in supply or weather calamity . 
Automatic teller machines -LRB- ATMs -RRB- -- 500 of them -- dispensing pieces of gold will be available around Germany , Switzerland and Austria by the end of this year . 
It cost the equivalent of $ 42.25 -- a 30 percent premium over the spot market price . 
May 12 , 2009 12:28 UTC The National Weather Service has issued flood warnings along the Mississippi , Ohio , Wabash and White Rivers . 
Photo : Northern Illinois field taken May 10 by Chris Stebbins . 
Illinois corn and soybean planting is lagging historical averages due to a wet , cool spring . 
Oil prices have been trading in an unusually strong positive correlation with equities markets over the past few months on hopes that signs of an economic recovery could mean a boost for energy demand . 
But with oil and product inventories swelling and little sign of demand improving in the United States and other big developed economies , analysts warn that the linkage may be hard to maintain , especially if U.S. motorists cut back on vacations this summer . 
May 3 , 2009 22:40 UTC `` If it intensifies , we 'll have to react ... right now we are watching it but there 's not a panic attitude , '' one CBOT trader said on Friday . 
Locations of shale basins not geographically precise . 
E.g. Haynesville basin is located on the north Louisiana\/east Texas border . 
Figures in trillion cubic feet . 
Source : The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission website , derived from the American Clean Skies Foundation . 
Rising estimates of U.S. recoverable natural gas reserves from shale deposits could keep natural gas prices low over the next few years . 
The above map shows the sharp increase in recoverabe reserves from select shale basin in trillion cubic feet from 2006 to 2008 . 
