Smoke billowed above Baghdad after a blast near the secure Green Zone Arab League leaders have called for the immediate implementation of a joint plan with the UN to end a year of violence in Syria . 
Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad has accepted the plan , state media report , but says `` terrorism '' must stop as well . 
Earlier , Iraq 's PM Nouri al-Maliki warned that arming either side in Syria would lead to a `` proxy war '' . 
He was speaking at the opening of an Arab League summit in Baghdad - the first such meeting there for decades . 
President Assad 's remarks were contained in a message to the world 's emerging powers - Brazil , Russia , India , China and South Africa - who met in Delhi on Thursday . 
He said he would work to enforce the peace plan but `` terrorism '' must stop as well , state news agency Sana reported . 
The Syrian government blames the anti-government uprising on foreign-backed terrorists and armed criminal gangs . 
The UN-Arab League plan , brokered by envoy Kofi Annan , would see a UN-monitored end to fighting , troops pulled out of opposition areas and access for humanitarian services . 
Syria first agreed to the initiative on Tuesday but violence has continued . 
A number of explosions were heard in central Baghdad as the summit was getting under way . 
Two of the blasts occurred near the Iranian embassy , eyewitnesses said . 
There were unconfirmed reports that an explosion near the city 's secure Green Zone was an IED -LRB- improvised explosive device -RRB- . 
Fewer than half the Arab League 's 22 heads of state turned up for the summit , reflecting their suspicion of Iraq 's government and its close ties to non-Arab Iran . 
Iran is also Syria 's closest ally in the Middle East . 
`` Based on our experience in Iraq , the option to arm either side of the conflict will lead to a regional and international proxy war in Syria , '' Mr Maliki said . 
The Emir of Kuwait attended the summit - the first visit by a Kuwaiti leader to Baghdad since Kuwait was invaded by Iraq under Saddam Hussein in August 1990 . 
Qatar and Saudi Arabia , the two Arab states most fiercely opposed to the Syrian government , only sent envoys . 
Arab League leaders and envoys posed for a group photo in Baghdad The summit was held in such tight security at the city 's former Republican Palace that the venue was not initially disclosed to journalists . 
While expectations were not high for the talks , the fact that they were being held in the Iraqi capital at all can be seen as a sign of progress for Iraq , says the BBC 's Wyre Davies , in Baghdad . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon urged Syria `` to put commitments into immediate effect '' . 
`` The world is waiting for commitments to be translated into action . 
The key here is implementation : there is no time to waste , '' Mr Ban told the summit . 
The UK will give # 500,000 -LRB- $ 795,000 -RRB- to Syrian opposition groups , Foreign Secretary William Hague is to announce later on Thursday . 
The money will be used for `` practical non-lethal support '' and to document human rights abuses by the Syrian government , Mr Hague will say in a speech in London . 
Syrian-led political process to address the aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people 2 . 
UN-supervised cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties to protect civilians 3 . 
All parties to ensure provision of humanitarian assistance to all areas affected by the fighting , and implement a daily two-hour humanitarian pause 4 . 
Authorities to intensify the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement throughout the country for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to respect freedom of association and the right to demonstrate peacefully Both Qatar and Saudi Arabia have voiced their support for arming opposition forces in Syria , and some analysts believe they are already funnelling weapons to the rebels . 
Washington has urged countries to maintain pressure on the Syrian government . 
The US state department said it had `` not seen the promises that Assad made implemented '' . 
The opposition in Syria is sceptical about the terms of Mr Annan 's plan , with some saying Mr Assad is merely stalling for time in order to continue his crackdown . 
`` We are not sure if it 's political manoeuvring or a sincere act , '' said Louay Safi , a member of the opposition Syrian National Council . 
`` We have no trust in the current regime ... We have to see that they have stopped killing civilians . '' 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
29th March 2012 - 13:32 Power corrupys and people do n't like to let it go . 
I feel for the Syrians and fear that there is a long way to go before peace is restored . 
I pray for all involved that they may find an end to this which is acceptable to all parties , but fear it is unlikely and that many more people will die . 
29th March 2012 - 13:20 By assisting the opposition forces in Lybia , the west has given hope to opposition forces in other middle eastern states . 
We assume that the governments are bad and the opposition forces are good but that 's because we have it constantly drummed into us by our media . 
I learned to read between the lines at a very early age , thanks to a wise school teacher , and would encourage others to give it a try . 
29th March 2012 - 12:50 The Libya crisis has effectively stifled the UN because China and Russia are well aware how a humanitarian crisis was manipulated to institute military action against one side and regime change -LRB- to one which has already committed acts as brutal as it 's predecessor -RRB- . 
I think the UN should agree to allow China and Russia to get the aid to the people and allowing them to do it militarily if need be . 
29th March 2012 - 11:28 the main reason that assad continues to murder his own people is the lack of a united front within the UN . 
The UN is a joke ; it stands by talking while thousands are slaughtered and fails to even reach a consensus . 
If the UN in its present format had been around in 1939 , it probably would have spent 3 years trying to reach an agreement on what should be done about hitler All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
