Care , confrontation and compromise are essential weapons Friday 21 January 2005 00.05 GMT For Britain 's 1.6 m Muslims , generalisations are deceptive . 
Lumping together wealthy Arabs in west London , poor Punjabis in Birmingham , Bangladeshis from rural Sylhet in Tower Hamlets and middle class Indian Muslims in Leicester , can obscure more than it illuminates , and many familiar problems -LRB- like high unemployment , poor housing and discrimination -RRB- and now mixed in with many less familiar advances -LRB- for example in school results or political clout -RRB- . 
But one issue hangs over every British Muslim : the sincerely held belief of millions of people that a war is now underway between Islam and the west . 
They include belligerent American Christian republicans ; secular European liberals who see Islam as uniquely intolerant , violent and dogmatic -LRB- and Turkey as a mortal threat to the EU -RRB- , and Islamic activists who interpret every event from Chechnya to Iraq as further evidence of a western conspiracy to destroy Islam . 
To the extent that these beliefs gain further ground , we risk a bleak future of further segregation , mistrust and misunderstanding . 
But it 's important to remember that we have been here before . 
England 's Catholics were widely seen as a fifth column 180 years ago . 
They were allied to our historic enemy -LRB- and France was a far more serious threat than al-Qaida will ever be -RRB- . 
They answered to a foreign Pope and , as the public were constantly reminded by ranting Protestant priests , Catholicism threatened our most cherished values of liberty and democracy . 
Yet the clash of civilisations never happened . 
Within a few decades Catholics were being successfully integrated . 
The worst legal discrimination had been removed and the earlier anxieties had come to seem faintly absurd . 
This example confirms the wider lesson of history . 
Conflicts are never caused in any simple way by identity , culture or economics . 
Where resources are scarce , or there are strong historical memories of conflict , small events are more likely to inflame passions . 
But all over the world many communities that might be expected to be divided live happily together , just as many communities that were previously integrated -LRB- like in Yugoslavia , India or Rwanda -RRB- have descended into bitter hatreds . 
What makes the difference ? 
Dealing with underlying structural problems helps , but not as much as how people and institutions behave : whether communities turn a blind eye to provocations ; whether intellectuals and journalists allow lies to take root ; whether leaders whip small resentments into big ones ; whether states respond with sensitivity or crude force . 
For Britain , three conclusions follow . 
First , leaders and institutions need to take great care over what they say and do , whether they are mullahs or ministers . 
One example illustrates the point . 
The wrongful arrest of tens of thousands of British Muslims after the September 11 attacks can be explained by the very poor intelligence the police had , and , just possibly , excused by the fact that a terrorist action in Britain linked to British Muslims would have been hugely damaging . 
But responsible leadership in a diverse society has to mean thinking through all of the possible effects of actions . 
Second , we need to fight the myths on all sides . 
Secular commentators should be challenged when they claim that Islam is uniquely violent -LRB- what about the horrors committed in the name of Christianity , secular communism or for that matter Hinduism -RRB- . 
They should be challenged when they paint Islam as uniquely intolerant -LRB- what of the Emperor Akbar who remains the world 's best example of active rather than passive tolerance -RRB- or as bound to subordinate civil life to religion -LRB- what about Turkish or Ottoman history -RRB- . 
Equally , Salafi extremists operating within Muslim communities should be challenged when they propagate lies about American or Zionist conspiracies . 
They should also be confronted when they exploit real grievances over Palestine but ignore the complexities of Kosovo or Bosnia -LRB- when the west came to the aid of a Muslim minority being oppressed by a Christian majority -RRB- , or the inconvenient fact that the worst slaughter of Muslims of recent years -LRB- in the Iran\/Iraq war -RRB- was at the hands of other Muslims . 
Third , we need new deals to be negotiated ; compromises which allow life to go on and hold resentments at bay . 
Some of those implicit deals are already taking shape : more autonomy to run Islamic schools in return for a commitment to the national curriculum so that children are prepared for life in modern Britain ; more targeted social programs ; more chances for young Muslims -LRB- and their often equally isolated white working class counterparts -RRB- to mix with others . 
Some of these deals may be uncomfortable when they touch on such issues as the non-negotiability of free speech , the possibility of a limited role for sharia law , or a stronger emphasis on English language skills . 
The point is that these all have to be talked about and negotiated politically , not treated as matters of absolute and immovable principle . 
Societies can easily talk themselves into conflict and misery . 
But they can also talk , and act , their way out . 
Geoff Mulgan is director of the Young Foundation . 
