Syrians living in Greece burn posters of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad , in solidarity with anti-government protesters in Syria , outside the Syrian embassy in Athens , May 6 , 2011 . 
AMMAN | Fri May 6 , 2011 9:30 pm BST AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian security forces killed 23 protesters on Friday demanding an end to President Bashar al-Assad 's rule , rights campaigners said , and the European Union agreed to impose sanctions in response to his crackdown . 
Activists and witnesses said demonstrations broke out after the main Friday prayers in cities across the country of 20 million people , from Banias on the Mediterranean coast to Qamishly in the Kurdish east . 
The bloodiest confrontation took place in the city of Homs where 15 protesters were killed , activist Ammar Qurabi said . 
State television said an army officer and four police were killed in Homs by a `` criminal gang , '' though another activist , Wissam Tarif , said witnesses told him nine soldiers defected in Homs to the protesters and may have clashed with other troops . 
International criticism has mounted against Assad , who has gone on the offensive to maintain his family 's four-decade grip on power and crush demonstrators demanding freedom . 
European Union governments agreed on Friday to impose asset freezes and travel restrictions against up to 14 Syrian officials responsible for the violent repression , which rights campaigners say has killed more than 580 people . 
Officials give a lower death toll and say half the fatalities have been soldiers and police , blaming `` armed terrorist groups '' for the violence . 
They say demonstrators are few in number and do not represent the majority of Syrians . 
Assad himself was not among those immediately targeted under the sanctions , which follow last week 's EU agreement in principle to impose an arms embargo on Syria . 
The measures will be approved on Monday if no member state objects . 
Assad 's security forces and troops , which stormed the city of Deraa last week , have prevented demonstrators establishing a platform such as Egypt 's Tahrir Square by blocking access to the capital Damascus . 
But every week protesters have used Friday prayers to launch fresh marches . 
`` The people want the overthrow of the regime , '' shouted 2,000 demonstrators in the Damascus suburb of Saqba . 
A youth riding a motorbike was later killed in Saqba when he approached a roadblock and soldiers opened fire on him , a witness said . 
Footage released on the Internet and aired on Al Jazeera television showed protesters in several towns and cities echoing the same calls for freedom and change of leadership . 
In Hama , where Assad 's father brutally suppressed an armed Islamist uprising in 1982 , a rights activist said security forces shot dead six demonstrators when they fired at a protest . 
The London-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said a protester was killed in Latakia and three others wounded . 
Despite the harsh crackdown , protesters appear determined to maintain demands for an end to years of repression , arrests without trial and corruption by the ruling elite . 
`` The Syrian people will not back down after the country 's budding youths were killed in their hundreds , '' said Montaha al-Atrash of the Syrian human rights organization Sawasiah . 
Opposition leader Riad Seif , who helped initiate a peaceful movement seeking political freedoms and democracy 10 years ago , was arrested at one of Friday 's protests , his daughter said . 
Authorities also arrested on Thursday prominent Damascene preacher Mouaz al-Khatib , a major figure in the uprising , human rights campaigners said on Friday . 
A Western diplomat said 7,000 people had been arrested since the demonstrations broke out on March 18 in Deraa . 
The United States , which sought for the last few years to engage Damascus and loosen its anti-Israel alliances with Iran and militant groups Hezbollah and Hamas , imposed further targeted sanctions against Syrian officials last Friday . 
Last week , Assad ordered the army into Deraa , cradle of the uprising that began with demands for greater freedom and an end to corruption and is now pressing for his removal . 
An ultra-loyalist division led by his brother Maher shelled and machine-gunned Deraa 's old quarter on Saturday , residents said . 
The United States condemned the assault as `` barbaric . '' 
Syrian authorities said on Thursday the army had begun to leave Deraa , but residents described a city still under siege . 
`` With our soul and blood , we will sacrifice for you , Deraa , '' chanted 20,000 protesters in nearby Jassem on Friday . 
Thousands more converged on the town of Tafas , 12 km -LRB- 8 miles -RRB- northwest of Deraa , which remains encircled by tanks , carrying placards with the word `` leave . '' 
Aid workers from the Red Cross and Red Crescent delivered their first emergency relief supplies to Deraa on Thursday , bringing drinking water , food and first aid materials . 
They had no immediate information on casualties in the city . 
Human Rights Watch cited figures from Syrian rights groups saying 350 people had been killed there . 
It urged authorities on Friday to `` lift the siege '' on the city and to halt what it called a nationwide campaign of arbitrary arrests . 
