MANAMA | Fri May 6 , 2011 9:00 am BST MANAMA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Along with its business friendly reputation , another casualty of Bahrain 's crackdown on anti-government protesters could be its crown prince , seen as more reform-minded than others in the ruling family . 
The fading influence of Prince Sheikh Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa puts at stake efforts to liberalise Bahrain 's economy and attract global businesses . 
`` There is no doubt that the hardliners are in control and that there has been a shift in the internal balance within the regime , '' said Shadi Hamid , analyst at the Brookings Doha Centre . 
The crown prince had advocated dialogue with Sunni-led Bahrain 's Shi'ite majority in February to try to defuse tension with mostly Shi'ite protesters who demanded a bigger say in the country 's political and economic affairs . 
But the dialogue failed to take off and the government decided to impose martial law and clear out protesters , aided by troops from Saudi Arabia and other Gulf allies . 
Since then , Sheikh Salman has virtually disappeared from public view and Bahrain 's Sunni ruling family appears to be putting his younger brother Sheikh Nasser bin Hamad al-Khalifa more in the spotlight . 
`` It looks as if the hardliners would like to groom Sheikh Nasser , '' a Gulf-based diplomat who declined to be named said . 
`` He 's on state media almost every day now . '' 
A graduate of Sandhurst military academy , Nasser , 23 , has so far kept out of the spotlight and is known for participating in endurance equestrian events . 
He wed the daughter of Dubai ruler Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum in 2009 . 
At stake are reforms Sheikh Salman initiated to open up the economy to international and local investors , which in turn were aimed at diversifying the economy away from oil income and enable the private sector to create jobs for Bahrain 's youth . 
`` Bahrain does not have the luxury to be hesitant on reform , '' said John Sfakianakis , chief economist at Banque Saudi Fransi . 
`` It now competes with business-friendly financial centres in Qatar , Abu Dhabi , and of course Dubai . 
If businesses leave they will be received elsewhere , '' he said . 
With government finances in a precarious position , Bahrain , a small oil producer , can not afford to plough more funds into ailing state companies such as national carrier Gulf Air GULF . 
UL , which Sheikh Salman wanted to privatise in the long-term . 
The crown prince had slowly wrestled control over business regulations from the hands of Bahrain 's government bureaucracy headed by his long-time rival , Prime Minister Sheikh Khalifa bin Salman al-Khalifa , an uncle of the king who has governed the Gulf island kingdom since its independence four decades ago . 
One example of the rivalry between the two is Bahrain 's airport that was effectively run by the ministry of transportation , previously headed by a son of Sheikh Khalifa . 
It was transferred to private sector management in 2010 after years of resistance by the government administration . 
Transportation was a cornerstone of the crown prince 's strategy to turn Bahrain into a business hub hosting the regional headquarters of multinationals . 
After hardliners said that Iran and Shi'ite movement Hezbollah sponsored the unrest , they forced Gulf Air to suspend its flights to destinations in Iran , Lebanon and Iraq . 
`` International investors will take note of these things , -LRB- Sheikh Salman -RRB- was seen as an economic reformer . 
Now they will ask what is happening to the forces who pushed for privatisation and economic reforms , '' said Sfakianakis . 
Sheikh Nasser now appears in favor , and in recent weeks he has represented the royal family at social occasions and led a campaign for loyalists to demonstrate their allegiance to the royal family . 
`` It is definitely noticeable that Sheikh Nasser has become more prominent , '' said Jane Kinninmont , an analyst at British thinktank Chatham House . 
`` This puts him up there with the senior people , which has not been seen before . '' 
Also gaining influence is Sheikh Khalifa bin Ahmed al-Khalifa , the head of Bahrain 's defense forces , who is thought to be driving the crackdown on the Shi'ite opposition , and his brother , who heads the royal court . 
These factions are thought to have more favor with Bahrain 's Saudi backers , who are wary of Shi'ite political activity as a channel for Iranian influence , and keen to insulate the Gulf from mass protests that toppled regimes in Egypt and Tunisia . 
-LRB- Reporting by Frederik Richter ; Editing by Reed Stevenson and Angus MacSwan -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
