Markets , Liquidity Concerns Roil Industry Constellation Energy Group , parent of Baltimore Gas & Electric , faces a crisis of confidence over the liquidity needs of its trading arm . 
-LRB- By Jay Mallin -- Bloomberg News -RRB- Market turbulence continued to ripple through the energy industry yesterday . 
Constellation Energy Group , parent of Maryland 's biggest utility , was said by a key analyst to be at an `` advanced stage '' in talks to sell part or all of the company after it came under pressure to boost liquidity for its energy-trading business . 
Ethanol giant VeraSun lost three-quarters of its already deeply depressed stock value after saying it would lose up to $ 103 million in the third quarter because it made bad hedging bets on corn . 
And leading oil price bull Goldman Sachs slashed its forecasts for the next few months . 
Less than one month after it reiterated a target of $ 149 a barrel by yearend , Goldman Sachs said the financial crisis and global economic slowdown could push prices down to $ 75 . 
Constellation Energy , one of the country 's top generators of electricity and the parent of Baltimore Gas & Electric , is facing a crisis of confidence over the liquidity needs of its trading arm , which until this year was a profitable and rapidly growing business . 
The company issued a statement saying it was in `` active discussions with potential strategic partners '' and had retained advisers from Morgan Stanley and UBS . 
Standard & Poor 's issued a report saying , `` These strategic options include an outright sale of Constellation , which management has informed us is at an advanced stage . '' 
Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley 's office later said that state regulators would have to approve a sale if it included BGE . 
Constellation 's stock has lost half its value in the past two days and 70 percent of its value since July 31 . 
Its market capitalization yesterday was $ 5.5 billion . 
Constellation officials did not return calls for comment . 
In early August , Constellation disclosed that if its credit rating were downgraded , the company would need $ 3.3 billion in collateral . 
That was about $ 1 billion more than it had previously said would be needed . 
While the revision had no immediate financial impact , it damaged investor and lender confidence . 
`` It was seen more as a lapse in risk management , '' said Aneesh Prabhu , an analyst at S&P , which lowered its credit rating for Constellation to `` BBB '' on Aug. 13 . 
He said crumbling confidence had prompted a small number of counterparties on London 's ICE exchange to already cut off business with Constellation . 
Though they were not significant in amount , Prabhu said `` once it starts , it can certainly snowball . '' 
Analysts said there were concerns that a $ 2 billion credit line that Constellation had negotiated but not closed with Royal Bank of Scotland and Union Bank of Switzerland would fall through . 
But Constellation said yesterday that the credit line was intact . 
S&P 's report said the rating agency had separately contacted the banks , which said they would provide the credit even if an effort to syndicate the loan to other institutions failed , a much greater possibility in the current financial climate . 
