Explore all of our oil spill graphics to track the spill , see its effects , and learn its possible solutions . 
As BP hacked away at a pipe gushing oil at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico , investors sawed off 15 percent , or $ 21.1 billion , of the company 's market value Tuesday . 
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. , during a trip to the Gulf Coast , announced that the Justice Department had launched criminal and civil investigations , adding to pessimism among BP investors reeling from the failed attempt to plug the leaking well over the weekend . 
BP , the world 's fourth-largest company before the April 20 blowout on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , has lost a staggering $ 74.4 billion , or 40 percent , of its market value in six weeks . 
Although investment analysts say the company has pockets deep enough to pay for mounting claims and cleanup costs , the political outcry for making BP pay has added to the uncertainty surrounding its future , especially while oil is still leaking into the Gulf of Mexico . 
President Obama vowed a `` full and vigorous accounting '' of the causes of the oil spill disaster in the gulf , telling the leaders of a new commission that they should pursue the trail of blame without limits . 
Separately , the Justice Department told a federal judge in Houston it opposed the request by Transocean , owner of the Deepwater rig , to limit its liability to $ 27 million under a 1851 maritime law . 
`` This is can not do , '' the department said in its filing . 
Calls for punishing BP intensified . 
Sierra Club Executive Director Michael Brune said : `` BP should pay . 
Not just for the cleanup , but for the lives lost and the natural treasures destroyed . '' 
And on the Web site Talking Points Memo , former labor secretary Robert Reich urged Obama to put BP 's American operations into temporary receivership . 
Meanwhile , BP had begun yet another effort to deal with the spill , using a giant lobster-claw-like slicer to cut off the old damaged pipe that has been twisted on the seafloor . 
A saw then worked on the remaining section of the blowout preventer to make it easier to get a tight fit later this week if BP can successfully lower a new apparatus on top to funnel oil and gas to the surface . 
But the national incident commander , Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , did little to raise hopes of a quick end to the crisis , saying `` We 've got to keep our heads in the game ; we 've got to keep our shoulders to the wheel . '' 
The tense relationship between the Obama administration and BP took a more adversarial turn with Holder 's trip . 
He said that Justice was reviewing statutes such as the Clean Water Act and Oil Pollution Act of 1990 , which could carry penalties of $ 1,100 for every barrel of crude spilled into the gulf , or more if negligence is proved . 
Legal experts said it is likely that BP will face at least a civil federal lawsuit and is already in violation of environmental laws . 
In addition , criminal prosecutors are examining the possibility of false statements , obstruction of justice and conspiracy , federal law enforcement sources said , though they would not say whether evidence of such crimes has emerged . 
Legal experts said this means that investigators are exploring whether BP ignored warning signs before the explosion , falsified records or statements to regulators , or tampered with testing equipment . 
Holder did not specify BP as the target of investigation . 
Numerous contractors are involved with the Deepwater rig . 
The prospect of criminal charges , especially if filed against the corporation as well as individuals , could threaten BP 's leases with the Interior Department and weaken its position in claims negotiations . 
Criminal charges put the accounting firm Arthur Andersen out of business , but other companies that have been the subject of criminal probes have settled and paid fines . 
