A boy sits on an army tank with a poster depicting Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , his sons and assistants as members of a soccer team in Court Square , Benghazi April 24 , 2011 . 
The poster reads '' Mercenaries team '' . 
BENGHAZI , Libya | Sun Apr 24 , 2011 7:02 pm EDT BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi bombarded Misrata on Sunday , a day after rebels celebrated the pullback of government troops from the western Libyan city , a rebel spokesman said . 
`` The situation is very dangerous , '' rebel spokesman Abdelsalam said by telephone from Misrata . 
`` Gaddafi 's brigades started random bombardment in the early hours of this morning . 
The bombardment is still going on . '' 
Captured government troops said on Saturday they had been ordered to retreat from Misrata -- the only major rebel-held city in western Libya -- after a siege of nearly two months , and rebels fighting to overthrow Gaddafi had claimed victory . 
But the mood of victory was short-lived and the prospect of a turning point in the two-month conflict dimmed on Sunday . 
Government forces bombarded three residential areas and the city center , including Tripoli Street , the thoroughfare that has been the scene of intense fighting in recent weeks , Abdelsalam said . 
Rebel spokesman Safieddin said a large part of Tripoli Street was under the control of rebels , and that insurgents had launched an attack on the remaining Gaddafi forces after NATO air strikes on the city in the early hours . 
Rebels have so far been unable to advance from eastern Libya as they fight with Gaddafi 's troops on the coastal road between the towns of Ajdabiyah and Brega , outgunned and lacking cash for equipment and state-building . 
Rebel leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil told a news conference in Kuwait on Sunday that the oil state would contribute 50 million Kuwaiti dinar -LRB- $ 177 million -RRB- to Libya 's rebel council . 
Fellow Gulf Arab state Qatar , which has joined the Western military operations in Libya , has been marketing Libyan oil on behalf of the rebels to help them generate income . 
An arms embargo on Libya is being enforced by NATO , but the rebels also need money to try to create the infrastructure of a state from scratch and care for victims of the conflict as they pursue their two-month-old battle to shake off Gaddafi 's rule . 
`` This amount will help us a lot in paying the salaries of employees who did not receive their little salaries for two months , '' Abdel Jalil said . 
`` We are capable of only covering 40 percent of this amount . 
We are in need of urgent aid . '' 
Hundreds have been killed in the fighting for Misrata , raising fears of a humanitarian crisis in the besieged city . 
Safieddin said at least 36 people had been killed there by Gaddafi 's forces since Saturday : eight during Sunday 's bombardment and 28 on Saturday , many killed by booby-traps left behind by retreating forces . 
More than 100 had been wounded . 
A Qatari ship docked at the Tunisian port of Sousse overnight carrying 127 Libyans and 11 Tunisians from Misrata , the Tunisian state news agency said . 
Rebels in their eastern stronghold Benghazi said they had no expectations of an early end to fighting in Misrata . 
`` I do n't think this is a real withdrawal , '' rebel military spokesman Ahmed Bani told Reuters . 
He said government loyalists might be trying to stoke tensions between Misrata and neighboring towns , and that Gaddafi 's troops might return to the city later under the guise of intervening to protect local tribes from the rebels . 
Libyan Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Kaim had said the army would `` leave it to the tribes and the people around Misrata to deal with the situation , whether by using force or using negotiations . '' 
British Foreign Secretary William Hague told the BBC he doubted Gaddafi 's forces were really going to withdraw . 
`` This may be cover for using more insurgent-type warfare without any uniforms and without tanks . '' 
Britain and France have been leading air strikes against Gaddafi 's forces in an operation mandated by the U.N. Security Council on March 17 to protect civilians in Libya . 
The United States has also deployed Predator drones , using the unmanned plane for the first time on Saturday to attack the site of a multiple rocket launcher near Misrata . 
Libyan state news agency Jana quoted a military source as saying the use of drones was aimed at political assassination . 
Western powers have been bombing Libyan positions for more than a month . 
The United States , Britain and France say they will not stop their air war until Gaddafi leaves power . 
JANA said on Saturday that Prime Minister al-Baghdadi Ali al-Mahmoudi had spoken by telephone to Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou . 
While speaking with Papandreou he `` reiterated Libya 's commitment to United Nations resolutions , '' JANA said . 
The Libyan government has repeatedly announced ceasefires , but failed to halt military operations . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The Libyans are will to sacrifice all to gain their freedom . 
A good article about it can be found at This is a war between a corrupt r gime -- which , however , unlike most corrupt r gimes in the world is not a puppet of and entirely subservient to the West -- on one side , and a bunch of CIA\/MI6\/DGSE-backed opportunists on the other who rely on a passionately gullible educated Libyan minority and social\/tribal divides -LRB- plus an element of anti-sub-Saharan racism -RRB- to sell themselves as freedom fighters . 
The majority of Libyans would choose peace over democracy any day , but the West has made sure to transform an externally-orchestrated protest into an all-out civil war in order to take control of North Africa and drive out China and bring about the New Order . 
Naturally , as the civil war goes on , lives will be disrupted and people killed and others radicalized , and reconciliation becomes impossible , which is just what the West and the opportunist rebel leaders want -LRB- and the r gime was trying to avoid -RRB- . 
If the West truly cared about the civilian population of Libya , far from engineering and taking sides in a civil war , they should n't have orchestrated\/supported the uprising in the first place , and the majority of the civilians in Libya would now be living a normal -LRB- and highly subsidized -RRB- life , just as they were doing a few months ago -LRB- while a powerful lite would continue to make huge profits from shady deals at the expense of the masses , which is also the case in Western `` democracies '' by the way -RRB- . 
With Republicans , we hear of national security and rogue states and the war on terror ; with Democrats , humanitarian crises and `` democratic '' oppositions\/freedom fighters conveniently pop up around the world and get saturation coverage . 
The public explanations change ; the principle of imperialist interventionism does n't . 
Western mass media are the cheerleaders of Western imperialism . 
When Libya 's citizens -LRB- we call them rebels -RRB- say `` free '' they mean they have freedom of movement within the city . 
Gaddafi soldiers & mercenaries only moved to the outskirts of the city and are pounding the city indiscriminately with long range Grad Rockets . 
Gaddafi also laid mines or booby-traps explosives before pulling out , which leaves children playing in huge danger . 
This megalomaniac wants to butcher every man , women and child and never give up until he is dead himself . 
The West has n't realized that until now . 
They thought he would just resign . 
LOL the guy is a psycho , we should have know that when he killed some 300 Americans on flight Pam Am a few years back . 
The rebels will win because that 's their country and their home . 
Hiring BelarousRussians and Chad mercenaries is a pretty sad state of affairs to kill you own citizens and has poisoned their drinking water . 
I hope we will help all we can , and be for once on the right side of history , especially when we are begged to do so by its citizens . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
