WASHINGTON | Wed Jun 23 , 2010 3:57 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Democrats in the House of Representatives have begun drafting legislation to tighten oil industry practices , especially in deep-water drilling projects like the one that has left millions of gallons of oil spewing into the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` We 're working on it , '' House Energy and Commerce Chairman Henry Waxman told Reuters on Tuesday . 
Asked when the legislation might start moving through the House , Waxman responded , `` I do n't have a timetable . '' 
The April 20 explosion on a BP-leased oil rig that led to the worst environmental accident in U.S. history triggered a wave of congressional investigations . 
Following several high-profile hearings , including testimony from top BP officials , bills to address the problem are beginning to move and others are being drafted . 
It 's too early to know how their final versions will look or when Congress might complete the work . 
Waxman 's committee alone has held seven hearings on the oil spill since May 12 . 
One House Democratic aide said that members of the Energy and Commerce Committee `` have heard enough information to at least get started in terms of the regulatory and legislative responses '' to the disaster . 
Last month , President Barack Obama created an independent commission to probe the oil spill . 
But with that panel only now getting organized , Democrats in Congress are not waiting for it to wrap up its work sometime next year , when Republicans likely will hold more seats in the Senate and House . 
`` We want to make sure that where there 's a government permit to allow drilling , that all necessary safety measures are reviewed and approved and that the standards are met , '' Waxman said . 
A House Democratic leadership aide added , `` It 's my understanding '' that Waxman is writing legislation addressing the `` design , maintenance and testing of drilling equipment . '' 
The committee also might hold new hearings , according to House aides , but those sessions have not yet been firmed up . 
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi had set a July 4 deadline for lawmakers to put together ideas on how to deal legislatively with the BP oil spill , which is estimated to be releasing as much as 60,000 barrels of oil a day into Gulf waters . 
A series of bills could be debated in the House in coming weeks . 
On Wednesday , the House was poised to pass a bill granting subpoena power to the Obama-appointed commission . 
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid also is having his committee chairmen write legislation that could be folded into a larger energy and environment bill he hopes to put to a vote in July or early August . 
That bill likely would encourage the use of more alternative fuels by electric utilities in addition to stepping up regulation of drilling . 
It also might impose mandatory carbon dioxide emission reductions to fight global warming , but Democrats are split on this . 
Other oil spill-related bills moving in the House include : -- The House Judiciary Committee on Wednesday approved a bill to expand the type of damages that can be claimed in oil spills . 
Other bills pending in Congress would raise or lift caps on industry liability . 
The Judiciary committee also voted to authorize issuing subpoenas to BP for documents on its Gulf oil spill claims process ; -- House Democrats will try to pass emergency spending legislation soon that includes around $ 200 million for oil spill-related activities . 
The bill also would allow the Interior Department to take more time to review lease requests for oil drilling ; -- House committees are working on bills to improve worker safety in oil spill cleanup efforts and to develop better preparedness standards for offshore energy projects . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
