WASHINGTON | Sat May 21 , 2011 12:03 am BST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The legal team defending former IMF chief Dominique Strauss-Kahn against sexual assault charges has informally sought public relations advice from a Washington consulting firm run by former CIA officers and U.S. diplomats , Reuters has learned . 
TD International is the same company Strauss-Kahn , then a private citizen , hired in 2007 to advise him on how to navigate international and Washington politics in his bid to become managing director of the International Monetary Fund . 
Documents filed in 2008 with the Foreign Agents Registration section of the U.S. Justice Department show that Strauss-Kahn , who is French , retained TD International as his `` U.S.-based communications resource . '' 
Strauss-Kahn , 62 , who was seen as a front-runner for the French presidency until his arrest , has been charged with trying to rape a hotel housekeeper in New York . 
He has denied the charges and his lawyer has said he will plead not guilty . 
A person familiar with the work TD International did for Strauss-Kahn in 2007 said his representatives consulted the firm informally after his arrest last Saturday and asked for advice related to his predicament . 
If the firm at some point becomes formally involved in his defense , the source said , its role will be in helping other Strauss-Kahn advisors , including Paris-based public relations experts , engage in `` crisis management . '' 
But the source , who asked for anonymity , said the firm had not been formally engaged . 
A lawyer for Strauss-Kahn did not respond to a request for comment . 
A spokesman for TD International told Reuters on Friday : `` We do n't comment on client relationships and activities . 
However , our past work with Dominique Strauss-Kahn is accurately reflected in -LRB- Justice Department -RRB- filings . '' 
A contract between TD International and Strauss-Kahn , dated July 18 , 2007 , shows he hired the firm to `` conduct a specific public relations campaign '' and `` work is to begin immediately and continue until ascendancy of client to head of IMF . '' 
The contract says Strauss-Kahn was to pay the firm 20,000 euros -LRB- 17,448 British pounds -RRB- , then equivalent to about $ 27,600 . 
According to the source , TD International helped advise Strauss-Kahn on U.S. and international political manoeuvring related to the choice of a new IMF chief . 
The global lender has always been headed by a western European but the former French finance minister 's bid for the post was being challenged by Russia and a group of developing nations , who were strongly pushing their own candidates . 
In addition to advising Strauss-Kahn on political matters , TD International introduced him to journalists from media such as the Wall Street Journal and Financial Times . 
The 2007 contract was signed on TD International 's behalf by Ronald Slimp , who the firm 's website says was a former U.S. diplomat and trade negotiator . 
The website describes the firm 's founder , William Green , as a former diplomat who is fluent in French and `` participated in the management of the Anglo-American and U.S.-Canadian intelligence relationships when posted to Washington . '' 
The website identifies two other partners in the firm as former CIA officers . 
Justice Department filings show TD International was also registered as the U.S. representative of Yulia Tymoshenko , a leader of the `` Orange Revolution '' in Ukraine and a one-time prime minister . 
A 2007 press release posted on the firm 's website says it was the `` registered representative of Ms. Tymoshenko 's political party . '' 
