The Syrian Arab Red Crescent says its vice-president , Abdulrazak Jbeiro , has been shot dead . 
The Red Crescent said he was killed as he drove from Damascus to Idlib - a focal point of the Syrian conflict . 
It condemned the killing . 
Across Syria , 24 people were killed on Wednesday , said activists . 
The Syrian army is reported to be on the second day of an offensive against insurgents in the central city of Hama . '' 
-LRB- Mr Jbeiro -RRB- was shot . 
Circumstances are still unclear , '' Beatrice Megevand-Roggo , head of International Committee of the Red Cross -LRB- ICRC -RRB- operations for the Near and Middle East , told Reuters news agency . 
`` Regardless of the circumstances , the ICRC condemns this very severely , '' she added . 
We are unable to update that figure - 5,000 and more is a huge figure and should really shock the international community into taking action '' End Quote Navi Pillay UN High Commissioner for Human Rights `` The lack of respect for medical services is still a great issue in Syria . '' 
Anti-government activists the Local Co-ordination Committees -LRB- LCC -RRB- blamed his death on `` security forces '' , while Syrian state news agency Sana pointed the finger at `` a terrorist group '' . 
Sana said the shooting occurred in the Khan Shiekoun area . 
`` The group opened fire with a machine-gun , hitting him in the head . 
He was taken to hospital where he died , '' Sana reported , according to news agency AFP . 
As well as being vice-president , Dr Jbeiro was the head official in the northern city of Idlib . 
Twenty-four Syrians died on Wednesday , the LCC said - six of them soldiers from the Free Syrian Army in clashes in Damascus suburbs . 
In Homs , a woman and her five-year-old child reportedly died when a shell hit their home during clashes between troops and men believed to be defecting soldiers . 
Troops and defecting soldiers are said to be clashing in Homs In Hama , four people died on the second day of a government bombardment , LCC said . 
One of them was a Christian priest , Father Bassilius Nassar , who was helping a wounded man . 
Sana said he was killed by `` an armed terrorist group '' , according to AFP . 
But LCC said the priest was `` martyred '' during `` a military campaign conducted by the regime 's forces '' . 
The Syrian regime blames `` terrorist gangs '' , saying they are part of an international conspiracy against Syria , for unrest that has swept the country since mid-March 2011 . 
The UN said in early December that more than 5,000 people had died in the Syrian unrest . 
Speaking on her way into a Security Council briefing , the UN human rights chief Navi Pillay said more people had been killed since then but her office had not updated the death toll because of difficulties getting information . 
More than 5,000 civilians killed since March , the UN said in early December UN denied access to Syria Information gathered from NGOs , sources in Syria and Syrians who have fled Vast majority of casualties were unarmed , but the figure may include armed defectors Tally does not include serving members of the security forces `` We are experiencing difficulties now because of the fragmentation on the ground , '' she said . 
`` Some areas are totally closed , such as parts of Homs , so we are unable to update that figure . 
But in my view 5,000 and more is a huge figure and should really shock the international community into taking action . '' 
As the fighting in Syria continues , diplomats at the UN say European and Arab nations are meeting to try to draft a new UN resolution to address the crisis . 
A previous attempt was blocked by Russia and China , and on Wednesday Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said he was open to `` constructive proposals '' to end the violence . 
But he reiterated his opposition to the use of force or sanctions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
