Judging by Jarhead , Sam Mendes 's film about the first Gulf war , the American war movie is n't growing up much . 
But it is adapting to the times You can tell Sam Mendes 's Jarhead is self-conscious by the number of nervous references it makes to several of older and better war movies . 
Mendes is as slick and meretricious here in Desert Storm as he was in the suburbs of American Beauty and among the reach-me-down neo-noir cliches of Road to Perdition , but I congratulate him for taking on his big-budget predecessors like a new fish in the jailhouse preemptively stomping the wing daddies . 
First up is Apocalypse Now , whose Ride of the Valkyries sequence is viewed by a packed audience of ecstatically war-hungry Marines , fresh out of boot camp , all screaming `` Bu - Bu-Buh-Bom-Bom ! '' 
as the rockets fly and the bodies burn . 
Which , ironists may note , was probably not the effect intended by Francis Ford Coppola , who by many accounts let his own anti-war movie turn him into an on-set General Patton , a man whose biopic he 'd co-written a decade earlier . 
The Deerhunter , fraudulent then and now , fares worse . 
One Marine 's wife mails a video copy for him to watch with his platoon , but after the credits - including , cheekily , `` directed by Michael Cimino '' - the footage has been taped over by the grunt 's wife back home with footage of herself getting bonked by the neighbor . 
After congress is concluded she gives the lens the finger and dumps her Clean Marine . 
I like to think that 's also Mendes 's rigid digit to Cimino . 
Elsewhere , he 's not nearly so clever . 
His boot camp scenes are pure Full Metal Jacket , and in places the tone veers from M \* A \* S \* H \* - style service comedy to Catch-22 absurdism , propelled by the sun-dazed musings of sensitive soldier-writer Jake Gyllenhaal , himself a cliche harking back to self-conscious scribbling infantrymen such as James Jones and Norman Mailer . 
Jarhead seems unable to decide exactly what kind of war movie it wants to be . 
Judging by Jarhead , the American war movie is n't growing up much , but it is adapting to the times . 
Once upon a time , back in the Good War and after , it was John Wayne , lock-and-load , no doubts , no blood , and lashings of the Andrews Sisters . 
Then came Vietnam , fought on the myths those earlier movies promulgated , and everything went all `` frag the lieutenant ! '' 
, ears for souvenirs , the smell of napalm in the morning , and nothing but blood and doubt , all pumped up by Creedence and Stax . 
Everything was green and brown , an iconography of jungle and rice paddy , monsoon and mosquitoes . 
Of course , before Americans saw all this in the movies , they had to watch it on the news every night for a decade . 
No less green and wet were the recent second world war do-over movies like Saving Private Ryan , which let directors shed gallons of plasma that were n't permissible in the 1940s and 50s , and yet wave the flag as if John Wayne was still among us . 
Band of Brothers was broadcast literally on the eve of war , almost as if the Ministry of Truth had willed it : the handiest war-nostalgia boom ever . 
Still , they went easy on the Andrews Sisters , so there was an upside . 
Which brings us to Jarhead . 
Typically , the first Iraq movie made during the Iraq war proper turns out to be about the other Iraq war , the one that lasted 100 hours and offered no battle time , no money-shot , for most of the troops expecting to fight in it . 
If Jarhead had any discernible politics , it might give the infinitely savvier Three Kings a run for its money , but no : Mendes seems content to use one Marine 's comment as his own alibi : `` Fuck politics . 
The rest is bullshit . '' 
This is a fraudulent disavowal of reality heard pretty much daily from senators and pundits - and , I suspect , from movie execs eyeing potential receipts in the Red States - during our own Iraq war , the one with all the bodies . 
Still , just the accident of its release at this moment almost makes it feel more political than it is . 
