Relatives of some of those who died in the July 7 suicide bombings are expected to boycott today 's multi-faith service of remembrance at St Paul 's Cathedral . 
Families of a handful of the 52 men and women who died are understood to be planning to stay away because they feel overwhelmed by anger . 
Some are bitter about what they say is a failure of support from the government in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks . 
Others blame Tony Blair 's decision to go to war in Iraq for making London more vulnerable to suicide bombings . 
Sean Cassidy , whose son , Ciaran , 24 , was killed in the Russell Square bomb , said he would attend the service today with his wife , Veronica , and daughter , Lisa , because he hoped to be able to speak to Mr Blair to express his anger . 
`` As far as I am concerned there would be no memorial service if it was n't for the war in Iraq , '' he said . 
`` I never thought of not going because I want to speak to Mr Blair to have a little chat about the war . 
I am not sure what the protocol will be but I would like to speak to him . 
Everyone knows the war made us more vulnerable to attack , but Mr Blair wo n't say it . 
There are some families who say they are n't going because they are angry at the lack of support from the government . 
I am still very angry , it just does n't go away , it just comes to you every couple of hours . 
You just ca n't get away from it . '' 
Many relatives have communicated their feelings over a special secure website set up for families to share their experiences . 
Issues around the government 's much-criticised compensation scheme , the war in Iraq and the feeling that not enough practical support has been provided by ministers have been discussed on the site . 
For the 2,300 strong congregation expected today , however , the focus will be on healing . 
`` I think they have done the honorable thing by holding a proper memorial like this , '' said Graham Russell , whose son Philip , 29 , died in the Tavistock Square bus bombing . 
`` I hope they do those that died proud and I suspect they will . '' 
Most of the relatives will attend today 's service , with some traveling from as far afield as New Zealand , Australia and Bangladesh . 
Conducted by the Dean of St Paul 's , the Very Reverend John Moses and attended by Mr Blair , the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh , the 55-minute service is designed to reflect the religious and cultural diversity of London and those who died or were injured . 
Of the 52 people who were killed , 36 were British citizens and families of the other 16 , who came from countries as diverse as Mauritania , Ireland , Italy , Nigeria , Grenada , Poland , France , New Zealand , Ghana and Bangladesh , have flown into London to be at the service today . 
In an opening bidding , the dean will speak of the resolve of countless men and women of different faiths and cultures to live together in peace . 
Four candles , representing each of the locations where the suicide bombers struck - Aldgate , Edgware Road , King 's Cross and Tavistock Square - will form the focal point of the service as they are carried to the Dome altar by emergency and transport staff . 
They will be followed by bereaved families of individuals who died in the three tube attacks and the bomb on the No 30 bus . 
The driver of the bus , George Psaradakis , had been due to carry the Tavistock Square candle but he is suffering severe post-traumatic stress and understood to be too ill to attend . 
After meetings with the culture secretary , Tessa Jowell , last week several families were asked if they would like to meet the Queen following the service . 
It was an invitation which divided one family . 
Louise Gray , whose husband Richard , 41 , was killed in the Aldgate blast , told the London Evening Standard that her son Adam , 11 , was refusing to go to the service but his sister , Ruby , seven , would be presenting a posy to the Queen . 
Mrs Gray said Adam blamed Mr Blair for making London vulnerable to the terrorist attack which killed his father as he traveled to work from his home in Ipswich . 
`` He -LRB- Adam -RRB- is very angry . 
He fully understands what happened . 
He is very angry with the bombers but he also blames the war and he blames the government . 
He does n't want to be part of anything that has Tony Blair there . '' 
But she said Ruby decided to come after being asked by the organisers to present a posy to the Queen . 
Other families who will meet the Queen include Graham and Janet Foulkes , the parents of David Foulkes , 22 , a Guardian employee and one of the youngest to die in the bombings . 
-LRB- The service begins at 3pm -RRB- Processional hymn Praise to the Lord , the Almighty , the King of Creation The bidding given by the Dean of St Paul 's , Dr John Moses , followed by The Lord 's Prayer Anthem O Vos Omnes qui Transitis per viam -LRB- All ye that pass by behold -RRB- Reading Isaiah 51.1-6 , read by Ken Livingstone , the mayor of London Hymn Judge Eternal , Throned in Splendour Sermon given by the Archbishop of Canterbury , Dr Rowan Williams Hymn Father Hear The Prayer We Offer In remembrance and thanksgiving led by Cardinal Cormac Murphy-O'Connor , Archbishop of Westminster , and the Rev Esme Beswick , co-president of Churches Together in England Kyrie Eleison by Maurice Durufl , sung by the choir . 
