U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Gaddafi forces still hold Brega oil terminal , refinery BENGHAZI , Libya | Fri Aug 12 , 2011 6:37 pm IST BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Troops loyal to Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi are still in control of the oil terminal and refinery of the strategic eastern port of Brega despite rebel advances , a spokesman for rebel forces said on Friday . 
The two sides have been battling for months over Brega , 750 km east of Tripoli . 
The rebels see securing the oil facilities as a tipping point in the war and hope to resume oil exports from there as quickly as possible . 
Rebels said they had captured a residential area of Brega on Thursday . 
But spokesman Mohammed Zawawi told reporters it was still not safe to go into the city . 
The oil terminal is about 15 kms -LRB- about 10 miles -RRB- from the residential district . 
`` Now we 're trying to clear that area . 
There are some Gaddafi troops still there , '' said Mohammed Zawawi . 
`` Gaddafi troops are shooting rockets into the city . '' 
Gaddafi is clinging to power despite a near five-month-old NATO air campaign , tightening economic sanctions , and a lengthening war with rebels trying to end his 41-year rule . 
The rebels have seized large swathes of the North African state , but are deeply divided and lack experience , and Thursday 's gains in the east broke weeks of stalemate . 
In the west , rebel forces driving north towards the town of Zawiyah , within striking distance of Gaddafi 's strongold in the capital , have not moved up from Thursday 's positions . 
Rebels said they had reached the village of Bir Shuaib , some 25 km -LRB- 15 miles -RRB- from Zawiyah , which has unsuccessfully risen up against Gaddafi twice this year . 
Reuters interviewed a captured intelligence officer who said Gaddafi had reinforced Zawiyah , which also has a coastal oil refinery , with about 1,000 conscripts . 
But there were no heavy weapons there and no African mercenaries as rebels insist . 
Brigadier-General Al-Hadi al-Ujaili predicted the rebels would face a hard fight to capture the town . 
He said Gaddafi still enjoys strong support in Tripoli and among Libya 's main tribes , which he said was crucial . 
The western battle is one of three widely separated rebel fronts against Gaddafi forces . 
In the east around the ports of Misrata and Brega , fighting had been bogged down in recent weeks while the western rebels have advanced . 
Misrata , a sea port on the Mediterranean under rebel control for months , is about 500 kms -LRB- 300 miles -RRB- east of Brega Zawiyah lies less than 50 km west of Tripoli , on the main road to Tunisia , which has been a lifeline for Libya but has begun to crack down on rampant smuggling of gasoline . 
Rebels in the western mountains do not operate as a single force , as each town has its own command . 
But when they join forces for major operations they can muster a few thousand men . 
In an effort to pile economic and military pressure on Gaddafi , more countries are set to announce next week that they will free frozen assets for the rebels , a British official said . 
`` While it 's hard to predict when this will end , it 's easy to see the pressure is building on Gaddafi and it is only a matter of time before he 's forced to leave power , '' the official said . 
Britain is playing a leading role in NATO air strikes against Gaddafi 's forces , which have weakened his armoury but have not enabled the rebels to deliver a knockout blow . 
Tightening the economic noose around Gaddafi , Tunisia said on Thursday its troops were patrolling fuel stations to curb the flow of smuggled gasoline into neighbouring Libya . 
International sanctions and the effects of Libya 's civil war have disrupted normal supplies of fuel to parts of the country under Gaddafi 's control , but huge volumes of gasoline are instead being smuggled across the Libyan-Tunisian border . 
`` The armed forces are now conducting checks at fuel stations in the south of Tunisia ... so that neither Tunisians nor Libyans can fill up with large quantities , '' Tunisian defense ministry official Mokhtar Ben Nasr told a news conference . 
`` These checks are aimed at preventing the smuggling of diesel and gasoline to Libya . '' 
