The long arm of the global financial crisis reached down into Morena Parada 's preschool classroom , where a little girl named Joeli Arias-Lopez painted bright green and orange splotches on an oversize easel and pronounced it a house . 
The 4-year-old was blissfully unaware that her school , the Child and Family Network Center , stays open in this converted warehouse with a grant from the now-foundering Freddie Mac Foundation . 
Or that without that money , which was expected last month , her school , filled with bright puzzles , toys , blocks and dedicated teachers , might end the year early or close down altogether . 
For 15 years the Freddie Mac Foundation , one of the largest corporate donors in the Washington region , has helped this little preschool , which charges nothing and serves about 150 needy children at six locations in Alexandria and Arlington County , stay afloat . 
But when the government announced in September that it had taken over the mortgage-finance giant to avert a collapse , officials put all charitable grants on hold , just two days before the preschool 's grant was expected to be approved . 
Now the preschool is in limbo . 
No one can tell its officials when or whether their grant , and those of several other area organizations that work primarily to help children and families , will come through . 
`` Which of these kids do you want to tell ca n't have an education ? '' 
asked Steve Nearman , the preschool 's board chairman , watching Joeli paint as other classmates sang `` Twinkle , Twinkle , Little Star , '' played with blocks or traced butterflies with stencils . 
`` They 're not widgets . 
They 're the future of our community . '' 
The board is also considering cutting back on social work services it provides to help families become self-sufficient , scaling back English classes for parents or closing the school early , Nearman said . 
The school year normally ends late in June . 
Without Freddie Mac 's $ 250,000 , or about 14 percent of the school 's $ 1.8 million budget , the school might be lucky to make it to March . 
And with the economic downturn affecting everyone 's bottom line and donation habits , school officials do n't count on anyone else to pick up the slack . 
Chief Operating Officer Lee Jackson has a stack of bills on his desk . 
He pays the ones he must , such as the mortgage , utilities and food for the children 's meals . 
The others he `` prioritizes . '' 
`` People think about the financial crisis , and they think about corporate executives , '' said Barbara Fox Mason , the preschool 's director . 
`` They do n't realize how it 's affecting people from the other side of the street . '' 
The Freddie Mac money is usually the one donation Mason can depend on . 
In July , as in previous years , Mason met with a Freddie Mac official to craft the school 's grant proposal . 
Two days later , Freddie Mac called and told her to expect $ 350,000 . 
Although she had submitted a grant proposal for that amount , to be conservative , Mason budgeted $ 250,000 , which is what the school had received in previous years . 
`` It was n't irresponsible of us to put in our budget what they typically give us , '' she said . 
`` They were the rock . 
No one saw this coming . '' 
In early September , Mason was gathering the documentation required as part of the grant process , including information showing the school 's success . 
-LRB- Independent bench marks show the preschool 's students , who often start far behind their peers , progress at twice the national average through the year . -RRB- 
Then , Sept. 9 , two days after the federal government announced the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac takeovers , Mason got a call on her cellphone saying the Sept. 11 board meeting to approve grants had been postponed . 
And she has n't heard anything since . 
`` We 're under conservatorship , and as the conservator said in September , they 're reviewing our charitable investments , both for the company and the foundation , '' said Shawn Flaherty , spokeswoman for the Freddie Mac Foundation . 
`` Final decisions have n't been made . 
It 's an ongoing process . '' 
With the delay , Mason was forced to ask the City of Alexandria to release about $ 150,000 earmarked for the preschool now rather than in January . 
Those funds will keep the lights on through March , Mason said . 
`` Otherwise , we could n't make it . '' 
