Russia Prime Minister Vladimir Putin said the intervention reminded him of the medieval call for crusades : In Bill Clinton s times they bombed Yugoslavia and Belgrade , Bush sent troops to Afghanistan and then , under a made-up and absolutely false excuse they sent troops to Iraq , liquidated all Iraqi authorities , even children from Saddam Hussein s family were killed . 
Now its Libya s turn . 
They use protection of civilians as an excuse . 
But it is the civilian population who perish in air raids . 
So where is the logic and conscience ? 
There is none of both . 
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev broke publically with Putin on this - a very rare event -- saying of Putin s remarks , `` Under no circumstances is it acceptable to use expressions which essentially lead to a clash of civilizations . 
`` The blood-soaked tempests that Iraq has undergone for eight years and the unspeakable suffering of its people are a mirror and a warning . 
The military attacks on Libya are , following on the Afghan and Iraq wars , the third time that some countries have launched armed action against sovereign countries . 
It should be seen that every time military means are used to address crises , that is a blow to the United Nations Charter and the rules of international relations . 
In its argument , the newspaper said military actions will add to the domestic chaos in Libya and possibly strengthen Gadhafi . 
Furthermore , it argued that Libya may descend into anarchy as a loosely connected tribal society . 
The external affairs minister of India , S M Krishna , told reporters : We view with grave concern the ongoing violence , strikes and deteriorating humanitarian situation in Libya . 
We regret the air strikes that are taking place ... India calls upon all parties to abjure violence and the use of threat and force to resolve the differences . 
I think the need of the hour is cessation of armed conflict . 
Meanwhile , the African Union has called for an end to all military actions in Libya . 
Mauritania President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz , whose country is hosting the union s summit right now , added that the African Union rejects the idea of foreign military intervention in Libya , regardless of its form . 
The fact that we know so little about the domestic context among non-regime actors in Libya is precisely the reason that the types of external intervention currently taking place are likely to backfire . 
On Libyan news site Jeel-Libya , Salem Ben Ammar writes approvingly of international intervention , calling this the beginning of the countdown to the end of the cowardly tyrant Gadhafi . 
Also supporting the intervention is the London Evening Standard . 
In an editorial , it writes : The air strikes against Libyan government targets have had one good outcome : the rebel stronghold of Benghazi did not fall , as it would otherwise have done , and the inevitable massacre of rebels did not take place . 
France Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said : The initial success of our intervention is clear . 
If we had done nothing , Benghazi would be a bloodbath . 
We saved the civilians of Benghazi . 
Greg Sheridan of The Australian writes : Even if this results in a prolonged stalemate it is much better than outright victory for Gaddafi . 
And in fact the precedents are not too bad . 
For nearly a decade the U.S. and its allies enforced a no-fly zone against Saddam Hussein 's forces over the Kurdish areas of northern Iraq . 
The de facto state that developed there was liberal and well run by Middle Eastern standards and has been central to the democratic dialogue in post-Saddam Iraq . 
In the United States , Washington Post columnist David Ignatius compliments the Obama administration s handling of the intervention in Libya : President Obama is turning a page , by letting other nations take the first whacks at Moammar Gaddafi , no question about that . 
But that strikes me as good strategy , not a feckless blunder . 
What s increasingly clear watching the play of events over the past week is that Obama really does want to change the narrative about America and the Arab world even at the cost of being criticized as vacillating and weak-willed . 
He senses -LRB- rightly , in my view -RRB- that over the past several decades America , without really intending to , became a post-colonial power in the Middle East . 
The narrative of American military intervention stretches from Lebanon to Iraq to Afghanistan , with the ghastly interlude of Sept. 11 , 2001 . 
Obama seems determined to break with it . 
He really is the un-Bush . 
In Germany , foreign minister Guido Westerwelle said : It is the responsibility of every country to decide if they 'll support a military intervention or not . 
We always said we would n't send soldiers . 
This does not mean we are neutral , this does not mean that we have any sympathy with the dictator -LRB- Muammar -RRB- Qaddafi . 
-LRB- But -RRB- we calculated the risks , and when we see that three days after this intervention began , the Arab League has already criticised this intervention , I think we see we had good reasons . 
Germans reflect this ambivalence . 
A survey in the Bild am Sonntag newspaper found that 62 % of respondents supported international intervention , while 31 % were against it . 
Despite their support for international intervention , the majority of Germans did not want their country involved . 
German pundits worry that this stance will hurt Germany 's global standing . 
Amrit Naresh of The Local newspaper writes : Did we isolate ourselves ? 
In a way , yes . 
Did we damage our room to maneuver ? 
We have lost a little bit of credibility in the Security Council , I believe , with this cautiousness . 
Amr Moussa , secretary-general of the Arab League , stepped back from his earlier criticism of airstrikes and said the Arab League and the U.N. Security Council are united on the need to protect civilians . 
Another Arab League official , however , said saving Libya from Moammar Gadhafi 's forces was `` an Arab and nationalist duty '' above all , and warned that the situation in the North African state was `` very dangerous . '' 
Who do you agree with ? 
I agree with the opponents . 
This aggression is absolutely unacceptable . 
Now Gaddafis military bases are destroyed , so what 's next ? 
The Rebels will be armed and have the upper hand ? 
Those loyal to the regime ca n't fight back and have to surrender unconditionally . 
Will there be peace in the country ? 
Do we outsiders know whether we are doing the right thing , when we rule in favor or against one of the two warring parties . 
March 21 , 2011 at 2:20 pm | Reply Is it just ?? Were you there defending the Libyan people from murder , torture and persecution for the last 41 years ? 
Did n't think so . 
The only `` just '' solution would be if every tree in Libya was adorned with a hung Gadaffi supporter . 
After all the years of atrocities commited by his regime the opposition deserves a `` JUST '' revenge and I hope they get it . 
March 21 , 2011 at 2:44 pm | Reply If the justified premise is that we are saving innocent civilians , then we must start bombing Israel , get rid of that War Criminal Beni ' . 
Israel continues to terrorize Palestinians with Tomahawk 's and F15 's , tanks , and modern weapons of terror . 
While the Palestinians are armed with sticks and stone and absolute determination to recover some of their Nation stolen by the Euro-Jews , the Kazars . 
March 25 , 2011 at 4:37 am | I agree with Niclas . 
Let 's put it in prospective . 
When people are fighting for freedom and liberty from tyrants like Mr. Kaddafi , we should not be ashamed , fearful , or scared of confronting `` evil '' . 
Like some typical neighborhoods , if everyone accept thugs to run around rampant , doing what ever they want , and causing you to live in fear and in your home with bars , or even worse , pretend you do n't see it and agree with them -- what type of life is that ? 
Only dogs and animals ready to be killed live like that . 
When an entire neighborhood stands up for their rights , we should stand with them -LRB- and not on the sidelines waiting to see where the wind blows -RRB- . 
So many people are fearful of taking the right action , in standing by the right thing to do . 
Ask yourself , what is the right thing to do when you see a tyrant , dictator going after his own people ? 
You stand up like a real man , a `` human '' and go against them . 
If I were in Libya , I would be right across from Kaddafi 's home , ready to blast him out to kingdom come . 
Let the free people of Libya finally achieve their aspirations and dreams of freedom , liberty and happiness -LRB- yes the principles of the US Constitution which we in America live and die for -- not sit around and wait for others to defend us -RRB- . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:01 am | At least it is named the ` evening ' standard , hopefully the sun is setting on its ` standard ' : their standard is this : the inevitable massacre of rebels did not take place . 
What then of the ` the inevitable massacre of Gadaffi loyalists ? ' 
Oh and the civilians I keep forgetting them civilians . 
Now trapped in the Devils Triangle formed by Gaddafi , the Allies and the rebels . 
All this to protect them . 
I am sure they are more than touched . 
March 21 , 2011 at 8:16 pm | Reply so we 'll just stand buy + watch this tyrant butcher his people , fill his pockets and the west support him because he has stolen his countries oil ? 
March 22 , 2011 at 11:33 pm | Reply March 23 , 2011 at 1:09 am | Reply Sometimes , going with `` the devil we know '' is a reasonable strategy . 
In this case , whoever replaces Gaddafi can not possibly be worse . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:34 pm | Reply Agreed 100 % with the opponent . 
This is another war that disguise themselve in pretext of humanity but the end its is all about the OIL . 
March 24 , 2011 at 7:58 am | Reply Hey J. von , I fully agreed your comment . 
I think this so called UN resolution 1973 for intervention in libya is unacceptable and it is all about west hungry thirst of LIBYA OIL that 's it . 
USA , UK and FRANCE are hypocrat and playing double standard in libyan internal conflict because looking at IVORY COAST conflict whereby thousands and thousands of innocent civilians are being killing by the president who lost last year election but refused to cede and as many as 700000 displace people . 
What did USA , UK , and FRANCE do about that ? 
The answer is clear NO. . 
Because there is no OIL in Ivory Coast . 
Did they intervene in Darfur , Sudan ? 
Do n't judge me wrong i have never like Qaddafi before and i will never like him but what west is doing in his country is criminal act and they will be revenge by Qaddafi 's sympathizers around the world in coming months or years to those international countries who attack him with their bombs . 
Qaddafi have a lot supporter even in AMERICAN SOIL , FRANCE AND UK . 
March 28 , 2011 at 12:14 pm | Reply Is n't it ironic Putin is the one to criticizing the US ? 
The same Putin who 's invaded Georgia , stolen big chunks of it 's territory , who 's a former graduate of the most vicious terrorist organization , the KGB , who likes to kill off his opponents with plutonium , or to simply make them disappear . 
Those who are `` lucky '' find themselves charged with trumped up charges and thrown into a prison . 
Journalists who 're critical of him simply die off . 
Putin is a Russian thug president and the only reason he 's speaking out is because he fears a regime change in Libya might lead to lower oil prices . 
It wo n't , but it only shows his ignorance . 
March 21 , 2011 at 2:40 pm | Reply Putin ' likes to kill off his opponents with plutonium , or to simply make them disappear ' Too bad he is opposed . 
We could have really used him in Libya March 21 , 2011 at 8:27 pm | Reply Putin 's concern is more of a jumpin point for the upcoming election -RRB- Im sure he will be running against Medvedev March 23 , 2011 at 11:42 pm | Reply I wish and pray Putin contest against the current president so that USA can shot da hell out being world police . 
I hope obama lose re = election 2012 because he give an empty campiagn promises . 
He called mcain Bush 's third term but he is carbon copy bush policy . 
USA attack China for their human right record or try to bring democracy there but causing pro democracy violent protest like you are doing to Libyan governement . 
March 28 , 2011 at 12:23 pm | Het dude . . 
backoff with those PUTIN remarks . . 
He The Man ... not some sissy you can antognise with ... Treat Him With Respect pal ... Salute to all the B.R.I.C for their stand against the war ... March 24 , 2011 at 8:02 am | Reply May 14 , 2011 at 5:42 am | Whether Christian , Muslim , Hindu or any other religion , all people deserve respect and dignity . 
Regardless of how the Libyan situation turns out , this was the right thing to do . 
Putin is a born again ex-KGB who would love the old days to return . 
He is no one to criticise the coalition . 
For the first time in years , a lot of people in my circle express their approval of the intervention , the US has gone up in our estimate for what it is worth and your president deserves respect for the way he has handled the situation . 
I ca n't believe the criticism that is being directed at him . 
He is doing his best to restore America 's credibility in the world and is not doing a bad job at all . 
I think it is incredible that the educated young people of the Arab world have finally woken up and realized that their enemy is not the west but they have home made enemies who lust for power and will do anything to cling to it . 
Well done to the US and international coalition including the pusillanimous Arab League ! 
March 26 , 2011 at 7:40 am | Reply Before getting to upset with Putin , remember that Russia is the only country in the world that can destroy the US in about one hour ! 
March 27 , 2011 at 3:50 am | May 14 , 2011 at 5:52 am | You got it wo n't affect gas prices because oil companies are greedy mongers !!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I say go for it with caution -- who will come into power in all these countries -- I also want to comment on the woman attacked in the hotel with the # $ @ ! 
roughly trying to cover her head and now saying she is prostitute -- Ihave thought about her on nd off the last 24 hours wondering if she is really alive or mostly faced the SAME thing she was speaking out against . 
Whatever happened to the 4th reporter ? 
One day all will lay down their arms . 
March 28 , 2011 at 9:36 am | Reply Will be more equatable if the same applied to Saudi , Bahrain and Yemen . 
March 21 , 2011 at 2:59 pm | Reply With the exception of Yemen , those countries have n't used nearly the level of violence that Gadahfi has used -LRB- yet -RRB- in suppressing the demonstrators and , while there has been government violence in Bahrain , it 's nowhere near the point where the government and people ca n't negotiate , especially since the US has so much more influence in Bahrain . 
As for Yemen , it looks like the president there is on his way out after all , hopefully with a minimum of chaos . 
March 22 , 2011 at 12:12 am | Reply alllooo brother Jim ... hell you were not there at all those country ... just get all info by setting on your lazy chair via Ipad ... hmmm ... get your ticket and fly to those place dude . . 
see it for yourself ... March 24 , 2011 at 8:14 am | I 'm new to this , but feel so disgusted by the British government and the rest of the so called coalitions hypocrites . 
The smug glee is shameful the contradictions so vulgar and the murderous intent so self righteous and so self self serving . 
The news channels a cross the world also seem to sensationalize , their reporters seem subjective with selective hearing and do n't let the facts get in the way of a closed mind or self fulfilling prophecy . 
Since when does two wrongs make a right . 
Is air support to the revolutionaries counter attacks establishing a cease fire or imposing a murderous will on others for ones own intent or beliefs . 
Why are we not protecting civilians in Bahrain , Yemen , Syria or Saudi Arabia by enforcing a cease fire . 
Why were we not asked to vote on this ? 
Who gave Cameron\/Clegg the right to take us to war again in a self righteous crusade . 
Why not let the Arab Countries take responsibility for their own management and development . 
The Drone attacks by the US in Pakistan and Afghanistan and the so called calculated collateral damage is as bad as any genocide for ones own goals . 
March 21 , 2011 at 5:44 pm | Reply Drone attacks against terrorists count as genocide ? 
Take another hit from the crack pipe . 
March 23 , 2011 at 1:10 am | Reply Where was your outrage when Ghaddafi was using artillery to bombard his own civilians , and pulling wounded out of hospitals and executing them ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:41 pm | Reply Bahrain , Yemen and Saudi Arabia are our close allies . 
Therefore , we have to adopt a different standard , let us put it in this way , when approaching the issue . 
That is why we have begun airstrikes on Libya while turning a blind eye to what 's happening in Bahrain , Yeman which are also ruled by dictators . 
We have got our national interests to safeguard , bearing in mind . 
March 27 , 2011 at 11:53 pm | Reply I agree with shug . 
Fareed , let 's get one thing absolutely clear . 
Protection of civilians is not the reason for the no fly zone and the military action . 
If there is one thing the United Nations has proven it is that it can and will stand by when civilians are being killed . 
I am surprised the Arab League did not call for a no fly zone to protect their ` brothers ' in Gaza . 
Every person in the world , including those in remote tribal villages who has access to world news know two things : One : The United Nations will not always intervene to protect civilians Two : If there is intervention there are some other interests involved . 
Those so called world leaders have not learned how to lie or handle their public relations . 
Why should the Arab League choose to ask for protection of rebels -LRB- see Times article -RRB- -- sorry -- civilians in this country , Libya ? 
Are they interested in establishing a totalitarian Muslim state ? 
It seems to be so . 
And there is the oill . 
Black Gold it is called , perhaps I know why . 
More precious is `` Red Gold '' the precious blood that runs in the veins of all of us who are human . 
Red Gold is to be preserved at all costs , conserved at all costs , protected at all costs , and is priceless . 
However you can get a barrel for the price of a few cruise missiles though . 
March 21 , 2011 at 8:09 pm | Reply Why the heck would the Arab League be interested in a totalitarian islamic state in Libya ? 
these are all secular dictators and most of them are terrified of Iran\/The Muslim Brotherhood -LRB- except the Saudis , who are just stupid not crazy -RRB- March 22 , 2011 at 12:15 am | Reply The ` UN ' is not an entity , it is a meeting place for nations . 
The UN can not act towards the protection of civilians in the majority of cases -- we were very lucky to get this resolution passed . 
You rationalization that the UN has not been able to act in previous cases nullifies the current initiative is false . 
Ghaddafi was on the brink of massacre in Benghazi , and was comitting bold-faced atrocities on a daily basis , we had little choice . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:45 pm | Reply Who gives a crap about oil . 
Every damn country on this planet , from America to China play politics to get their oil supply . 
Every American ca n't live without it -- from plastic to fuel to power our autos and power plants , every damn country needs oil . 
The US gets less than 2 % of it 's oil from Libya -- Europe gets more oil from Libya and China is just around the block up there . 
That said , times have changed gentlemen . 
The Arabs are in revolt against their governments . 
They now demand some common things we American preach : Liberty , Freedom and democracy to vote without fear . 
We should be happy to assist them in limited form to achieve their aspirations . 
And let 's get serious , any person not living in Libya who supports keeping Qaddafi around should go live in Tripoli under Qaddafi . 
I can guarantee you you will either be his prized trophy , his bitch , or you will be in a hole somewhere with bullets across your body . 
Now do you want to live like that ? 
Enjoy the freedom you have . 
If you never lived in a dictatorship country with tyrants running it , you should enjoy the experience some day . 
You will definitely be on the next day out . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:13 am | Reply WHY LIBYA ? 
Why not those governments who have been committing genocide for years ? 
The UN has turned a blind eye to `` non oil rich '' parts of the African Continent . 
Why was this vote and order thrown down so quickly ? 
Bahrain and Yemen are both firing on their citizens ; where is the UN ordered attacks there ? 
I 'm no fan of Ghadaffi -LCB- sp -RCB- but I know that beyond a shadow of a doubt the US , France and Britian would attack their citizens -LRB- probably with greater force -RRB- if they were attacked by militants or rebels as armed as the `` protesters '' in Libya ! 
And i am sure the UN would look the other way ? 
March 22 , 2011 at 12:10 am | Reply You 've got your causality mixed up , this did n't start with an armed rebellion , it started when Gadhaffi attacked nonviolent demonstrators , leading them to take up arms to defend themselves . 
March 22 , 2011 at 12:17 am | Reply aloo brother jim ... you werent there . . 
they were told to disperse peacefully be ingorant and been carried away with so called revelotion ... they all had gun and light weapon carried during so called peaceful demostration which end up gun fire sling toward the autorithy ... and then hell break loose ... This war is Domestic own libya affair ... We tend to forget what UN do for people of Palestin in Gaza Raid ... Where is the resolution for that ... Where the No Fly Zone for Gaza ... March 24 , 2011 at 8:10 am | Well ... we Americans and Europeans turn our eyes when killings occurred in Rwanda and in the former Yugoslavia in the mid-90 's under the Clinton Administration . 
And over 400,000 died of genocide . 
We lived in guilt and agreed never to sand by when such actions occur in the future . 
So we have decided to take a stand , and stand for humanity . 
A stand where hopefully in the future , we will teach the future world generation that genocide and killing innocent people as a very good reason to use military force to save a population . 
In fact , this is one good reason to use military force . 
The future benefits and learnings will carry through for generations . 
Finally , let it be known that the Arabs have taken head to President Obama when he travel to Egypt in 2009 and gave a speech about Freedom and Democracy . 
2 years latter , that Arab population is taking the call and rightfully so . 
The journey is still long and hard ... however , the Arab countries , after 30-40 years of tyrants and dictatorship rule , was bound to have revolutions to overthrow their current governments , and move more towards democratic rule . 
As the Arab countries and world start to see the US as holding to it 's principles of protecting the Libyan people who are struggling for their right to Freedom , Liberty and democracy , they will start to appreciate America for what it is -- a true democracy which stands by it 's principles -- Freedom , Liberty , the land of the brave . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:24 am | Reply Dear Barney , please send your gound forces into Bahrain , Syria and Yemen . 
Please take a equatable stance rather than a double standard if you truely have a sound mind in addition to a big heart . 
March 28 , 2011 at 12:08 am | It is very interesting to me that we -LRB- United States -RRB- have to take the lead to help and protect people all over the world while other countries stand by and do nothing . 
Yes , I realize we have partners in all of our various conflicts , but we are always in the lead and we are always bearing the greatest cost , and for what ? 
I guess we did n't learn anything from Iraq . 
We went in , got Saddam out , then started taking fire from people who hated and opposed him , but feared him . 
Why would we thing that Libya would be any different ? 
Yeah , yeah , Ghadaffi fired on peaceful protesters . 
How long did it take for those peaceful protesters to pick up weapons and fire back ? 
Not long at all . 
Makes you wonder how long it would have been before they were the ones who started shooting . 
Hey , next we should give them money , or weapons , or both and see how long before those weapons are fired at us . 
I say , let them sort it out and we concentrate more energy on helping Japan or maybe work on creating more jobs in the U.S. . 
March 22 , 2011 at 8:50 am | Reply It was FRANCE and the UK that were pushing for this , and led the first assaults . 
The US would not be intervening were it not for them . 
The US is merely laying down the first salvo , and then handing over the operation to them . 
There are a dozen other countries involved , and UK France will at the end of the day be shouldering the bulk of the work . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:55 pm | Reply I think you should be the one getting facts straight . 
Take a look at what it is costing the U.S. and what it is costing other countries . 
I guess you think the 200 cruise missles we have already fired are cheap ? 
Do you really think anyone else is going to be spending as much as we do on this ? 
I wasnt talking about taking the lead in a political sense , i was referring to the military involvement and yes we are apparently going to step aside and let someone else run the operation . 
It sure doesnt mean we arent going to spend the most money on it . 
March 24 , 2011 at 8:03 am | It shows that we Americans can stand for our principles , our rights and freedom . 
We do n't wobble through adversity and we fight for what is right . 
God Bless America , the only country that has the guts to do what is right , and admit when it is wrong . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:26 am | Reply I agree with you Barney . 
There is no other country I would rather be than here in the good ol' U.S of A. March 27 , 2011 at 1:56 am | Jersey wrote : ` let them sort it out and we concentrate more energy on helping Japan or maybe work on creating more jobs in the U.S. . ' 
I agree !!!!!! And if the government ran out of things to do , try dealing with the murder rates in this country , they would have saved over 15,000 lives of US citizens in 2009 . 
Now here 's a humantarian reason . 
March 22 , 2011 at 1:19 pm | Reply Why did n't we help the Sudanese Christians when they were being slaughtered in Sudan ? 
They seemed more deserving than rebel Libyans who cheered when the Lockerbee bomber was flown back to Libya . 
This is a civil war in Libya and the rebels do n't have much more in common with the US than do other Arabs . 
Christian Sundanese however ... ... March 22 , 2011 at 2:32 pm | Reply Your logic is totally flawed -- this argument of ` we did n't help then , therefor all attempts to help are merely covers for some other motivation ' is FALSE . 
The world lives in constant despair , and there is rarely a time when we can act and make good of the situation . 
The facts on the ground were extreme and military action was concise and effective -- which is rarely the case . 
Stop whining like a child , grow up and face the facts of the world . 
March 23 , 2011 at 5:48 pm | Reply Are you kidding ? 
Because they 're christians they 're more deserving of aid than another group of HUMANS who are being killed off ? 
Hold this grenade real quick . 
Your an idiot no one 's more deserving of help because they share your false idol-ism of an imaginary god . 
The UN def has alterior motives , as do all politicians . 
We only see and hear what they decide to show and tell ALWAYS remember that . 
We as Americans need to focus on ourselves , we 're trillions in debt , spent a hundred million in one day the first day we did our air strikes on Gadafhi , we 're no more prepared for a nuclear event than the tech savy japan was , and just because our Allies want to play `` world saviors '' does n't mean we follow the leader . 
I completely agree that genocide and mass murder of the innocent will eventually have your soul tortured , but many other countries in the UN were already going to F Gadafhi up we need to put our resources and minds towards new fuel systems , lowering taxes -LRB- which are outttta control ! -RRB- 
, and becoming the country Americans believe we are . 
March 24 , 2011 at 12:35 am | Reply What exactly is the U.N. 1973 Resloution ? 
I believe we should help people in need , but when you go to a country that people do not like us very much , thats where the delima is . 
Shouls we or should we not ? 
March 22 , 2011 at 2:50 pm | Reply last week Gaza attacked Isreal no one helped the reason no oil March 22 , 2011 at 4:29 pm | Reply you a-holes could go back n forth on that for years . . 
like you have March 24 , 2011 at 12:50 am | Reply Its unbelievable how the so called allies have taken on to the crusade , the unrest in the in ME has significantly increased the price of Fuel in my country UK . 
Our govt try to blame others of our problems . 
I just want to know how many civilians have opposed gaddafi , the population of Libya is 6.5 m and i believe the majority adores Gaddafi just as the cubans love castro . 
So i dont know how they say they are doing the greated good for the civilian population . 
In our country we had demonstration about tuition fees it got nasty , the govt took hard action , so answer this question can the arab league intervene to protect civilians of UK ? 
THis is whats happening in libya who the hell ask the UN for help . 
I dont believe the majority libyans did . 
THe UN is controlled by western countries and the US they dont give a toss about the arabs or the asians they will never side with them . 
The so called allies say they have support of some arab nation obviously they will as the allies are probably threathening them . 
The way they spun it with the media its unbelievable , i am still waiting for the UN to act on Israel who for over 60 years have brutally murdered and maimed Palestinains . 
Thats a fact , this will never be hidden away in history . 
March 22 , 2011 at 4:55 pm | Reply `` last week Gaza attacked Isreal no one helped the reason no oil '' I think you are just plain ignorant , either you have rose tinted glasses on or you dont know the facts . 
If you live in the states your media doesnt tell you the full story . 
March 22 , 2011 at 5:01 pm | Reply 158 cruise missiles fired at Libya X 1,066,465.00 ea = $ 168,501,470.00 One lost f-15 fighter = $ 30,000,000.00 for a total of $ 198,501,470.00 wasted money Real math ... real facts . 
And we are need to shut down the govt . 
Come on Mr. President . 
This is a joke March 22 , 2011 at 6:04 pm | Reply Here we go again . 
We can all find a pro con in this segment of our lives but what should have happened from the onset was for Gaddafi to step down when he saw how the people of Libya did not want him or his family ruling them anymore . 
The first time he spoke and said he will not go and his son who ranted on and on proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that with this type of mentality they displayed , they were going to rain hell on his own people . 
Can you imagine , just for a second , if one of our presidents said they will not leave power and then have our own military sent out to kill us . 
And you want to tell me that you would n't cry for help from other countries to please do something . 
For the UN to step in and take him out ??!! The problem all of these countries have including ours , is so intrenched with the power and love of money that this will never , ever , ever end . 
Ever !! March 22 , 2011 at 6:21 pm | Reply When is Uncle Sam going to protect Palestinian and Lebanese civilians from the zionist enterprise ? 
Ah ... well ... never ... March 22 , 2011 at 6:37 pm | Reply LOOK !! FORCES ARE AS BAD AS THE DICTATOR WOUNDING INNOCENT PEOPLE INNOCENT ENVIRONMENTS HOW SAD STOP THE BOMBING ALL SIT DOWN AND TALK FOR THE SAKE OF PEACE !! March 23 , 2011 at 5:28 am | Reply yeah right . 
Try talking to a dictator and tyrant who is bi-polar . 
The only negotiating discussion he knows is through the barrel of the pistol . 
Like a thug in the inner cities , they do n't understand the concept of sitting down and negotiating . 
It is always one sided and only under their terms . 
Let 's get real and wake up with what is really going on in the world . 
America may have been civilized after the brutal wars of the last 200 years . 
But many in Africa are still living under tribal , brutal , intimidation , and under dictators . 
Yes they may have more modern weapons -LRB- versus spears and machetes -RRB- , use facebook and twitter , etc. . 
But it 's the same crap over the last 400 years ... just more visible realtime information over CNN March 25 , 2011 at 1:54 pm | Reply NEXT YEAR THE COUNTRY WILL BE IN DEBT AND WE ALL HAVE TO CUT EVERYTHING -- SORRY FOR THE STUDENT GRANDS ' CUT THE MONEY IS FOR THE BOMBINGS THE WORST TO SEE i.e. . 
THE DESTRUCTION , THE POOR CHILDREN KILLED IN MISRATA BY CO-FORCE TUESDAY -- THIS IS TO HELP THE LIBIAN PEOPLE MADE THING WORSE ALL EXCUSE ABOUT HELPING WHERE IS GOD ? 
WHY DO WE HAVE SUCH LEADERS IN THE WORLD MAY BE WE DONOT NEED SUCH LEADERS AT ALL EVERYONE IN POWER DO NOT KNOW THE WORD MORAL RESPECT ALL LIFE ... STOP WAR NOW GET TALKING PLEASE MAKE PEACE SA THEY PROMISED WHEN ELECTED ... March 23 , 2011 at 5:46 am | Reply Furthermore , the people we are protecting in Libya right now are the very same people who traveled to Irag and Afghanistan to fight against us . 
Ghadafi has said that what he is fighting is Al-Qaeda extremists in his country . 
Now , I certainly do now support him as he is a brutal dictator and just plain crazy , but that statement is probably more accurate than anything else we have heard from him so far . 
So which band of lunatics and extremists do we back in Libya is the question . 
Does n't really seem to matter . 
Either way , the US will be accused of trying to steal oil and kill Muslims . 
Again , I will say , let them sort it out . 
If Arab countries are reluctant to provide assistance to the rebels , why are we so eager to help ? 
March 23 , 2011 at 7:48 am | Reply I agree with u. its time mmow for US to care about there people . 
Actually arab league has to intervene to solve the problems in libya . 
March 28 , 2011 at 10:53 am | Reply i really do n't think anyone should intervene , we should remember that humans do n't change just like that ... they get evolved with their surrounding environment changing . 
imagine how people in war zones can get evolved . . 
i do n't think most of us can even imagine that . . 
give peace a chance . . 
leave the morons to be happy been puppets . . 
i think the nature does need its morons to go on like this . . 
if we try to equip them with knowledge we 've got . . 
they just tend to ruin it . . 
i think leaving the cults to fight among themselves wwould be the best thing for others to do . . 
March 23 , 2011 at 7:59 am | Reply Thanks for adding to the cluster-f -- k Obama , w\/out explaining the expected outcome . 
The rebels do n't seem to have a clue either . 
Perhaps this will leave a hole for more organized groups , say Hezbollah , maybe al-qaeda ? 
Or some rich corp. . 
Just what the world needs . 
March 23 , 2011 at 9:39 am | Reply Oh . 
Britain and France need Libyan oil , especially since the BP fiasco . 
March 23 , 2011 at 9:43 am | Reply As of 2011 , the Earth countries are still like 100 yrs or 1000 yrs ago : speak your opinion with your guns . 
So go get a bigger gun ! 
March 23 , 2011 at 10:15 am | Reply I guess all the other countries should really keep out of it , but ask the UN to get involved and control the matter . 
UN was created with such a purpose and if it is not getting involved , we need a better goup out there . 
If any country gets involved in any other countries internal ` war ' affairs , we 'd all say that they are here for something or other , like in the case of Libiya -- oil . 
UN on the other hand would not seem to have any ` personal ' interest , thus it is really high time for them to step in . 
March 23 , 2011 at 11:56 am | Reply I agree with President Obama 's actions . 
The Libyan rebels needed help , Ghadafi would have massacred them if the United states and other nations had not interviend . 
What is our military for , if not to defend and to help people that want Democracy ? 
Now it is my opinion that we arm the rebels with 15yr old machine guns and sniper rifles so they can advance toward Tripoli . 
March 23 , 2011 at 12:24 pm | Reply Mark , the same people you say you agree with Obama about protecting are the same ones who flocked to Irag and Afghanistan to fight against us . 
Government reports show that more foreign fighters came out of eastern Libya than from anywhere else . 
Guess who they were shooting at ? 
Our forces in those countries . 
Now you think we should arm them ? 
I hope we arent that stupid . 
March 23 , 2011 at 1:40 pm | Reply There is no any form of Legality in the western military campaign in Libya , the so call legality , is pure ignominious Illegal action which was lobbied for by the American , British and France , it was obvious that the military campaign was motivated by the Libyan vast oil reserve which has long been control by Qaddafi and sons , of which the imperialist are not happy with , Any country has the right to have their own form of Government to rule their masses ; all nations can not be democratic , Never the less why don t these so democracy campaigners go to Britain and sack the Queen who still remain the head of Government irrespective of her role or other European monarchy ruled countries , why should the Imperialist support criminals with arms who want to sack their head of Government or king in Bahrain . 
It is just too obvious that there is an unseen hand controlling events underground in the countries where revolution has become the other of the day . 
Let the true Libyans rise up to resist the Cockroach Called Imperialist western Allied force ; whose missions are aimed at toppling Governments who does not dance to their tune via sponsored criminal revolution backed up by military power . 
The second point here is that , it becomes a crime when the citizen of any country takes up arm against its Government ; would an American , British or French citizen protest against their Government with Guns and explosive , and such group of people not be locked up forever or even shot dead by their law enforcement agencies , This is a new era crusaders where the lawless Imperialist , tend to portray their selves as the true law upholders . 
This is called Impunity of the modern era Never the less if these lawless imperialist thinks they want justice for the so called masses they don t give a dame about ; why do n't they go to Yemen where nerve gas has been used against armless civilians ? 
Or even Cote d ivoire were Lauren Gbagbo has been massacring innocent civilians . 
Please Western imperialist group of criminal who steals and loot the resources of Nations through the back door to enrich their Bankrupted Economy . 
Let these western imperialist criminals quit Libya now and do n't turn the Country to another Iraq . 
And my last message to Ban ki moon and Amir Moussa the head of Arab league , you are a Cockroach and a puppet and tools in hand Bankrupted western imperialist . 
Quit now , you are all syndicate in this shameful Crusade , code name LIBERATION . 
March 23 , 2011 at 12:24 pm | Reply I support the military action against Ghadafi , who rules the Libya long time with his iron fist . 
However , I also worry about the security of innocent people living in the cities , where the war erupted . 
The dictatorship of Ghadafi is deserved to be wiped out and all people of Libya would be free from fear , and any kind of suffering caused by this regime . 
When there is no such a regime , the freedom and democracy would be improved . 
What 's next after Ghadafi ? 
I support the idea to construct Libya with a democracy , of which this country could accept and adapt it . 
After Ghadafi , all foreign military forces should be withdrawn from Libya because Libya really do not need a neo-imperialist and neo-capitalist controlling their country . 
March 23 , 2011 at 1:33 pm | Reply Perfect example of what I have been saying . 
So you support our military going in there and helping the rebels by bombing Ghadafi 's forces , but you think we want to control Libya ? 
So we are spending billions of U.S. dollars doing this and that 's great in your book , but after Ghadafi is removed , you dont want us around , right ? 
Then we go back to being murderers and thieves in your mind ? 
That is exactly why we should stay out of it and let them sort it out . 
I really dont care who kills who over there , its always going to be the same old story that you all think we want to steal your oil and whatever else it is that we supposedly do . 
We should just take the money we are spending on helping these bastards and invest it in our own country . 
Let 's create jobs and improve infrastructure in America and let these morons blow each other up . 
March 23 , 2011 at 1:57 pm | Reply UN and Western Powers go and force Israel to abide by UN resolutions and make them stop killing civilians , and get off Palestine land ... Same way they go and stop Saudis , Bahrain and Jordanian 's governments killing civilians ... Then the attack and no fly zone of Libya would be justified ... Ivory Coast has two presidents for so long , and both sides killing civilians ... Where 's the Western Powers ... March 23 , 2011 at 2:04 pm | Reply First , I think that what we 're seeing the US do is partly a result of what has n't been done in the past . 
We look back at what happened in Sudan and other countries where we did n't intervene , and we 're ashamed . 
That we did n't step in earlier in Darfur is inexcusable . 
Now we were given a chance to stop another insane dictator from going in and killing an entire portion of the population , and we took it . 
Some people are upset because we sided with the rebels by acting . 
But had we not , we would have passively watched a massacre on CNN , and the headline would have been , `` how many did n't have to ? '' 
Leaving Libya alone would be the act of siding with Qaddafi . 
We certainly should n't invade Libya , but I 'm proud of us for giving them a fighting chance by evening the playing field . 
People here have been pointing out how we have n't been intervening in other countries in exactly the same way . 
I do n't think we should , nor do I think that would be even possible . 
But this shows that we can try when given a good opportunity . 
And if other countries know that we can and will , that will help things so that we wo n't have to . 
I 'll be very interested in seeing what happens when we stop using oil for gasoline , and then we still help out a middle eastern country . 
Will people say its because we need to satiate the American palm date barons ? 
And for those of you who spout those gems about `` why do n't we worry about our own problems '' , I would suggest that just because your cable news channel only has one feed on does n't mean that the rest of the country is n't doing anything . 
If you want to stop crime or poverty in your own country , I suggest you become a cop or a social worker . 
March 23 , 2011 at 2:45 pm | Reply Robin Hood come to America . 
President Obama make the first big mistake in 21\/2 years , because he listen to Sakozy and Cameron + the Arab league . 
Those country create they own terrorist and will never live peace . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:27 pm | Reply In the past , Western made the war to promote the effect of democracy and freedom to many countries on their benefit . 
They did not care any poor countries . 
Russia and China stand opposition with democracy and freedom to make money by sell their weapon . 
The war in the the world is never stop . 
Today is a 21 century . 
Everything must be change . 
First , the UN must be define clearly : who are UN ? 
What are they stand for ? 
How did they vote in the past ? 
Is it fair for every members ? 
They must be change the rules and the way contribution too . 
Each members should contribute 0.5 GDP and their vote equal on their contribution . 
The UN will solve all problem in the world on standing for democracy and freedom to everyone and any countries within fair and equal , without effected by any countries . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:40 pm | Reply The solution can be anything else rather than bombing which has so many dark sides as we all know from bloodsheds to increasing tax paid by everyone . 
I have not read or study much about politics but ONE CENTAL POINT THAT I CONCERN IS ANOTHER IRAQ WAR IT IS SO DEPRESSING NO WHERE IS SAVED AS MORE TERRORISTS AFTER ANY WARS I supposed Life will be threatened -LRB- e.g. at the airport everytimes going abroad all this checking ; Olympic game coming soon more money for security check to protect the people from terrorism , and so on . . 
AS the Tyrant has so much in the Swiss bank could have been frozen it and try to make negotiation with him to help his people better , that is the UN 's job should have done and proposed rather than using FORCES it is not the BEST CHOICE really . . 
May be it is not too late to leave the War zone NOW ? 
Yes , I believe this tyrant should be ruined , but at what cost to us ? 
Our economy is challenged enough by fighting two fronts , but three now with Lybia ?!!!!! What are we some global cops !!!! March 23 , 2011 at 4:52 pm | Reply I think president Obama should worry more about his country . 
He rather spend money on people that dont even like us . 
That money could be used to help all our HOMELESS COMBAT VETERANS !!!!!!!!!!! March 23 , 2011 at 6:13 pm | Reply Robin Hood come to America . 
United Nation is run by the super power country anyway . 
I give you aid and you vote for me . 
March 23 , 2011 at 6:20 pm | Reply When will America realize that everything in this world changes and may soon come to pass ? 
When will America learn from her bitter and humiliating experience in Vietnam over five decades ago ? 
PLEASE , Uncle Sam , stop pretending that you are still mighty , powerful and strong as you used to be . 
PLEASE , confine you emaciated and dying tentacles within your shores . 
Lest , before you know it , the Four Dreadful Horsemen are already mercilessly galloping in your doorstep . 
March 23 , 2011 at 10:48 pm | Reply Are you serious Rommel ? 
Without the US 's help do you think your country would be where it is today ? 
I bet you have relatives or know someone who lives here . 
Ask them about their opinion and perception of the U.S. March 27 , 2011 at 2:16 am | Reply I agree with Putin , China , India that it is wrong , but two of those countries should have vetoed the impending tragedy . 
If China , Russia Germany and India were to gain and retain respect , they have to stop being on the sidelines . 
Mednedev is trying to get into the Un security Council but that is useless . 
Anything UN is typo mistake for US . 
The US action has put dear China into the cockpit of the Middle East and African economic revival initiative commodity-wise and Russia will now sell more arms to the new arab states . 
True that abstention in voting shows empathy , but it has to go further than that . 
After the betrayal of friends like Mubarak and perhaps later on of Saleh and the multiple kings , all of the successors will arm themselves to the teeth and no country will dare give up nuclear power or any firing power to the US\/UN . 
Iraq gave up 38 skud missiles via Bix and shortly afterwards , Bush took Iraq like taking candy from a baby , with the help of the european stoogies and boasted of allied power . 
It was the UN that disabled Saddam and could not stop Bush to go for the jugular . 
Khadafi gave up his weapons and chemicals . 
He went down the same way . 
When he had these weapons , no one dared to touch him , just like when Saddam had his toys . 
Iran and North Korea are smarter than the world give them credit for . 
Iran will not be put in the same spot as the discussed two . 
North Korea has to hold out for some time yet until the rest of the world powers can start to use the veto in the UN . 
The US is not worried about using veto power . 
It does it many times a year , mostly to protect Israel . 
When will the veto wielding powers start to face their political responsibility to the less powerful of the world ? 
I am disappointed in the behavior of India . 
They are very happy with the golden apple handed to them by bush for their nuclear agreement . 
Yes , this agreement will put a limit to the viability and autonomy of the Indian people . 
The golden apple was a state visit to the White House and photo op . 
Now they have their nuclear , what next ? 
Do they have earthquakes in India ? 
March 24 , 2011 at 12:12 am | Reply despite the `` flood of lies and confusion created `` U.S. failed to draw China and Russia to the approval of military intervention in Libya by the Security Council . 
The dynamics of events is marking the failure of the Plan A to overthrow Gaddafi to `` popular protest . '' 
Plan B failed armed coup with the `` Libyan revolution '' orchestrated by the CIA and the Pentagon from Egypt . 
The `` rebels '' and admit international agencies are surrounded for three days and under constant attack from the forces of Kadafi . 
And the signs are that , for the many divisions of the imperial camp , begins to fail the Plan C of the international military intervention to end the president and control the Libyan oil . 
The plan of `` international mediation '' presented by Chavez on his part and has the support of the Arab League and the positions against `` foreign interference `` in Libya began to be boosted by Russia , China and Iran . 
This whole scenario indicates that , despite forecasts of its `` final irreversible , '' Gaddafi still alive and fighting back as the outcome and resolution of the situation in Libya remains uncertain March 24 , 2011 at 1:55 am | Reply Life s a bitch and then you die . 
No one should have stepped in but they did and now it s too late . 
Hopefully it was the correct thing to do and all turns out ok . 
On one hand Ghadafi looks to be an insane crazy person out to kill the weak people who apposed him on the other hand who are the rest of us do decide what the future of another nation should be . 
Also as I have noticed everyone asking after all is said and done , what now ? 
Will the same allies protect the evil Ghadafi and his supporters when the tables are turned and the rebels start to kill them all ? 
What is the future of Libya now ? 
Will it be a peacful healthy civilization as for the results of the present situation and how does it even concern the rest of the world . 
What about all the other places that people are being brutalized and pushed around in . 
Is it the rest of the world duty to fix everyone s problems one at a time ? 
Yee-gads , what a world what a headache , thank God we all die sooner or later and get out of here ! 
March 24 , 2011 at 2:32 am | Reply The main thing is the leaders who are corrupted then their people suffer everywhere in different degrees . 
Leader should qualify about Respecting Life and not Greedy like disgraceful creatures !!! I can not even bear to look at some leaders LIERS ... REAL Paracites . 
The UN leaders need to get the talking not the bombing if the Tyrant wouldnot talk we can freeze his money in the Swiss Bank but not FORCES from the beginning should have done this still not too late STOP THE WAR STOP THE WAR it will only make things worse -- not just money but CASULTIS , dead peope and environment damaged and terrirism increaded ... ... ... ... ... ... March 24 , 2011 at 5:46 am | Reply Dr. Ali Hamdi , author of the healing bill book America has never abandoned any of its friends or allies ; to say nothing of an unarmed nation who has been mercilessly murdered by militia members and mercenaries from Cuba , Venezuela , Chad , Mali , Zimbabwe , and other parts of Africa . 
It is therefore unfair to criticize the very nations that freed Kuwait , Afghanistan , Iraq , Kosovo , and Bosnia & Herzegovina for helping a tormented nation . 
I am very much aware that for the Chinese regime which like the Libyan one has massacred its own people in Tiananmen square and Tibet and the Russian government which killed thousands of innocent people in Chechnya and elsewhere deem the Libyan blood to be cheaper than a drop of oil and it is perhaps colorless . 
March 24 , 2011 at 9:23 am | Reply Dr. Ali Hamdi , author of the healing bill book The Security Council must regard corruption and its related offenses as intentional crimes and treat corruption , violation of human rights and the monopolization of authority and power the same way genocides , ethnic cleansing , and hostile activities against other nations are treated . 
When Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait , the Security Council issued many resolutions to deter him although the population of Kuwait was only three million . 
The Security Council is therefore requested to issue similar resolutions and arrest the Arab dictators who violated human rights and enslaved not only three million but hundreds of millions of their fellow citizens . 
Because of the stronghold that many Arab dictators have firmed up and the ineffectiveness of coups , the reform in countries of atrocity necessitates the intervention of the United States , the Security Council , Human Rights Organizations , the Civilized World and the International Community as a whole . 
There are many grounds to support such intervention ; terrorism has begun in such countries as a result of the dictators violation of Human Rights and then spread like a cancer into the whole planet from such corrupt countries . 
Our dictators should solely be liable to the International Community for the pandemic-like diffusion of the ethical disease that destabilized the world and weakened the developed countries economy . 
It is a horrible mistake to believe that Saddam Hussein was the only one who raised money for terrorist organizations or harbored terrorists ; most of the Arab dictators have been doing the same thing in three ways : while some of them supported the terrorists to shake the Israeli security , others have either harbored them with a view to destabilizing their neighbors or just to repel their chanceful hoax . 
Our dictators have been propagating hate ideas that threaten the convergence that is realized in respect of the dialogue of civilizations , not to mention their continuous violation of human rights and the inhuman practices a lot of people have unnecessarily undergone on part of such despotic dictators and their militias ; this situation pushed a lot of desperate people to join the terrorist groups in quest of getting rid of their lives . 
The Security Council , which is supposed to reconcile between countries , must enact laws that enable the International Community 's interference in respect of the sought after reform in any country and issue resolutions with regard to dictators and officials who oppress their fellow citizens . 
Oppressed citizens mustn t only be regarded as refugees and incarcerated like kettle in refugee camps , but must be treated with respect and great concern ; as for their claims , they must be given the same dimensions and level of concern that is usually given to cases filed against war criminals . 
Arab dictators must be summoned to Amsterdam , New York , Geneva , or any foreign country and prosecuted and punished for the crimes they committed as in Saddam Hussein and Slobodan Milosevic 's cases . 
If they are found guilty , they must be arrested , toppled , and punished . 
Their victims must be well represented and allowed to talk the way we witnessed during Saddam s trial ; further more , such victims must be accommodated in five star hotels and enjoy the same services and respect their foes may enjoy all throughout the time of their trials . 
Because a country is according to the United Nations Organization composed of its inhabitants and its land , sea and air , violating the inhabitants rights must impose the interference of the International Community and the Security Council whether the offender is a foreign country or from amongst the same country . 
Justice can not be fully established if partiality finds its way to the United Nations Judiciary System or the Security Council s offices . 
It is the responsibility of superpowers like the USA , Great Britain , France , Germany , Australia , and other peace-loving countries to launch this initiative to clean the world from injustice and dictatorial regimes . 
Being named The United Nations Organization and not The United Countries Organization clearly indicates that the nations are the most important factor in the said Organization as the name suggests . 
The United Nations Secretary General and his staff know that a lot of people throughout the world have been going through injustice and deprivation on part of their dictators ; even though , no measures have been taken to diminish their sufferance , yet . 
Every time a Secretary General is elected we rejoice and expect to see him issuing deterring resolutions , but apparently justice has not been amongst the United Nations ' concerns as far as the red carpets are laid to the Secretary General by such dictators . 
Are the leaders more important to the United Nations Organization than the millions of people the dictators have enslaved ? 
If the answer is yes then the International Organization must change its name to read : the United Leaders Organization . 
Since the answer is no , this Organization must assume its full responsibilities and free the millions of oppressed people around the world and establish justice in their countries . 
The inhabitants of this planet who are the basis of the foundation of the United Nations Organization rely on their Organization , the United States of America , the Civilized World and all countries that love peace and justice to topple the last dictators and free the world . 
We can not wait anymore to see the world completely free of evil and injustice . 
The United Nations is therefore requested to establish courts where ordinary citizens can complain against their leaders and sue them whenever they violate human rights , transgress or monopolize the dominion . 
The United Stated of America has taken a vital part in preaching and spreading democracy in the world and has successfully changed the destiny of many nations ; however , many oppressed nations are still waiting to see the 101st Airborne Division , the 3rd Infantry Divisions , and other American brigades and battalions dumping the dictators in hell . 
The dictators have always formulated trivial pretexts with a view to coating the violations of human rights in such entities with false sovereignty pretexts , and claimed that local affairs of their countries must be treated within their territories without foreign interference . 
Such ostensible excuses mustn t be acceptable to the International Community anymore , because they have helped envelope the despotic leaders crimes with an illegal tricky legitimacy ; they are the same pretexts that helped a lot of Arab and African dictators kill millions of their fellow citizens . 
The United Nations Organization is requested to enact laws that enable observers from the International Community to see and report how oppressed nations are living , because the horrible life conditions that a lot of people have been going through can not be detected by the foreign ambassadors who usually live in luxurious villas and maintain electric generators in their embassies and residences that start automatically as soon as the electric power is off to the extent that they do not even feel that the electric power was interrupted . 
The authorities in many corrupt countries can interrupt the electric power and deprive major parts of any city from electricity for many hours without warning . 
The intentional interruption of electric power can occur in the middle of a surgery , a lecture , or a long waited seminar , movie , or television series . 
It happened that a surgeon lit few candles to finish an appendectomy for his client due to an intentional electric power interruption that was aimed to devastate the inhabitants of that particular quarter as a punishment for their continuous reform related demands . 
The Security Council and all the developed countries are requested to alleviate the sufferance of oppressed people through effective means such as the enforcement of democracy in dictatorships and the legislation of laws that prohibit the dictators from their usual recourse to trivial pretexts that serve nobody except themselves . 
An initiative of this kind will be a great idea that serves not only justice in the world but will without doubt reduce all the terror activities that have resulted from injustice . 
The permanent members of the Security Council are invited to issue a resolution in this regard and propagate it all over the world to let everyone whether he is a leader or a subject know that he is not above the international laws and regulations . 
As a matter of fact , there are many leaders and officials like Saddam and Slobodan Milosevic who need to be overthrown and prosecuted for recorded crimes against humanity ; the American , the Australian , and European immigration offices are rife with scary stories many immigrants have endured . 
This resolution must clearly stipulate that presidential candidates must sign a Security Council sponsored written commitment to establish justice , fight injustice , surrender transgressors and terrorists irrespective of their ranks or positions , and undertake that nobody may be excluded from this obligation or enjoy any presidential , religious , tribal or diplomatic immunity when it comes to the violation of human rights and the failure to establish democracy ; such pledge must be signed before such presidents are allowed to start campaigning . 
There must be a global commitment to not considering any body in any part of the world above the law . 
Whether the issue is about genocides or individual cases , the Security Council must treat such cases with the same level of concern , and if necessary forms committees of inquiry and a special army to bring to justice all outlaws who refuse to appear before their judges or fail to respond to such demands . 
Partiality , favoritism , and interests must be completely avoided where the concerned judges , investigators , and personnel should be absolutely independent and let work freely in any country and anywhere including palaces , mosques , churches , synagogues , and temples . 
They mustn t be of any religious , political , geographical or ethnic predisposition . 
I believe that in presence of such global state of chaos and ethical degradation it will not surprise anyone of us to wake up in the morning and learn that a pro-Taliban group has regretfully toppled the Pakistani President in an overnight coup and seized the Pakistani nuclear arsenal . 
Although this scenario is furious in view of the brutality and hostility the group has been exhibiting , it is never farfetched . 
That is why the implementation of democracy in the world is as vital as the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction . 
Establishing justice , implementing democracy , fighting terrorism , eradicating dictatorial regimes , fighting poverty and diseases , in addition to the non-proliferation of WMD must be the Civilized World Countries highest concern . 
If the Security Council wishes to see the world better , its members must issue a resolution that stipulates that all corrupt and dictatorial regimes must be replaced by democracies where no leaders may govern for more than two terms of four years each . 
The unconditional recognitions that the International Community has unfortunately granted to the kingdoms , sheikhdoms , sultanates , and dictatorships that resulted from chaotic states and gradually gained international recognition over time must be reviewed , canceled , and replaced with democratic republics . 
For those who think they can prove me wrong , I remind them that except for the intervention of President Bush and his brave army , the Emirate that the Taliban Group had created on 90 % of the territories of Afghanistan would have gained full international recognition as a country and many of the criminals who enslaved the Afghani people and deliberately slain his men and shot his women dead , as we saw on TV , would have gained international recognition and walked on red carpets in many parts of the world by now . 
Likewise , the Arab kingdoms , sultanates , sheikhdoms , states , and republics have , in fact , gained international recognition when similar chaotic conditions in the past had left no room for the international community to calculate things the right way and depend on virtues in the way they recognized states and entities . 
If the United Nations Organization is not able to correct such historical mistakes , the superpowers , in view of the damages they incurred as a result of the ethical mutation that was created by the dictators , must alternatively force the regimes that rule such entities to establish justice and implement democracy or give way to better regimes . 
March 24 , 2011 at 9:31 am | Reply Dear Editor . 
My Country Santo Domingo underwent or invaded for 42,000 marines USA in 1965 . 
Here had Banana and Sugar . 
For only Fear that we become another Cuba . 
Your country is a big nation and have a beatiful history . 
But the reason for airstrike Tripoli or Gadafi I believe is for Petroleum . 
USA is a Leader The Mediterran 's Pirates right now similar to Francis Drake . 
The ONU Give Its Corso 's Patents for robbery the petroleum ` Libyans . 
The Minions Zapatero and Sarcozy too no want Help civilians . 
They want reelection equal Obama . 
Can you read Gulliver 's Travel of Jonattan Swift or The Naive of Voltaire or The Vested Interests of Jacinto Benavente ? 
Gadafi the Big Leader is David , USA and UE is Golliat , that is Terrorism . 
This War is The 100 Years ` War . 
The USA is a Leader or World 's Dictator from the Second World War , and must go . 
Is the moment for Chinesse or Indian or Brazil or Russian . 
March 24 , 2011 at 10:42 am | Reply So if American is going after Libyan Oil , why do we only get less than 80,000 barrels of oil per day from Libya -LRB- pre-Feb 2011 -RRB- while Europe and China get 80 % of Libyan oil ? 
NOTE : Libya pumped over 2 million barrels of oil per day . 
If America wanted Libyan oil , we would be fighting with the Europeans and Chinese -- not the Libyans ! 
It 's amazing how many countries and people in the world complain about American intervention . 
However , when they get their asses kicked and their population is about to be wiped out , who do they call for help ? 
Good old uncle Sam -- the savior of the poor , the world , and the peace keeper . 
The world demands help from America in times of their need -LRB- because Americans are the only ones who have a righteous conscious -- for liberty , freedom , and democracy . 
Other countries talk about it . 
Americans live it and continue to evolve our democracy . 
So next time the world cries about US intervention to save Libyan lives , ask the Libyan people being massacred if US intervention was right ? 
I and many of the living Libyans thank America and France for standing up for their principles -- for life , liberty and freedom . 
March 25 , 2011 at 2:54 pm | Reply I could n't have said it better myself . 
You speak the truth ! 
March 27 , 2011 at 2:19 am | I go with the Germans - I support international intervention , but I do n't want my country involved in it . 
There are a lot of work to do in our own soil , starting with employment . 
March 24 , 2011 at 11:48 am | Reply The Libyan civil war is not in America 's interest . 
Our armed forces , equipment and treasure have a primary purpose of protecting American lives . 
We should abstain from the long term entanglements in Libya . 
When America suffered its own civil war , we did not appreciate the interference of foreign powers . 
Let the Libyans determine their own fate . 
We 'll deal with the victors just as we deal with all other countries , hostile or friendly . 
March 24 , 2011 at 12:01 pm | Reply Yea dude . 
Just do n't forget that the French helped us during our revolution with the Brits . 
If the French did n't show up in our times of need -LRB- yes , we almost got our asses kicked -RRB- , we would still be speaking Old British , drive on the right side , and cross over to French Louisiana on our we to spanish speaking State of California -LRB- part of Mexico -RRB- . 
How quickly do we forget our own history and how we were founded ? 
Oh , and do n't forget our own civil war -LRB- North and South -RRB- . 
We did get help from both the British and the French -LRB- both sides -RRB- . 
Though bloody and over 400,000 American souls perished , we eventually did away with slavery . 
Without the Civil War , we would have been two separate countries -- one south very much similar to South Africa and still practicing separation of races . 
Out of war , good things do come forward -LRB- i.e. WW II , German , Japan , etc. -RRB- . 
Something positive will come about with Libya and when their history books are written and taught 10 years from now , Libyans will view their democracy as being saved by the Americans , French and Brits . 
Now that 's a great legacy to leave behind March 25 , 2011 at 5:42 am | Reply OK , I know I 'm going to sound ridiculous but ... Donald has this nailed . 
We do not go into any country unless paid by someone . 
If we go in without a funding source , let 's take the countries # 1 resource -LRB- oil -RRB- for our own and sell it on the open market . 
We should not be the world police , we 're damned if we do and damned if we do n't so let 's get all the ya hoos that hate us to fight the world battles , by themselves . 
Let 's simply protect the US and associated properties . 
Also how about a pailin and John Boehner ticket in 2012 ? 
March 24 , 2011 at 12:21 pm | Reply Sara Pailin ? 
How would she handle a Libyan crisis ? 
Invite Qaddafi over to Alaski to discuss peace , sit at her house overlooking Russia -LRB- yeah right ... I ca n't even see the North Pole where I live -RRB- , and settle for a few lives to sacrifice , exchange Alaska and Libya oil and the price for peace . 
Oh , do n't forget a vacation home for Qaddafi in Alaska , and a nice summer home for Sara in Tripoli . 
March 25 , 2011 at 2:07 pm | Reply Absolutely unacceptable intervention in Lybia . 
Nothing is new though as the US and `` allies '' have been at it for a very long time . 
It is true that after the Obama `` change '' and `` hope '' this is ridiculous . 
American People , are you toitally asleep ?? March 24 , 2011 at 5:48 pm | Reply No. . 
We Americans are totally awake , alert , and aware of world events . 
We are not introverted , and think the world evolves around us and we do nothing when something happens . 
As the only Big Brother in the world , we take responsibility and when atrocities occur around the world where evil reins , we stand up to our principles and we go after the jerks and Aholes who disturb our peace . 
We are peaceful people , wanting only the best for the world ; and providing the venue for those who want Freedom , Liberty and the right to life . 
May the Libyan people achieve their aspirations . 
Living under a dictatorship and tyrants is not an environment you want to live in . 
Only those who have been there know how bad it is . 
Those who have lived under the protection of freedom , liberty and justice -LRB- ie . 
like in America , Europe , etc. -RRB- have no concept of this . 
How would you feel like if you lived in a neighborhood that had thugs running around shooting at homes and cars , and your home had bars and you only stay in house , fearful of going out ? 
Oops , that sounds like East Oakland or East LA ! 
Try it some day . 
You may have a different view of the world afterwards . 
March 25 , 2011 at 5:33 am | Reply We really need to go into Iran next , and cleanse that state too . 
March 25 , 2011 at 9:45 am | Go Obama , GO ! 
S laughter those people til they do n't exist ! 
Do n't allow any of them to reamin standing ! 
Oh , and for the no-fly zone -- I do n't think tanks and artillery fly . 
March 25 , 2011 at 9:41 am | Reply I think you need to talk about Qaddafi slaughtering people and executing them on the spot first , before you start to criticize Mr. Obama . 
It sounds like you never lived in country under dictatorship and with tyrants . 
Unless you have the other side of the prospective where you had family member hands chopped off , relatives disappear , you should rethink your logic and who you should criticize actively . 
God bless America and thank you for being the Savior and leader of the world -- the only country people that have the balls to do anything right -- everyone else talks and cries like babies . 
March 25 , 2011 at 1:59 pm | Reply ... DECEMBER 21 , 1988 , GHADAFFI BOMB-EXPLODED PAN AM FLIGHT 103 OVER LOCKERBIE , SCOTLAND , KILLING ALL 259 ABOARD AND 11 ON THE GROUND : : : ... FACT : December 21 , 1988 , thirty-eight minutes after takeoff from London , en route to New York City , Pan Am Flight 103 exploded over Lockerbie , Scotland , killing all 259 aboard and 11 on the ground : : : ... FACT : Libya s current foreign minister , Musa Kusa , met with representatives of the British and American intelligence services in December 2003 to arrange deals to remove the sanctions being applied against Libya as the consequence of Ghaddafi s mass murder war crimes that included Ghaddafi s bombing of Pan Am 103 . 
What is corruptly ironic is that Kusa was educated at Michigan State University and both his children , born in the United States , are American citizens . 
... Fact : Kusa was and is Gaddafi s enabler , -LRB- 1 -RRB- aiding and abetting Ghaddafi in the bombing of Pan Am 103 , -LRB- 2 -RRB- assisting Ghaddafi to manipulate compromises on his Nuclear Weapons program , -LRB- 3 -RRB- enabling Ghaddafi to avoid responsibility for War Crimes against people of the United States , -LRB- 4 -RRB- England , -LRB- 5 -RRB- Germany , -LRB- 6 -RRB- France , and -LRB- 7 -RRB- currently avoid consequences for Ghaddafi s current War Crimes against his own people . 
... FACT : World leaders , like Tony Blair , Nicolas Sarkozy , Silvio Berlusconi , Gordon Brown , and even George W. Bush , like disgusting dogs in the park , publicly licked Ghaddafi in their efforts to get Ghaddafi to abandon his Islamic state Nuclear Weapons program imitative of the nuclear programs developed by Islamic Pakistan , Islamic Iraq , and Islamic Iran . 
... FACT : In 2009 , Abdelbaset al-Megrahi , the only Libyan intelligence officer convicted for the Lockerbie bombing , serving a life sentence in Scotland , diagnosed with terminal prostate cancer , was returned to Libya to spend his last days out of humanitarian considerations . 
... FACT : Ghadaffi s Nuclear Weapons program was temporarily set aside and Big oil prospered in Libya . 
... FACT : Newt ingrich and other GOP Conservatives who chanted a list of negatives on the proposed No Fly Zone over Libya have obviously forgotten all the Americans who Ghadaffi mass-murdered when he ordered bombing of PanAm 103 over Scotland , which Ghadaffi s own Justice Minister recently confirmed . 
... FACT : Ghadaffi is a blood soaked War Criminal who should be prosecuted for his War Crimes against humanity in his bombing of Pan Am 103 in 1988 and should be prosecuted for his War Crimes against his own people , today , 2011 . 
March 25 , 2011 at 12:52 pm | Reply Even the most saints of saints eventually needs to make a deal with the devil , the thugs , and the dictators to save the souls and lives of the many , and sacrifice a few . 
It 's a fact since the evolution of man . 
Evil is evil and you will have dictators and tyrants like Edi Amin , and other likes . 
Imagine if America was not around -- we would be speaking German and all be non-Christians , non-pro life . 
We would be sending our children to bomb who ever , when ever . 
Be grateful that you live and have a country like America . 
If you do n't know what you have , try living in Libya or Iran for a change . 
Hopefully , you will return back to your beloved country of America alive and well . 
March 25 , 2011 at 2:03 pm | Reply Too true , James . 
We just met a young man from Sierra Leon -LRB- forgive me if I spelled that incorrectly -RRB- and during the telling of his story of having his parents killed and himself captured and made into a boy soldier , he must have said four or five times , `` You just ca n't imagine . '' 
So my husband and I rented ` Blood Diamond ' to gain a little understanding . 
He 's right ; we just ca n't imagine what others are suffering all over the world . 
March 25 , 2011 at 2:24 pm | Actually , I think the Germans and others who have sat by , while we in the US help clean up the world , should send America money to clean up and add jobs in our country , while we spend our dollars policing the world and protecting them from the likes of Qaddafi . 
Let 's get real , Germany get 's a huge chunk of oil from Libya . 
That is why they are so quite and non-committal to the entire engagement . 
So let 's have Berlin pay our bills so we can do the dirty work that they ca n't seem to do -- even when evil is around . 
Nothing has changed with the Germans . 
March 25 , 2011 at 2:10 pm | Reply Now we know how Soloman felt when two women claimed the same baby as hers . 
The U.S. is condemned as a war monger when we step in , or a hypocrite who wo n't become involved and ` allows ' hundreds to be massacred when we had the ability to stop it . 
My question , and I mean this sincerly , is , who are the civilians who support Ghadaffi ? 
They ca n't all be on the governments ' payroll or be related to him . 
March 25 , 2011 at 2:18 pm | Reply When you have a gun to your head , when you do n't get food and water unless you go out in the streets to support the government , when armed guards harass you and take your children away as ransom , you will support a tyrant and dictator like Mr. Qaddafi . 
Its a fact of life in the 3rd world where the rules of law , justice and liberty do not exist . 
They are mentioned in government media , and the nice movies and pictures show everyone happy , but in their homes at night , the people of Libya pray and hope Qaddafi will go away so they can be free to express themselves , and live an open life in a free society without intimidation , fear , and blackmail . 
Americans need to know how the real world -LRB- outside American -RRB- is , and stop being introverted and assuming the world is a peaceful place . 
And since the world is a global economy , what happens around the world affects America -LRB- i.e. Japan Earthquake , Libya , China , etc. -RRB- It 's better to be in front and lead the direction , to be the head of the dog and bite , rather than to be the tail where you get the smell and poop when things occur in life . 
Thank you America for taking the Leadership -LRB- head of the dog -RRB- in an otherwise , disorganized and irresponsible world . 
March 25 , 2011 at 3:04 pm | Reply Italian film scientist discovers skin and hair on face body of the Shroud of Turin . 
Three toes ripped off left foot see Vincenzo Ruello youtube March 26 , 2011 at 4:50 am | Reply Robin Hood come to America . 
and another Arab country will be next . 
Because the super power country and the UN use they double standard on you . 
If you are my friend and you can do anything you want I will close one eye for you . 
If you are not my friend I will bomb the hell out of you and let the side I like take over the country . 
Big fish always try to eat little one . 
March 26 , 2011 at 10:55 am | Reply There will be no peace in Libya until some unsavory , anti-west group takes power . 
The Muslim Brotherhood are already salivating at the prospect . 
And when Libya turns into another Iran , Cameron , Sarkozy , Obama , and other egoistic western leaders will have created it by their astonishing naivete . 
Too bad all these `` Christian '' leaders never bother to pay attention to the Biblical advice : By Their Fruits Ye Shall Know Them . 
March 26 , 2011 at 1:53 pm | Reply It is about time the World did something about all the wrongs being done by the Arab League leaders !!! The People saw what Egypt did and got the Nerve to try and do it Themselves ... I was surprise to see the Arab League to get involved in it !!! Seeing how They might be the next to have it happen to Them ... March 26 , 2011 at 4:14 pm | Reply The United Nations , in my view , has entered a mature phase where it now seems prepared to act when any country extra-judicially decides to kill 1,000 or more of its citizens . 
This is a giant leap forward for mankind and bravo to the U.S. , which acted with the complete support of Americans , the democratized world and the media , including Al Jazeera , save one questioning columnist . 
That Republicans and a few others are now jittery about an uncertain mission is understandable but there was not one word of protest before the U.S. became involved . 
As for red herring arguments that congress had to be consulted , I sincerely doubt it . 
In Canada where the political parties are so divided they have forced an early election , just days before the Prime Minister 's motion in support of Canadian forces already deployed received unanimous support in the House of Commons , whereas American post-action partisanship is disingenuous and detracts from intelligent debate . 
Of course the developing situation is a valid concern as is cost . 
Luckily with these theftocracies as all dictatorships to date have turned out to be , there seems to be ample funding available that countries such as the U. S , need only apply for once new democracies take root . 
Also , the U.S. , which has been so dominated by a recession of late , would do well to recognize the depth and breadth of economic activity that will take place and benefit all nations when more of the world is demoncratized to enable healthy economies to grow . 
World-wide deocratization will indeed be a golden age for economics and culture , the likes of which we have never dared to imagine . 
March 27 , 2011 at 9:19 am | Reply Let 's not forget to add state-sponsored kidnapping and rape to the Gadhafi regimes 's crimes . 
I hope the world will urge UN secretasry general Ban Ki-moon to demand the production of this Iman al-Obedi , the woman arrested yesterday for attempting to tell foreign journalists in Tripoli how she had been kidnaopped and raped by Gadhafi 's sioldiers , to enable her to be asisted and given safe transport to another country if necessary . 
Anyone can write to the Sec.-gen . 
March 27 , 2011 at 9:27 am | Reply OBAMA 'S ADDRESS TO THE NATION HAS BEEN LEAKED ! 
Read it here first ! 
The conditions that exist in Egypt were resolved by the Egyptians themselves peacefully . 
Thus , UN and Nato was not called for . 
However the violent reaction by the Gadhafi regime against its own people that required UN and Nato actions is being repeated thoughout the Middle East and elsewhere around the globe . 
Therefore , on April 1st , UN and Nato forces will bomb Scott Walker in Wisconsin , Saudi Arabia , Jordan , Syria and Yemen . 
China , North Korea and Iran to follow after we reload . 
Let me me clear on one point . 
No American forces will be used on the ground . 
We look to the ticked off chesse heads and the citizens of the other countries to take care of it themselves . 
Thank you and Allah be Praised . 
I do not believe anything said unless it is from Him !!! The Republicans can post anything and say that it is what He is going to say ... March 27 , 2011 at 1:07 pm | Reply Understanding the protests in Libya , Tunisia , and Egypt In light of the instability in Libya , recent decisions to enact a no-fly zone , and the heated debate that has ensued as a result of that decision , it seems the world has turned to reactionary measures , forgetting all too well that the instability seen in Libya , Egypt , and Tunisia can be easily repeated in other developing countries . 
Many have attributed the motivations of the protests across Middle East and North Africa -LRB- MENA -RRB- to economic hardship -LRB- exacerbated by the global recession -RRB- and government oppression , chalking up the viral nature of the protests to social media . 
This view is shortsighted and ignores the drastic impact demographic changes , shaped over decades , can have on political and social stability . 
The answer comes down to demographics : in the last 30 years , these countries have developed large educated youth populations . 
As these populations came to age , these countries were primed for change . 
What Led Up to the Protests ? 
Demographers have at times been admired for their ability to tell the future . 
Thirty years ago , a demographer could have told you the demographics of the Egypt , Libya , and Tunisia would be drastically different 2010 and as such , so would the political and social environments . 
Let s look at two factors that primed these countries for protests . 
Increased Fertility Rates 30 Years Ago . 
In the late 1970s and into the 1980s , Egypt , Libya , and Tunisia countries experienced increased fertility rates . 
Fertility rates have since declined , but increased fertility rates 30 years ago have created today s reality : the majority of people in Egypt , Libya , and Tunisia are under the age of 35 , resulting in increased demands for resources and jobs . 
Increased Access to Education . 
In the 1980s , priorities and public spending turned to building human capital . 
In the last 30 years , life expectancy in Egypt , Libya , and Tunisia has risen by about 3 years and infant and child mortality rates have declined -LRB- Egypt cut theirs in half -RRB- . 
A particular factor in priming North African countries for social change , however , was an increase in literacy and school enrollment rates , due to increased public priorities on education in the 1980s . 
Currently , 99 % of Libyan youth between the ages of 15 and 24 are literate ; the numbers are similar in Tunisia and Egypt . 
Tertiary -LRB- post-secondary -RRB- school enrollment rates in Libya , for example , are about 50 % . 
Compare that to 2.8 % in Kenya . 
What makes Egypt , Libya , and Tunisia -LRB- and many other MENA countries -RRB- unique from other developing countries ? 
In short , a relatively healthy and educated youth population . 
Why does this demographic make a difference ? 
Youth Are More Likely To Protest . 
Numerous studies have shown that marriage and increased age reduce the likelihood of protest participation . 
Youth who lack spousal and parental responsibilities are more likely to protest . 
Access to higher learning opportunities increases information access and are often associated with increased expectation of government accountability , civil participation , and accessing formal employment opportunities . 
Many other African countries have large youth populations , but often access to secondary and tertiary school education for these populations is extremely limited . 
High Unemployment for Unemployment Leads to Instability . 
Looking at the specific case of Tunisia , 97.1 % of children attend primary school and 71 % of youth attend secondary schools - impressive numbers by many accounts . 
Now of those in the country who are unemployed , 41.7 % have a primary education , 37.7 % have a secondary education , and 13.6 % have a tertiary education -LRB- note that only 27.2 % of the population has a tertiary education -RRB- . 
That means that more than half of the unemployed Tunisian population has accessed some kind of higher learning and while many of the unemployed in Africa can fall back on income-generating activities in agriculture , those in Egypt , Tunisia , and Libya are a bit more limited as non-agrarian industries dominate their economies . 
Why is it Important to Understand the Impact of Demographics on Social Stability ? 
The majority of African countries have large and growing youth populations , but higher education access has lagged behind . 
However , if education rates accelerated to match population growth , protests , as seen in MENA countries , could be mimicked all across Africa . 
Does this mean that countries should stop investing in education to prevent instability ? 
Educated societies are critical to economic and social growth and well-being . 
There is substantial evidence to support that East Asian investments in human capital and social programs , particularly education , were not only critical to economic growth , but also critical to social and political stability . 
Social investments actually avoided political breakdown in several East Asian countries as governments responded , at least in part , population demands for public services . 
However , an educated population , particularly a youth population will demand change and accountability from governments . 
Developing countries , particularly African countries , can avoid substantial political and social breakdowns by identifying , including , and responding to the voices of their changing populations , particularly their growing youth demographics . 
March 27 , 2011 at 4:29 pm | Reply Wonderful work ! 
That is the type of information that are supposed to be shared across the net . 
Shame on Google for no longer positioning this submit upper ! 
Come on over and visit my web site . 
Thank you = -RRB- September 24 , 2012 at 1:44 am | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
