Gen. Wesley Clark : No-fly zone is established , some military objectives achieved He says the more difficult questions are the diplomatic ones Clark asks : Will Libya be split by the civil war ? 
Clark : Will Moammar Gadhafi be held to account for violence against civilians Editor 's note : CNN Contributor Wesley Clark , a senior fellow at the UCLA Burkle Center for International Relations , is a retired general and former Supreme Allied Commander in Europe . 
Little Rock , Arkansas -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The coalition is concluding its second day of air operations . 
The no-fly zone is established . 
A column of Libyan military vehicles , driving on a road toward Benghazi , has been attacked and destroyed . 
This is what much of the world had been crying out for . 
Yet the major questions have always been less about the military feasibility of the operation and more about its political goals ands how to achieve them . 
Although several world leaders have called for Col. Moammar Gadhafi to give up power in Libya , the authorizing U.N. Security Council resolution did not call for this . 
No-fly zone a slippery slope to more ? 
-- Assuming the opposition forces are safe in Benghazi , then what must be done to protect civilians in those towns previously held by the opposition but have now been retaken by Gadhafi 's forces ? 
Presumably some U.N. presence must enter these areas and work to identify and protect civilians . 
This will likely be resisted by Gadhafi and could spur further conflict . 
-- Will the U.N. and the coalition be satisfied with a political stalemate on the ground , in which the eastern portion of the country achieves de facto and de jure independence ? 
The cease-fire called for in the resolution would seem to rule out any renewed offensive activity by the opposition . 
So unless there is some means to apply additional leverage , there may be two Libyas : one a vengeful dictatorship , the other a fledgling democracy needing long-term international protection . 
-- Will Gadhafi be held legally accountable for the excessive violence already exercised against innocent civilians ? 
This will require an investigation on the ground in Tripoli and other cities now under Gadhafi 's control . 
He is not likely to accept this . 
Meanwhile , Gadhafi is doing his best to characterize the action as one of `` Crusaders attacking Muslims , '' and claiming excessive collateral damages , including civilian casualties , from the coalition 's initial air strikes . 
One of the basic rules of intervention is to get it over with quickly . 
From the military standpoint , this has been done . 
But how these initial military actions will relate to the stated -- and unstated -- goals of the operation remains the major challenge for the coalition . 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of Wesley Clark . 
