No-fly zone is being enforced but what is the endgame for Libya ? 
As coalition forces continue to attack Libya and impose a no-fly zone , Moammar Gadhafi 's regime is under the greatest pressure it has faced in its 42-year reign . 
But questions are being asked as to what will emerge from the bombardment . 
Will Gadhafi survive and if so what will his next move be ? 
What happens if he is toppled or even killed and who would run the country ? 
Can Libya ever enjoy peace and prosperity or is it set to be ravaged by a long and bloody civil war ? 
CNN spoke to some experts to hear what they think the endgame could be . 
What follows are some of their thoughts . 
Fawaz Gerges , professor of Middle Eastern Politics and International Relations at the London School of Economics and Political Science , said he expected the conflict to drag on . 
`` Libya 's political landscape is uncertain but I think that Gadhafi will fight on and on and this could be very prolonged . 
`` It could also see Libya become extremely divided with maybe Gadhafi continuing to rule one half of the country and the other half being ruled separately . 
`` This would likely create a prolonged civil war . 
I think Gadhafi will hang on -- he has very little choice anyway as there is nowhere for him to go , he has been backed into a corner by the coalition . 
We must remember that there were no-fly zones imposed on Iraq in 1991 and 1993 and still Saddam Hussein remained in power . 
`` I think the result of military action will be a very fractious Libya . 
Military action could also turn public opinion within Libya once they begin to see casualties from air strikes . 
This could strengthen Gadhafi rather than weaken him . 
`` Even if we were to see Gadhafi killed , this would create a political vacuum which could see a long civil war which the West would have to take sides on . 
`` We do n't know how divided Libya is ; we do n't know the strength of feeling for regime change . 
There is also a sense of increasing anxiety in the Arab League . 
`` I think Gadhafi will hold on for a long time . 
We also have to consider the wider implications for the whole of the Middle East . 
This could cause further instability throughout the Middle East and not just Libya . '' 
Libya could have great future ... Marco Vicenzino , chief strategy adviser at the Afghanistan World Foundation , said the future for Libya could be bright if its wealth was fairly distributed . 
`` What happens next very much depends on whether Gadhafi survives or how long he fights to survive and that could be a long time . 
