N.Y. Times journalists arrive in Tunisia after being freed in Libya Stephen Farrell , from left , Tyler Hicks , Ambassador Levent Sahin Kaya , Lynsey Addario , and Anthony Shadid pose on Monday . 
Four New York Times journalists who were reported captured by pro-government forces in Libya last week have been released and have arrived safely in Tunisia , Executive Editor Bill Keller said Monday in an e-mail obtained by CNN . 
`` We 're particularly indebted to the Government of Turkey , which intervened on our behalf to oversee the release of our journalists and bring them to Tunisia , '' Keller said in the e-mail , which was sent to New York Times staff . 
`` We were also assisted throughout the week by diplomats from the United States and United Kingdom . '' 
Earlier Monday , Turkish Ambassador to Libya Levent Sahin Kaya said the four journalists had arrived at the Turkish Embassy in Tripoli . 
The newspaper identified the journalists as Anthony Shadid , its bureau chief in Beirut , Lebanon , and a two-time Pulitzer winner for foreign reporting ; Stephen Farrell , a reporter and videographer who was kidnapped by the Taliban and rescued by British commandos in 2009 ; Tyler Hicks , a staffer who is based in Istanbul and has served as an embedded journalist in Afghanistan ; and photographer Lynsey Addario , who has covered the Middle East and Africa . 
In a statement Monday , the newspaper said : `` We are grateful that our journalists have been released , and we are working to reunite them with their families . 
We have been told they are in good health and are in the process of confirming that . 
We thank the Turkish , British , and U.S. governments for their assistance in the release . 
We also appreciate the efforts of those in the Libyan government who helped secure the release this morning . '' 
The four journalists entered the rebel-controlled eastern region of Libya via the Egyptian border without visas to cover the civil war in the country , the Times said . 
They had been missing since Tuesday , according to the Times , but Keller said in his e-mail that the four `` were allowed to speak to their families by phone Thursday night '' and that the government had informed the newpaper Thursday afternoon that they would be freed . 
`` Because of the volatile situation in Libya , we 've kept our enthusiasm and comments in check until they were out of the country , '' Keller wrote , `` but now feels like a moment for celebration . 
And before long we 'll all know the details of their experience . '' 
