By David Gergen , CNN Senior Political Analyst David Gergen : Washington is pondering Obama 's `` head-snapping '' shift on Libya He says Hillary Clinton , Susan Rice , Samantha Power pushed for the change Gergen : Can U.S. oppose Libya repression while going easy on Bahrain , Saudis ? 
He says most observers feel that what Obama wants is still the big question mark in D.C. Editor 's note : David Gergen is a senior political analyst for CNN and has been an adviser to four U.S. presidents . 
He is a professor of public service and director of the Center for Public Leadership at the Harvard Kennedy School . 
Cambridge , Massachusetts -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- After conversations with top players in Washington last week , mostly as I accompanied a group of Zuckerman Fellows from Harvard on a field trip , here are some brief reflections on the mood there toward events in the Middle East : The head-snapping change in policy toward Libya has everyone guessing where the Mideast is heading , whether the U.S. has a good handle , and most of all , what President Obama is trying to achieve . 
One irony , as a female friend put it , is that for years many of us believed that if only more women could gain power , the world would surely become more peaceful . 
Yet , we now see that the three people who talked Obama into using force against Libya 's Moammar Gadhafi were all women -- Hillary Clinton , Susan Rice and Samantha Power . 
Leading male advisers were opposed . 
Perhaps we should be less surprised than we are . 
And remember , too , that both were seen as successful leaders for most of their time in office . 
There are divisions in Washington about the president 's actions , but most -- including me -- believe Hillary & Co. had the better argument . 
If anything , the U.S. delayed too long , allowing Gadhafi to gain the upper hand on the ground . 
The head-snapping change in policy toward Libya has everyone guessing ... what President Obama is trying to achieve . 
Clinton 's voice key on Libyan policy Obama : No ground troops in Libya But what is the president 's endgame in Libya ? 
And what is his strategy for the Middle East more generally ? 
Who can say for sure ? 
Originally , the president kept saying we want Gadhafi out -- but now that we are using force , he says we only want to stop him from killing more civilians . 
Is this mission creep in reverse ? 
And how tough would we be if , as seemed possible today , the Arab League begins to retreat from supporting force ? 
Meanwhile , the administration privately -- and rightly -- stresses that even as we hit Libya , we must keep a strategic focus on Egypt and Saudi Arabia , long seen as our most powerful Arab friends in the region . 
The preliminary returns from weekend voting in Egypt -- we are still waiting to hear from Cairo -- will bring some heartburn in Washington . 
How big a threat will the Muslim Brotherhood now become in elections a few months from now and what can Washington do about it ? 
Even bigger headaches are arising in the U.S.-Saudi relationship . 
Several top players from past administrations report that the Saudis are hugely angry about Obama 's treatment of Egypt 's ex-President Hosni Mubarak . 
`` He was your best friend in the region for more than 30 years , doing everything you asked , '' the Saudi argument goes , `` but a week after he got into trouble , you threw him under the bus rather than working out a graceful exit . 
How can we now trust you ? '' 
The Obama administration is now working to rebuild Saudi ties , but will it have sufficient leverage to help usher in more democratic reforms in the kingdom and , crucially at the moment , in nearby Bahrain and Yemen ? 
Or , as seems likely , will we be caught in increasing contradictions between our policy in Libya -LRB- crack down on an enemy government that kills demonstrators -RRB- vs. Bahrain and Yemen -LRB- go easy on a friendly government that kills demonstrators -RRB- ? 
The big question mark is the president himself . 
Rebounding from his electoral defeats last November , he seemed to be asserting a much firmer grasp on power , but in recent weeks , he appears to outsiders as someone who has slipped back into a haze of caution . 
The Economist this week is even questioning his political courage . 
As he sends U.S. troops into harm 's way , many in Washington are now waiting to see which Obama now emerges . 
Much rides on the outcome . 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of David Gergen . 
