19 U.S. warplanes were used in airstrikes More than 110 Tomahawk Cruise missiles were launched Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Nineteen U.S. warplanes , including Marine Corps Harrier jets , Air Force B-2 stealth bombers and F-15 and F-16 fighter jets , conducted strike operations against Libya Sunday morning , according to Lt. Cmdr. James Stockman of U.S. Africa Command . 
It is the next phase in Operation Odyssey Dawn , which began about 3 p.m. ET Saturday with the launch of more than 110 Tomahawk Cruise missiles from U.S. and British warships and subs . 
The U.S. Navy launched four Harrier `` jump jets '' from the USS Kearsarge , an amphibious assault ship now in the Mediterranean Sea . 
The Harriers `` conducted strikes against Gadhafi 's ground forces and air defenses , joining an international effort to halt an offensive against the Libyan populace , '' said Navy spokesman Cmdr. Danny Hernandez . 
The U.S. Navy also flew EA-18 Growlers , which are special versions of the F\/A 18 fighter designed to jam enemy electronic signals , such as targeting radar from enemy air defense batteries , Hernandez said . 
Italian jets return from Libya Obama : No ground troops in Libya Fighter jets hit Libyan army convoy All American warplanes returned safely from their missions , according to U.S. Africa Command . 
On Sunday , Maj. Gen. John Lorimer , spokesman for the British Ministry of Defense , said British maritime assets including a submarine and two warships are in theater , backing the Tornado GR4s which returned to the Royal Air Force 's Lyneham station Sunday morning . 
` We 're really setting the conditions for the implementation of the no-fly zone , '' said Lorimer . 
`` In order to do that we need to attack targets which are the integrated air defense system , which will include radars and command and control centers . 
We 've got to deal with those first before being able to implement the no-fly zone as laid out by the UNSCR , '' he said . 
Lorimer added that a multi-purpose Typhoon aircraft is ready to be deployed . 
`` Protecting the innocent and conducting combined operations are what we are designed to do , '' said Col. Mark J. Desens , commanding officer of 26th Marine Expeditionary Unit , the Marines operating off the Kearsarge . 
`` Our forces are doing both as part of the U.S. commitment to protect Libyan citizens . '' 
Italy -- Libya 's former colonial power -- announced that as of midnight Sunday , four Tornado warplanes and four F-16s will be made available . 
