I interviewed Rashid Khalidi , the Edward Said Professor of Modern Arab Studies at Columbia University , about ten days ago after he spoke with Fareed . 
But his take on why Egypt and Turkey - two major regional powers - might be reluctant to intervene in Libya is as relevant now as ever . 
Here s what he had to say : Egypt is a country which has the largest number of foreign citizens working in Libya . 
They are potential hostages should Gadhafi and his brutal regime perceive Egypt as intervening against his interests . 
Gadhafi has shown no compunction about taking hostages in the past . 
I know this is a consideration for Egypt . 
I ve talked to people who have had input from the Arab League Foreign Ministers meeting and one of the things that was made clear at that meeting was that while Egypt really does support the idea of transition in Libya and wants to play a role , they feel terribly constrained by the fact that they have over a million Egyptians working in Libya ... This is apparently also a problem for Turkey , which is another regional power like Egypt that actually has capabilities . 
I mean , -LRB- if -RRB- you get the Turkish military or the Egyptian military involved in something in Libya , -LRB- then -RRB- you are actually talking about quite considerable capabilities . 
But Turkey has a lot of investments and also a lot of people - workers and business people - in Libya . 
So I think these are constraints on both of them . 
And in the case of Egypt , the military is running Egypt . 
The last thing they need is to be charged with running Libya . 
If Egyptian ground troops go in , I promise you that ll be the next thing - they are going to be stuck there . 
The final thing for Egypt - and this is a consideration that we have to keep in mind - is that the Egyptians are afraid of Libyan sensitivities . 
The Libyans have always chafed at the idea of Egypt as an overbearing big brother . 
They ve always been sensitive to that . 
Anything that Egypt does has to be weighed in light of that perception , -LRB- and potential -RRB- misinterpretations or overreactions on the part of the Libyans . 
The opinions expressed are solely those of Rashid Khalidi . 
The reasons mentioned here are real , but not the most important ones . 
The most important reason is the understanding by those two leading countries in the region the deep resentment that the population have over Western meddling . 
And this time , it is no exception . 
UN Resolution authorizing no fly zone and the use of all means necessary to protect the population , has been in no time flat `` interpreted '' into full scale agression . 
Indiscriminate targeting of civilian infrastructure , from roads to hospitals , electric and sewer plants , are telling much about the nature of this campaign , that was supposed to `` protect the population '' . 
The countries that ABSTAINED did so in GOOD FAITH , that is , the respect of the resolutions 's goal - the protection of innocent population . 
The criticism is mounting from all sides on the nature of bombing , the use of cruise missiles on population centers , and the mounting civilian casualties . 
Egypt and Turkey both are in the same situation : they are heavily dependent on the public opinion . 
And at present , the public opinion is heaving tilted against any Western intervention . 
In no time , the mission approved by UN SC , descended from its objectives into full-fledged attack on Libya . 
So , instead of enforcing no-fly zone , arms embargo , and humanitarian aid delivery , the first acts were to target all forms of infrastructure - both military and civilian , followed by the supply of arms to the rebels . 
Humanitarian assistance , under the conditions of continued coordinated missile and aereal bombardment , has been rendered impossible . 
Clearly , the civilian population in Gadhafi controlled areas are treated as military , as no protection is afforded them , and whatever they had in reserves has been bombed out . 
The zeal shown here by the trio , US , UK and France , surely compares unfavorably with the lack of attention to the nuclear power plants in Japan spewing radioactive particle clouds all the way to US . 
Let us talk about Libya , by all means . 
So we can not talk about our kids being blanketed by radioactive fallout . 
All the soothsaying by officials only causes higher alarm , as their statements reflect calculated ignorance - something a sharp third grader can spot . 
They talk about sea water being better at diluting the radioactivity , or funnier yet , how we are in no danger from RADIATION ! 
As if we are so ignorant ! 
By all means , we are not worried about radiation , but we are about radioactive MATTER in clouds of radioactive debris , blanketing our country with particles of cesium and plutonium . 
And everything we touch , inhale or eat , will carry these particles into our bodies . 
This is the danger to our health , while our leaders fiddle over Libya , like Nero fiddling while Rome was burning . 
March 21 , 2011 at 2:27 pm | Reply I agree with Bianca . 
I believe that original article was written to misguide public in a subtle way . 
Turkish and Egyptians have done the wise thing not to associate with western pro Israel powers . 
The bombing clearly showed that the purpose was more than just halting Qaddafi . 
The facilities being damaged belong to Libyan people and not Qaddafi . 
Ultimate billions of dollars will go back to western countries to rebuild them . 
I agree that Turkey is in a position to help and they must . 
Turkish president needs to fly to Tripoli with some of heads of the Muslim state under Organization of Islamic Countries . 
They need to meet both Qaddafi and Opposition in Benghazi and work out a deal . 
March 21 , 2011 at 3:46 pm | Reply This Libyan civil unrest is going now and three weeks , why during this time these two Islamic countries have not done anything to stop the fighting , and specially after Qaddafi got the upper hand and threatened to crash his enemies ? 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:08 pm | Specifically what facilities are you suggesting should not have been bombed ? 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:21 pm | The Arabs have not intervened in Libya because they are all busy at home with unrest . 
Saudi Arabia is busy with self preservation of Sunni rule in Bahrain . 
Anything other than self-preservation is really not of much importance to this Saudi and Sunni royal family . 
They have to protect their playground -LRB- Bahrain -RRB- so that they can dodge the religious police back home in Saudi Arabia when they get in the party mood . 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:33 pm | Shah , Turkey is not a trusted actor for reasons I discuss below . 
In addition to those reasons Turkeys industrial is heavily tied to Qaddafi 's corrupt and repressive regime March 21 , 2011 at 4:34 pm | Being pro western and pro-Israel has nothing whatsoever to do with Libya 's murdering thousands of protesters , nor does it have anything to do with Yemen , Syria , and Bahrain murdering their citizens too . 
Enough already about Israel ! 
Israel is not the country bombing and killing innocent civilians in Syria , Yemen , Libya , and Bahrain . 
It is these Arab governments -LRB- that hate Israel , by the way -RRB- that are murdering their own people for no reason . 
Do you really believe the Arab world would be any freer if there was no Israel ? 
Stop using Israel as an excuse for the dictators and madmen of the Arab world . 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:49 pm | March 21 , 2011 at 8:01 pm | The simple truth is that no one knows what to believe from a country where a `` dictator '' has full control over the state media . 
Some have actually been buying into his propaganda from the first day of the democratic protests which quickly turned into a civil was because Gadhafi was quick to change to game from democratic protests to civil war by firing on the demonstrators then creating a false narrative out of thin air about western and Al-Quada intervention . 
When you start believing in `` dictator '' media sources you begin to lose objectivity in favor of emotion , misinterpretations , overreactions and flat out lies . 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:08 pm | Reply Using the same token , you are discarding any information coming from Libyan sources . 
The objectivity is not the aim of western news resources either . 
The news food we are being served is to help justify the action taken -- or to be taken -- by the west . 
This goes back to Gadhafi 's strategy , same strategy . 
What happens , in the end , is that we believe what we want to believe . 
March 22 , 2011 at 10:33 am | The Arab League is a precarious bunch of manure perched on a fence and likely to fall on either side . 
The western governments were foolish to seek the blessing of this group in order to act on stopping Gadhafi . 
The Arab League is not trusted by even the Arabs . 
Many of the men who make up this body are themselves sitting within governments who are being protested by their populaces . 
No legitimacy is to be had among the coalition of western countries by accepting approval from this body which would predictably be rescinded within days . 
The Arab League was fully knowledgeable about the United Nations wording and should get out of the game of diplomacy if they are going to straddle the fence on any given day . 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:15 pm | Reply Right on Cindy . 
You might add that the `` western '' powers have again been seduced into a charade which wil ultimately be used by ALL Arabs , sunni , shia , whatever , as an attack on Islam . 
We need to liquidate every president and the boards of directors of every western oil company . 
This would ensure that inappropriate pressure was removed from the political scene . 
The Moslem lack of enthusaism for this thing reveaals the ultimate goal of the uprisings . 
Islamists are behind the entire project . 
A very dire future awaits us . 
March 21 , 2011 at 5:37 pm | Maybe the Arab League approval provided the necessary cover to finally act . 
Once action was taken , there is no such thing as the Arab Leaque saying `` well we really did n't mean it '' , or some variation on that theme . 
What I am personally a little surprised about is Great Britain . 
After release of the Lockerbie bomber on `` humanitarian grounds '' -LRB- how in the hell does that even come into consideration given the mass murders this guy committed ? -RRB- 
, which I am convinced was done to assist BP and for no other reason , it looks like BP does n't matter . 
Or , perhaps it really is a long term gambit on the part of BP , with the thinking being that Libya is going to be a mess anyway , getting rid of Gadhafi -LRB- whether he leaves , the opposition kills him , or a cruise missle manages to find him is irrelevant to the equation -RRB- , and BP is still in a prime position to make the most of the rebuilding while working with whoever turns out to be in control -LRB- and you just know that whoever does run Libya is going to seek to capitalize on the oil , just as Gadhafi has done -- so why not be in the best position possible when that happens ? -RRB- . 
March 22 , 2011 at 5:32 pm | I am from Lebanon and I strongly disagree with Shah below . 
Turkey is not exactly a trusted actor by the region 's residents . 
Turkey is actually in violation of more UN resolutions than any other country , there is the open question of its brutal repression of the Kurds . 
Its own military though bloated and having undue and unhealthy political influence and interests , is untested in battle with the exception of killing huge numbers of civilians . 
And the tactical `` bombing '' is part and parcel of a no-fly zone . 
No one in Egypt , Libya or Turkey was complaining when Yugoslav was bombed during its civil war to create no-fly zones . 
In terms of Bianca above , not much US intervention is needed in Japan . 
The US sent a bunch of ships to help with logistics , but the real need arising form the earthquake in Japan is addressing nuclear safety long term . 
All energy has hidden costs and dangers . 
Every mine disaster , oil spill and nuclear accident points to the same issue of which the entire world shares a responsibility . . 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:27 pm | Reply You must have some beef with Turks ... `` Turkish Army is untested in battle '' ... Give me a brake ... They have the strongest Army , Navy and Airforce in all muslim countries and they are very well trained . 
remember , they ruled you for centuries ... Stop you biased comments and do some resarch ... March 21 , 2011 at 4:55 pm | Ali , where are you getting your facts from ? 
Obviously you do not know what you are talking about . 
Turkey has been fighting against terrorism on its southeast border and is right to do so . 
The World has been acknowledging this for so long and you are the one who is considering Turkey doing wrong ? 
As far as Yugoslavia goes , back in 80s Turkey has intervened as part of NATO , and helped those innocent civilians get out of the killings . 
Turkey has been the only democratic power in the region and will remain to be . 
Turkey has halted the NATO 's intervention to Libya . 
Otherwise , NATO would have been acted even before the coalition forces . 
Ali , you must have some sort of hatred against Turks . 
Could it be because they ruled your so called country for centuries ? 
I am sorry for Lebanon . 
We do n't even know whom it belongs to ? 
March 21 , 2011 at 5:13 pm | The most important job of the Turkish military has been keeping an Islamic state at bay and keeping secular governments intact within Turkey . 
With the current president Erdogan , Islam is aggressively trying to get its foot in the government doors . 
The recent spate with Israel concerning the humanitarian aid being sent to Gaza and the Israeli intervention of that flotilla was candy for the Turkish Islamists that Erdogan played up to its full potential and spread around with populist zeal . 
It brought Turkish and Israeli communication to a near stand still and was political low hanging fruit for Erdogan to squeeze to its and his ultimate benefit . 
March 21 , 2011 at 5:34 pm | I have to at least partially agree with Ali ; Turkey did make news not all that long ago when their army entered into Iraq while the US Allied forces were working other regions in the name of suppressing Kurd incursions into their own country . 
These same Kurds were the ones Saddam Hussein gassed almost 20 years ago and attempted to exterminate . 
Yes , Turkey does have some of the greatest warriors in the area , but they are just as self-important as everybody else . 
If Turkey is holding back on Libya now , you really do have to wonder why . 
March 21 , 2011 at 6:19 pm | `` brutal repression of Kurds '' Kurds are free citizens in Turkey WTF are you talking about ? 
ignorant google scholar March 21 , 2011 at 8:04 pm | Gok , Turkey is an evil country itself . 
Turkey killed more than 1.5 Armenians during WWI . 
Turkey burned more than 5000 Kurdish villages and forced these villagers to live in awful conditions in major cities . 
Turkey killed more than 18000 Kurds in so called suspicious killings . 
The police brutality and torture against Kurds is well known . 
Kurdish identity is still not accepted as the state and government are in full force oppressing and assimilating Kurds . 
Kurdish language was banned for years and currently not accepted as a minority language . 
Turkey is not as innocent as you think it is . 
May be that 's bothering you . 
March 21 , 2011 at 10:10 pm | dear mike thomson , you are talking about killed kurdish and armenian people by giving numbers but you are n't talking about killed turkish people . 
And , do n't forget that those people armenian , kurdish and turkish they all were the citizens of the turkey . 
A I do n't think you are doing by purpose , i guess you are just too illiterate to know about this subject . 
By the way , turkish government had the March 22 , 2011 at 4:57 am | @Kyle : What a crap - what a zionist crap . 
There are four political units in Turkey : Laicist represented by CHP , Nationalists represented by MHP , Kurds -LRB- mis -RRB- represented by BDP and finally the conservative democrats represented by AKP , which is in power . 
The fact that the biggest accomplishment of Turkish military being the ousting of many freely elected governments in favor of oppressive laicist regime is the only truth in your words . 
Mr. Erdogan and his supporters are working on the clock to put Turkish military where it belongs as governing and lawmaking should be performed by democratically elected governments . 
Laicists are the second big power in Turkey and they are against Democracy . 
They want an oppressive regime quite similar in nature , indeed , to that of Gadhafi 's Iran 's or Saudis . 
Mr. Erdogan , on the other hand , openly states his belief in democracy along with his personal spirituality . 
There are many un-religious pupil in the AK Party organization . 
Laicists ' defense of military coups in Turkey is that the administration has a `` hidden agenda '' of establishing an islamic state ! 
Yeah , my a $ $ ! 
March 22 , 2011 at 10:59 am | Thanks Ali for the pro-Kurdish point of view which was the most needed at times when half of the world intervenes a major oil-site . 
In order to shred light on the topic , Turkey has two major concerns none of which are any relevant with the public opinion of Turkey , where neither Bianca nor the author were correct : i. the idea of watching someone bombing your marketplace at which you already have the multi-billion dollar trade volume and 10b $ prospect -- ii . 
the idea of giving away the command , thus , the initiative to a rivaling nation in the name of France . 
Comparing Egypt and Turkey on any scale gives you a very poor decision making ; the moment Egypt plays the sovereignty game over the territories apparently and legitimately theirs , let alone on the others , they will end up being worse than Iraq , dealing with unspeakable chaos and terror in no time , and which we suspect , of the Arabic named but internationally originated ones such as Al-Qaida and any others . 
As for Turks , however , the invention of pro-US Kurdistan offers them other opportunities such as dealing with the matters of the immediate neighborhood , which , at this point , might be ill-interpreted as new-Ottoman sphere of influence . 
Nevertheless , with the help of such multi-national military exercises , thus grounds to place your objections and risk to be -LRB- left -RRB- alone , in one way or another , the world is going for getting divided into two , then three or four , and none of the sides would like any each other . 
Instead of questioning the apathy of Egypt , Turkey or Germany , you should , in my humble opinion , probably question the quick decisions and readily willingness of several nations -- France and UK , who are renewing their naval and air forces despite the economic crisis , almost setting up themselves for a war-preparedness against an overly incapacitated enemy , Libya , a major oil site otherwise a poor and small nation , and quite unable to defend herself on any platform . 
Perhaps France and UK knows more about the immediate future , having things `` a century old '' on their minds . 
Best regardsl March 23 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | I have to disagree on at least one point . 
First off , you 're attributing real political posturing on a country that has only just resolved it 's own revolution and barely has any real government of its own . 
As a result , Egypt , in particular , would be foolish to attempt to project any power that could result in additional internal upheaval . 
The author of the article is right that Egypt essentially dares not make any moves that could risk their own defensive capabilities . 
At the moment , one wrong move by the Egyptians either for or against Libya could trigger a different kind of revolution entirely . 
March 21 , 2011 at 6:02 pm | Reply Re : `` Turkey killed more than 1.5 Armenians during WWI . '' 
-- Excuse me , you do love getting to off topic , but I should remind you that no one in Turkey , including my own grand-pa has any memory of killing shooting mass-destroying or even running campaigns over Armenians , who had been the prime scholars of our own nation . 
If it is how come we still have Armenian surnames commonly around in Turkey . 
Please stay in-topic , leave the off-topic discussion as well as your understandable hatred to your illegitimate terrorist organizations that are being dealt with -LRB- the organization called PKK had to change names and owners 3 times as we know of , so whomever is behind the Muppet-show does n't matter , what matters is they are snuggled weaponry , mines , allowed to run a drug-chain and in return they have the ROI upon investment on blood -RRB- . 
Best regards ; March 23 , 2011 at 6:41 pm | I for one am thankful that intl. powers , both the West and UAE + Qatar are intervening , Egypt and Turkey still have many people on the ground therefore their hesitation is understandable . 
Remember the Arab League and Organization of Islamic Conference are supporting the Libyan people and did not want to see Gaddafi crush his own people . 
Gaddafi has lost all legitimacy when he decided his arrogance and pride are more important than the Libyan people and nation . 
Let 's get the record straight , Gaddafi is targeting unarmed and armed civilians while the coalition is targeting his military forces . 
If anything more Muslim nations should come on board and support a political solution , either through the use of military or non-military means . 
March 22 , 2011 at 11:10 am | Reply Sorry to burst your profound bubble but it really is that simple . 
I can only speak for the Turkish situation ; but Turkey has over 15 billion dollars in contracts at Libya for construction alone , not to mention the tens of thousands of guest workers many of whom have lived in Libya for the better part of their lives . 
If one were to be a cynic , it can be argued that the guest workers aside ; merely the amount of investment and future contract payments from Libya alone would motivate the Turkish government -LRB- rightly so of course -RRB- to be very concerned about any prolonged military action in Libya . 
March 22 , 2011 at 3:47 pm | Reply I do n't know where Bianca is getting her information on the `` wholesale '' targeting of civilians . 
It is not on Al Jezeera , BBC , or any other source . 
Reporters in Tripoli are waiting to see evidence of the Libyan government reported claims of civilian casualties and are n't seeing them . 
So Bianca tell us -- where are you getting your `` facts '' from , or are n't real facts necessary because they get in the way of your point ? 
March 22 , 2011 at 5:23 pm | Reply That 's very true . . 
I 'm Egyptian & I feel the same . . 
If the military wasnt running the country now I would support any military action from Egypt ... but I would understand also if they do n't react ... however we have been silently giving weapons to the easter rebels . . 
Nah , you and Tunisia have your own challenges at the present . 
And it 's important that your own governments are rebuilt , in a way that will be reflective of what it is you actually want , moving ahead . 
Revolution is the easy part ; building to the future , that 's the part which is hard . 
It always takes more time to build to the future , then it takes to topple a dictator . 
And in this , I wish you and your country the best of luck . 
Once this is secured , there will be more time and ability to act in these matters , reflective of what it is your own countrymen would like to see . 
But there is work needed on the home front right about now . 
Now it is true , that for those of us in the west , having an Arab presense helps prevent this from being turned into a Gadhafi PR pitch , trying to turn this into a `` us vs the West '' pitch , such as with Gadhafi 's many deranged speeches of `` Allah 's on my side , the devil 's on yours ... '' even after giving a speech insisting there will be no mercy and no compassion for those who fight against him , etc. . 
But we 'll deal with it as we must . 
Just hopefully something materialises , which will help expose Gadhafi 's nonsense for what it is , and wo n't serve to offer credence to his propaganda here . 
And I wish some would stop bringing up the oil in the media as well . 
I could n't give a flying f - about the oil right about now . 
There 's other deposits in the world . 
Some matters really should be tabled and given a back seat until more pressing matters are met . 
Once the people have a country and a future , some matters can be negotiated then ; and in a way where they 'll have the money to help build themselves up . 
Now is just not the time , and it is n't the time where it 's even important . 
It should be left for the day after , not the pressing consideation that 's on people 's minds today , where people ca n't even be safe from being rounded up and shot , right in their own homes ... March 21 , 2011 at 4:21 pm | Reply Talk about conceited ! 
Who are you to contradict a person who is living that hell right now ? 
Who are you , in the comfort of your own air-conditioned living room watching mind-numbing television when the man you corrected may well have been one of those in the Square getting shot at just two months ago ? 
Yes , Egypt does have its challenges , but as Max stated , what 's to keep their private citizens from offering what aid to the rebels that they can ? 
The whole region is in turmoil , and all you can do is say , `` We 're better than you . 
We know what you 're going through . '' 
Has our own War Between the States been so long ago that you forget the loss in lives and destruction ? 
Or are you one of those who say , `` That ca n't happen to us '' ? 
The tragedy in Libya , we have all forgotten about Bahrain where a Minority Rule the Majority . 
am I the only one who thinks that the ATTACK on Libya , is to divert attention from BAHRAIN ? . . 
the mind Boggles March 21 , 2011 at 2:56 pm | Reply Mind boggles is the Arab League asking for military intervention from the UN with the no fly zone then balking when it actually happens . 
Or the fact that the Arab nations who do support it wo n't do it publicly and all the negative press is directed at the UN -LRB- mainly the British , French , and Americans -RRB- for doing what the world kept asking them to do . 
March 21 , 2011 at 3:06 pm | Reply It is no surprise that The Arab League wants to have their cake and eat it too . 
Or that they would buy into the state run propaganda machine running from Gadhafi 's bedroom . 
Now that they have bought into Gadhafi 's narrative of civilians being killed , they want no part of Arabs killing Arabs . 
Even Al-Jazeera is more believable than the Gadhafi mouthpiece media . 
The should cusp their ears when Gadhafi talks . 
He keeps spinning and spinning and spinning the story into it has finally spun out of control . 
His fake cease-fire should be a good indication of his lies . 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:28 pm | Reply Then Britian , France and America should wise up and walk away or tell the Arab League to put their request in writting . 
If they are not willing . 
March 22 , 2011 at 10:12 am | Reply This is great that France , British & US and UN decided to go ahead with the no-fly zone and take actiion , if they had not taken that action when they did , it might have been too late , at least for Bengazi . 
When this is all said and done , the people of the Arab world and in particular , the Muslims , should not forget that this help was asked by the people of Libia , US did NOT go and interfer . 
They must not forget this fact . 
March 21 , 2011 at 3:40 pm | Reply They wo n't forget , they just wo n't care . 
Do n't forget that being an american is all but illegal is most muslim countries March 21 , 2011 at 4:10 pm | Reply In every country , there are always bunch of people hating the government . 
The people -LRB- \* Libya people -RRB- asked for helps are the rebels , not the majority of the country . 
Just like the guy from Iraq showed the world how much weapons of mass destruction the Iraq government -LRB- Hussein -RRB- has and now confessed that he lied to satisfy his personal goal , did n't care thousands of american soldiers dies , ten of thousands disabled , and hundreds of thousands of Iraqi civilians died . 
If you go to America and ask if any one think american government should be brought down , and if your power is ten or hundred times the power of american military , of course you will have \* American people \* beg you to dispose of their inhuman presidents , who , through Patriot Act , can imprison anyone suspected without forever . 
It actually happened and is happening . 
March 21 , 2011 at 10:14 pm | Reply Oh please ! 
Since when have you EVER seen an order come down from the UN to attack and less than 24 hrs later a country is being bombarded ? 
WHY are these countries attacking a country who is DEFENDING itself from fully armed rebels ? 
No peaceful protesters were fired upon by the Libyan army . 
If state militias armed themselves the way the Libyan rebels did , you better dmn well believe the US would fire upon US citizens . 
And would be hailed heros for arresting and killing `` resisters '' . 
France and Great Brittan would also do the same upon such armed attack from rebels within their own countries and the UN would not interfere . 
It would be deemed a legit attack . 
PLEASE this is NOTHING more than some kind of diversion . 
Not sure from what but this all happened WAY too fast . 
March 21 , 2011 at 11:47 pm | Reply Your statements are ridiculous . 
The protesters were indeed gunned down . 
And to your comparison with militias in America ? 
The difference is that we have a way to rid ourselves of presidents we believe are not acting in our interests : we can vote them out . 
the Libyans have no such recourse . 
March 22 , 2011 at 12:35 am | Only the stupid Americans carry the load for the rest of the world , all the Arab cowards vote yes but do SH \*\* . 
Obama is an ASS H \*\* E and plays free and loose with our tax $ $ $ . 
Let the rest of the world step up we should worry about our own . 
March 21 , 2011 at 3:40 pm | Reply Better take a look at who in Congress pushed for what our President is doing over there now . 
You can not blame Obama for this one any more than you can blame him for Iraq or Afghanistan . 
The so-called Conservative Eagles are the ones pushing the US into becoming the world 's policemen ; we should be working harder to protect our own shores . 
March 21 , 2011 at 6:31 pm | Reply Obama should have more backbone to stand up against those in congress . 
March 21 , 2011 at 10:15 pm | Congress ? 
This order to attack came from the UN not Congress ! 
This attack from the US is COMPLETELY UNCONSTITUTIONAL !!!!!!! Congress never was consulted , never voted on this attack . 
Obama should be Constitutionally impeached ! 
March 21 , 2011 at 11:52 pm | To American Revolution -LRB- ironic name ! -RRB- 
: The president has every legal right to take these actions for a period of 90 day before getting congressional approval . 
There is no impeachable offense . 
March 22 , 2011 at 12:39 am | Jennifer correct me if I ` am wrong and I dont want to come off as a prick when I ask this but I ` snt it unconstitutional for the UN to use the american military in any way without the approval of congress ? 
I always thought that congress held the athority of the american military and the president was just commander . 
But my question is , if the UN can send the american military to set up a no-fly zone without the approval of congress isnt that in and of its self unconnstitutional , not just for the president but also the congress ? 
This may not be a very educated assumption but for some reason I thought the congress had to ok the use of the american military and that the president either had to have a presidental order or state of emergancy declared to bypass congress for american military use . 
I ` am just curious and again I dont want to be offensive when asking you this . 
March 22 , 2011 at 3:35 am | Where is the aid ship from Turkey ? 
Oh sorry only the Palestinians matter ... March 21 , 2011 at 3:43 pm | Reply After ferrying over 5000 people from Libya to safety on the way back It is probbaly stopped by an israeli army pirate ship as often the case . 
March 21 , 2011 at 3:59 pm | Reply March 21 , 2011 at 4:11 pm | Which sort of rabid , mad dog , anti-semitic group did you say you belong to ? 
March 21 , 2011 at 5:47 pm | I think the Qaddafi Human Rights award and the $ 250,000 has to do something with Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan 's reluctance to be involved . 
He received them not too long ago in November from Qaddafi . 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:08 pm | Reply March 21 , 2011 at 4:20 pm | Reply I am afraid it is going to be a protracted conflict . 
Sooner or later a mediation is needed to solve the problem . 
G l and Erdogan , the duo from Turkey would be quite suitable players . 
Germany , Russia , China and India would be welcomed by Colonel Gaddafi . 
Chavez could act unilaterally if he does n't feel comfortable with the others . 
March 21 , 2011 at 4:36 pm | Reply This is the most possible explanation and since France would n't be -LRB- allowed -RRB- to do the job , thus , to be on the cream layer of business , they hurried up taking the initiative on `` other '' grounds -- including being the ghost-busters . 
Perhaps this is why US government seems to be reserving a final say over the issue and they 're watching events from behind . 
March 23 , 2011 at 6:49 pm | Reply Turkey has been facing major changes in recent years . 
It is just normal for Turkey to act as wish , in this instance they are not saying stop the no fly zone . 
They are angry to France as France has attacked without talking to it 's allies . 
And Turkey has no more citizens left in Libya . 
Turkey has been evacuating for the last weeks and foreign nationals including Americans British Bangladeshi Indian etc. . 
So as this article indicates that too many Turkish companies has been working in Libya so they are not happy about it . 
This is a wrong statement misleading information . 
UK France Germany and Italy has major runs in Libya . 
The only think Turkey is concern is the deaths of innocent in Libya . 
As you might know Irag is Turkeys neighbor and has been invaded many times by Foreign countries and Turkey knows how people suffered and had to immigrate to Turkey . 
There was nearly 1.5 million Iraqi immigrants has entered to Turkey during the wars . 
The region has seen destruction in the most and Turkey does n't want this to Happen to Libya . 
Recently announced that 4 NYTimes journalist has been saved by Turkish government in Libya . 
And US UK has announced Turkey 's ambassador to Libya will act on behalf of them . 
So you can see that Turkey 's being there is actually helping the ally forces . 
Finally Russia China Germany wants the whole thing to finalize soon . 
People should n't trash a country just because it says it 's own opinion . 
For those who has never been to Turkey should not just pretend you know about it . 
First go for a visit to Turkey drink some Raki eat some fish and enjoy and then write anything bad about it . 
We have been going to Turkey for 17 years and do not have anything bad to say about them . 
I hope this war finishes very fast with as least deaths as possible . 
March 21 , 2011 at 5:57 pm | Reply I just have one thng to say about all of this ! 
Who is going to launch cruise missiles at the White house , Downing street and Paris when the world falls into economic collapse and the 3 governments send out military troops to imprison , shoot and control civilians within their countries -LRB- US , UK and France -RRB- ? 
When these countries fall into total chaos in the next few years , will the rest of the world be justified in forming a UN resolution and firing cruise missiles at these 3 countries when this happens . 
And will Obama stand talll to his words when he said , we can not stand by at let Libyans die at the hands of its leaders without doing anything . 
Will his own words be used against him at a later date ? 
And is n't it funny that exactly where the rebels have formed in Benghazi is where the majority of oil is produced in Libya ? 
Is this and Oil control maneuver ? 
Hmmmm wake up world to what is going on here and it is n't about helping the Libyans . 
March 21 , 2011 at 8:40 pm | Reply March 22 , 2011 at 12:42 am | Reply The only important thing is ending this conflict in peace UN plan had good intention but was a fail from start no fly zone is acceptable but giving weapons to rebels to help them fight wo n't bring peace but more death you can not solve a war with more fighting but only with talking If you want to protect civilians you have to bring ground troops and protect the cities air force or bombardment can not guard those people anyone with some military knowledge knows this , Egypt can not help much at the moment as they have their own problems at home and Turkey would not involve in battle as it is against it 's political stand since founding of republic `` peace at home peace at world '' is the motto for decades and involve only in peace talk or directly protecting or helping civilians , If Turkey is not acting that means there is a good reason behind it I wish this conflict will resolve peacefully before any more innocent people dies in Libya . 
March 21 , 2011 at 8:56 pm | Reply The decision is made , no matter who says what , the goal is set . 
You can see it yourselves when you look at the blood decision maker vampire smiling as they decide . 
You would think they are bringing life to people dying by bombing them . 
Do you forget that the Libyans pleaded for the world to act ? 
March 22 , 2011 at 12:44 am | Reply The problem is n't Islam , Judaism , or Christianity . 
It is n't West or Arab either . 
It is greed in the human heart . 
Greed of the West over oil . 
Greed of Arab leaders over controlling the vast amounts of money they generate and amass from oil while leaving their populace poor . 
The issue that bothers me about my country is the U.S. hypocrisy . 
Khadafi is killing his own people which of course is wrong . 
Yet the other U.S. `` allies '' are doing similar things but because they are friendly to us we look the other way . 
Sometimes , our moral compass lacks consistency . 
Why are n't we involved in the Ivory Coast ? 
The U.S. does it fair share of supporting dictators around the world that kill their own people . 
As far as Khadafi , we always bring up Pan Am 103 on how evil he is yet we fail to mention that before that we bombed Libya many times before that in which one attack we killed his adopted daughter . 
As far as supporting the rebels in the Libyan civil war we must be careful . 
The U.S. has a very bad habit of arming a side that winds up being our enemy . 
We supported Osama bin Laden against Russia in Afghanistan as well as Saddam Hussein in Iraq against Iran . 
I really wish we would stop this `` Christianity is evil '' or `` Islam is evil '' . 
It is human greed that is evil . 
March 21 , 2011 at 9:16 pm | Reply For once in a blue moon the UNSC had done something , that is to impose a no fly zone in Libya . 
They say the purpose is to avoid the loss of civilian lives , but what the US and it 's allies are doing right now with their bombing is not the right solution as well . 
It still kills innocent civilian , and by destroying infrastructures , it is making life more miserable for Libyans . 
It is also emboldening the opposition to counter attack and prolong this civil war . 
And since it is obvious that the Western countries , want to to eliminate Gadhafi , I guess that civilians both pro and against Gadhafi are simply part of collateral damage . 
So , how can the UNSC justify these actions ? 
And truthfully , the only reason the west is doing these thing is because of oil , they can be hypocrite about it but the people around the world are not stupid as they may think . 
They will not venture to Yemen , or even Syria if needed because they know too well , that there is nothing to gain in that part of the world . 
And even Iran has been quite ruthless in trying to suppress it 's people , and yet America for one has not done anything . 
Remember , America is on the brink of bancruptcy and with this callous act of being the sheriff of the world once more , Obama just put us much more closer to being broke . 
March 21 , 2011 at 9:56 pm | Reply Why are all here lying to ourselves , we all know that is about OIL , western Nations couldn , t careless about Africans killing one another . 
Yesterday 4 CHILDREN AND 7 WOMEN were killed in BAHRAIN bu Government sniper THUGS on rooftops where is the Outrage , not even a Word from the Filthy western media because Bahrain monarchy is just like the Filthy Saudi THUGS . 
But the Libyan Government is Fighting ARMED rebels but somehow they can , t defend themselves . 
March 21 , 2011 at 10:02 pm | Reply Turkey can not be trusted at all . 
Second World War they stay neutral , in other words supported Hitler . 
Constantly violating human rights of all it 's minorities , Kurds , Armenians , Syrians , Greeks . 
No freedom of speech , freedom of religion -LRB- they keep killing Catholic Bishops and Priests and they deny the Orthodox Church for opening it 's schools -RRB- . 
They are threatening Israel , Really ? 
Still occupying a large part of an EU member state , Cyprus since 1974 . 
Constantly violating the Greek air space and provoking the Greeks into war over a few dry rocks . 
Most of the UN resolutions on Turkey have fallen in deaf ears . 
Now , thay are playing neutral again with the Lybia thing . 
I bet if it was bombing the Serbs the Turks would have been all over that . 
They love killing Orthodox Christians and Catholics . 
The Turks are NOT trustworthy and the Western powers are making HUGE mistakes in regards to not holding Turley accountable for it 's actions . 
Egypt at least is not trheatening anyone and it seems to be changing without bloodshed . 
March 21 , 2011 at 10:10 pm | Reply Mike , I 've lived in Turkey for over a decade now . 
When you 're ` feet dry ' in a country for a while , one tends to analyze the decisions being made by the powers that be , to try to get an understanding of the methods to their madness . 
Turkey is a country that stands firm by not letting outside influences dictate foreign policy . 
That 's a very smart move in this part of the world . 
Although no one close to me supports the ruling party , they have made a few sound judgments lately . 
Jumping on the ` Let 's Hit Libya ' bandwagon is not a smart decision on the part of the US ... We 've got problems of our own thanks to the previous administration . 
March 21 , 2011 at 11:36 pm | Reply `` We 've got problems of our own thanks to the previous administration . '' 
-- And this is exactly what frightens us , your `` next '' administration ... for all we know we are amidst of a transitional phase , the trigger was pulled , now the damage is being done , tomorrow is the job of the trigger owners . 
March 23 , 2011 at 7:37 pm | Mike , you should go to Turkey first and I have several Turkish and Kurdish friends and they say , they are brothers for centuries . 
Also in stanbul , there are several Kurdish places where they can earn a lot of money and are freedom for doing anything . 
For Greeks , I think you do n't know who had attacked first to Anatoila after WW1 !!!!!!!! March 22 , 2011 at 5:14 am | Reply I guess WW1 is the history `` date '' that interests you . 
It is like occupying a territory , destroying it , depopulating it and re-populating it with your own people , acquiring legitimacy and accuse the previous inhabitants and legitimate owners that want to kick you out and back to where you came from . 
MIKE , all you talk is bullshit . 
you are totally bias . 
if this is what you really believe , go make a right research from right resources . 
But , I believe you are provocateur , who does n't want peace on the world . 
you bustard , you are doing good job as provocateur . 
congrads ... lets increase the hate against turkish people , they are too good for this world ... March 22 , 2011 at 5:28 am | Reply Why do n't you address my concerns , instead attacking me and calling me names . 
Is that how you solve all of your issues in life ? 
At least the previous people that commented on my post they did with respect and humility . 
and some facts ... something you lack a great deal . 
I wish you happiness and peace . 
Mike , I think you do not know anything about Turkey and Turkish people , I have a lot of Turkish and Kurdish friends but I can only say that Turkish people are more polite and nice than Kurdish people . 
I dont know it is diffucult to tell but I dont believe that Turkish would try to exterminate Kurds . 
Also I must say that all nations try to kill other people from other nations . 
Remember WW2 and what people did each other and in Turkey , you can see that everybody is freedom and really nice to other foreign people . 
I have never listened any songs more beautiful than Turkish folk songs and I dont believe that the people who created this unique culture can not try to exterminate any nations ... It is about fashist politicians and not about Turkish people ... March 23 , 2011 at 4:07 pm | Reply I always respect others opinions ... as well as yours . 
Just a few things for you . . 
maybe you can help me . 
If you go further below in this discussion you will see someone posting as me under the name `` Mike '' just to distort and confuse the discussion . 
Why Turks need to do that ? 
Their behavior does not come with a whole lot of humility and integrity . 
They are constantly sending mixed signals as far as their intentions with Israel ... Why ? 
They are talking about attacking teh French airforce ... Really ? 
They deny the right to Kurds to have their own country ... 40 million people without a country ! 
They are in violation of a number of EU chapters ... Why ? 
They are still occupying a large portion of the Republic of Cyprus -LRB- EU member state -RRB- Why ? 
They are in violation of not implementing a plethora of UN resolutions . 
They are in denial of the extermination of millions of Armenians . 
They are constantly provoking Greece into a war . 
i. Turkey did n't have to fight in WWII , they need n't show what military skills they had acquired in order to serve whatever their hidden agenda proposes -LRB- reference to US goals -RRB- . 
After all , Germans were the allies for a century , and were the Soviets thanks to a heroic WWI defense . 
Turks did not need to oppress the so-called minorities -- in contrast , they needed to embrace every prime citizens to build up fast ; the country was economically bleeding and most of their citizens were killed or injured after WWI -- since the country was not industrialized the human loss had been extreme . 
The number of churches in Turkey exceeds that of the Rome ... sometimes it is forgotten perhaps , but Turks believe they have already contained the Christian teachings -- it may be altered , but not devilish to them . 
Religious talks against Turkey has never been a fruitful and great idea -- believe me . . 
Turkey has warned Israel over their uncontrolled actions , yes , threatened them ? 
Turkey , unlike Israel is part of multinational organizations of any kind , and can be checked , controlled , praised or blamed . 
Israel is an abomination in this regard , roaming freely unchecked , because they feel they were isolated . 
Turkey offers them to break off this isolation in the language no others tried . 
No one knows the issues that include Jerusalem , Palestine and Israel as Judaism any more and any better than Turkey . 
v. Yes , Turkey has no intention for giving up their own legitimate right of doing so no matter what -- they had to silence Greece and intervene the military coupe they gone out of control on the island ; the island has an extremely valuable location since it gives the owners an overseer position above the Suez channel and control over all East Mediterranean . 
Under normal circumstances Greece would thank to Turkey for their intentional helps over the coupe , their EU and NATO memberships , I suppose they did n't . 
Turks should stop provoking their mighty neighbors or they may once again feel like conquering all the way to ancient Persia . 
the deaf population in Turkey is around 2,5 million , Turkey , in total , is nearing 80M dynamic population . 
Turkey did not stay neutral as the Serbians attacking Bosnians , who had been a major contributor to their civilization , thus , culturally tied population , as they will not stay neutral while their 10b $ prospected marketplace is getting bombed by a rival nation . 
Turkey has completed a major evacuation from the country , and has sent 5 ships and one sub marine , vix . 
Interesting point of view that suggests Turks are somehow related to the protestants and other churches , just not to those your parents were used to take you . 
We also raise a vampire race and have finest selection of other breeds FYI . 
x. I fail to see any supportive arguments why Turks , not even Turkey have not been trust worthy , though respecting your own faith on this subject , I understand Red and White are not favorite color combination . 
With all respect , I do not believe Egypt has any kind of control over their own territories . 
This is the very same reason why Turks have ruled the Northern Egyptian territories and the Channel , but not `` conquered '' the land or stayed on foreign soil as invaders . 
Egyptians are loved in Turkey , they have the resources , but they are not left alone , and Turks do not pay a role in this I 'm afraid . 
In my opinion , Turkey is a solid country whose words and potential friendship or partnership should be credible enough . 
Do not be surprised if one of these days Turks start flying over Libyan cities to intercept French vultures should they continue acting upon their own will . 
Best regards ; March 23 , 2011 at 8:36 pm | Reply You get credit for recognizing that Alexander the Great was 100 % Greek . 
As far as your comments ... I respect your opinion . 
Respect is something the majority of the Turks lack . 
As you can see below in this discussion someone is posting notes as me with the same name `` Mike '' ... Is that another Turkish quality ? 
Steal others identities and spread mis-information ? 
Writing fake Mike is not about nationatity and is not about being Turkish !! If there was another discussion about other subjects , maybe a German or an South African would do the same , you can not know !!!!! 2 . 
For this question , I think every country does it . 
Trade and showing reaction about diffirent situations are different aspects !!! 3 . 
Every country has patriots who think and aim to destroy something which is owned by other countries . 
I am sure a person who lives in Iraq might want to destroy all the things which come from the west if his father were klled by Western forces ... Think about that ... !!!! 4 . 
You may be right about this subject but I have just researched Turkish election done in 2007 and in this election , BDP which supports right of Kurds and advocates PKK organization which is considered as terrorist group by EU has just taken the 5 % of the all votes in Turkey . 
I means that 95 % of the people in Turkey do not want a Kurdish Territory in their homeland . 
And There is Kurdish TV and Kurdoloji studies and Kurdish language courses at Turkish universities ... 5 . 
I think it is good for a country to be able to say no about what you say to do as you think that it is not good for country 6 . 
I also researched about Cyprus past and there was an ANNAN PLAN which was refused by Greek part There is no need to tell about the war , massacres from two sides . 
It is a well known story for all wars . 
We all know that Israel does not obey UN rules . 
I think Armenians and Turkish historins must search all together in a neutral comission . 
As far as I know Armenians refused that . 
Greeks spent a lot of money for military developments , that 's why there is an economical crisis . 
For this subject , it is the guilt of not Only Turks but also Greeks . 
I reseached that Greeks had tried to occupied anatolia and there were two massacres from each side ... did you do any research through legit sources or you get all your information from the Turks ? 
Turkey is in violation of more UN resolutions than any other country . 
The geneocide against Armenians and the Turkish denial about this geneocide is one example of why Turkey can not be trusted . 
Invading small Nations -LRB- Cyprus 1\/2 million people -RRB- vs Turkey -LRB- 70 some million -RRB- , using Napalm bombs , killing and raping unarmed citizens and now they want to establish a separate country ? 
That is another example why Turks have zero credibility . 
March 26 , 2011 at 6:14 pm | Bias , bias , bias ... I also know that Armenians must prove that , as I wrote , it is not about nationality , for example , think that American or French parliments decide there was a genocide against Armenians , as we know , parlimenters are not historians-at least all of them - , they are businessman and something like that and Armenian political lobbies say them to vote about accepting there was a genocide , then Parliments decide there was a genocide !!!!!!!!!!!! We need scientific evidences , dont we ? 
If they prove also , it is not a guilt of existing Turks , as I researched in the internet that Kurdish gangs had tried to exterminate Armenian people . 
I wish nobody would have been killed in anywhere . 
For UN , we can not count how many people die all over the Africa and we can hear almost nothing from UN . 
So UN is not a good example for us !!!!!!!!!!! I will not write more ... I actually agree with you on the point that killings and injustices are happening all over . 
Unfortunately The USA and friends choose and pick which are worthy to help and which are not . 
Kuwait was worthy , Iraq was worthy , x-Yugoslavia was worthy , and now Libya . 
The massacres at Darfur apparently was not good enough for international intervention , the Turkish invasion of Cyprus apparently was not good enough for international intervention ... . 
Where there is oil there is interest -LRB- x-Yugoslavia was an odd one ... since there is no oil -RRB- ... . . 
Interests above all ... There is not much integrity left in the world . 
But , that does not mean that people like me and you should n't take the high road to respect and integrity . 
Arab world has abundance of tyrants and is going through an era where younger generation is thirsting for democrary and more representative governments . 
Strong religious influences have always been obstacles to dramatic , social and political changes . 
For the long term , I see great things for our Arab brothers and sisters . 
In the short term , I am fearful of the suffering they will have to endure . 
Whatever the reasons , thousands of innocent lives were saved this past weekend in Libya and I 'm very thankful for that . 
March 21 , 2011 at 10:47 pm | Reply Libya is an easy call : Qadaffi is a rogue , his county is too close to NATO bases , and even the other Arab gov ` ts wo n't mind seeing him go . 
If it were n't for the military he built up with all of Europe 's money for oil over 40 years , the rebels could have won two weeks ago anyway . 
No reason to let them be slaughtered like Saddam did to the Shiites after the first US-Iraq War . 
Ivory Coast is n't going to get any press . 
No oil and too black for US\/EU involvement . 
How long has Somalia been a sh \* thole , and we wo n't do squat there , even after it became a pirate haven . 
Bahrain and Yemen are too close logistically and politically to Saudi Arabia for the U.S. to do anything to help them . 
The US ca n't get on the side opposite the Saudi gov ' t since they control so much oil and so much of our debt . 
It 's awful hard to attack your paymaster 's friends in the Gulf . 
March 21 , 2011 at 10:57 pm | Reply 60 per cent of those polled in a Jazeera Arabic website poll are in favor of the military action both no fly zone and surgical strikes , they have been watching a month of graphic coverage that never made it on Western Tv , seeing even more horrific images of atrocites agaisnt civilians and children on Arabic facebook pages for the Libyan oppostion including when this was still a peaceful movement of sit ins and demos met with tanks and artillery fire , and they have also heard not just opposition fighures but ordinary Libyans call for help so the majority of Arabs see this as saving Libyan lives . 
The callers on Jazeera Mubasher , the Cspan like channel , are almost all in favor , those who regret it wish arab armies were doing the job and hoping that when we have represntative Arab leaders they will act in such crises . 
March 21 , 2011 at 11:11 pm | Reply Thank you for providing some actual facts to the discussion . 
March 22 , 2011 at 12:49 am | Reply Just rechecked the poll on Jazeera Arabic website , now climbed to 63 per cent in favor of the western military actions in Libya . 
Hope the trend continues , I see this as a turning point in Western-Arab relations , explicit language agiasnt occupation and standing by victims not oppresors whether Arab dictators or Israli occupation and settlement building , March 21 , 2011 at 11:14 pm | Reply Yara , Large , established Arab states need to take the lead in influencing other Arab states on change and democratization . 
I would like to see Eqypt flourish as a strong democracy . 
It could be a leader and admired in the Arab world . 
It could influence `` what is Arab '' . 
Two weeks ago Obama , Clinton and Gates were all hesitant in Lybyan involvement . 
US is fearful of being in the middle of `` Arab matters '' . 
Without confirmation from Arab League , Libyans could have been left to an awesome fate . 
March 21 , 2011 at 11:50 pm | Reply WOW ! 
This has gone far enough . 
If this is the last act the Lord wanted for his People . 
I believe by the time this is all over , our calendars will be @ the last days before December 21 , 2012 ! 
... March 21 , 2011 at 11:51 pm | Reply do n't forget , blood has never stopped in middle east since those middle eastern countries betrayed Turkey and sold their souls to the European countries in the 1 . 
Do n't call the Egypt as major factor in the area , we know them as losers from the war they fought against Israel mini country . 
TO SUM UP , there are two major power on the world one of them is TURKEY , the other is UNITED STATES OF AMERICA ... March 22 , 2011 at 5:11 am | Reply T rkiye Yurtta bar , D nyada bar ister . . 
Halk n Petrolunu stemez ... March 22 , 2011 at 5:41 am | Reply T RK HALKIDA HERZAMAN DERK ... B Z NSANI SEVER Z. . 
ALLAH CC YARATMASINDAN T R ... L BYA L BYA HALKININDIR ... March 22 , 2011 at 5:45 am | Reply i - Turkey is a member of NATO and has the right to vote yes or no , regardless of anyone 's opinions . 
It is the same country and government that did not let US troops into Iraq over its borders . 
ii - Current operation is nothing more than a chaos with no clear motives , no central control and coordination , as well as no support from the rest of the world , including the arab league and former russian republics or the russia itself . 
Why would a country accept to be a part of such an unclear goal , with unclear results and risks ? 
It is Turkey 's right to ask for more information , and stay aside . 
You will be sending your troops to a war , we are talking about human beings , and no matter what nationality they are , a human life is invaluable . 
iii - Every country may have interests on another country , which is normal , however , it is not really very ethical to change the rules of the game while playing it . 
This is what France did . 
Mr. Sarkozy , only to have more public support for his current seat , started using force , and now he is paying for it . 
Turkey and France have a very limited amount of money-cash flow and commercial relationship , but a lot more with Libya happens to be . 
Now Turkey is actually losing money because of France 's irresponsible attack . 
It is normal for a country to try to control the amount of losses in such a crisis situation , this is what Turkey is doing . 
March 22 , 2011 at 6:02 am | Reply March 22 , 2011 at 10:12 am | Reply DONT TRUST THE NATIONS WHO ATTACKS OTHER COUNTIRIES FOR OIL March 23 , 2011 at 4:12 pm | Reply Neither Turkey , nor Egypt expect any positive outcome , for their own , out of Libyan intervention . 
Both countries have been actively seeking diplomatic resolution to the civil unrest in Libya . 
They have shown much , much more ambition and have given plenty more efforts than western countries did , to have Gadhafi make a positive move towards a peaceful resolution of the unrest . 
Both countries have enormous economic and social ties with Libya & Libyans . 
Both countries are losing a considerable economic activity between Libya and theirs in the process . 
COnsidering all these facts , it would be quite foolish to claim that Turkey and\/or Egypt may have ambitions to participate in western military assault of Libya . 
Turkish PM have made it very clear that his administration -- reflecting the feelings of majority of Turks -- believe that Libya belongs to Libyans and Westerners are attacking Libya for Oil , economic & political gain . 
This should not be taken lightly . 
March 22 , 2011 at 10:27 am | Reply Mike , just wanted to give you some facts about Turkey ; - During 2nd World War Turkey had no financial means to even prepare for the war . 
After the 1st World War , the loans of Ottoman Empire was portioned to be paid by Turkey , in addition to the poor state of the economics , which is why neither Ataturk nor Inonu forced to select government run economy rather than market economy . 
There are more details about that period if you go to wikipedia and read the presidency of Inonu . 
- Violating human rights , are in the hands of government . 
Unfortunately the money is talking most of the time rather than the ` national interest ' . 
And the journalists who points that out or works on that gets to be assasinated or jailed . 
Just few Ugur Mumcu , Hrant Dink not to mention just recently jailed Ahmet Sik my old colleague . 
If what you say about freedom of religion was true there should have been no Jewish , Armenian , Greek Orthodox living in Turkey . 
And just recently they have changed the law on Education , so that illegal Armenians children can attend to Armenian schools -LRB- or any other school -RRB- without looking for their residency in Turkey . 
Isreal will always be an ally to Turkey , no matter what current givernment is trying to do . 
The links are too deep , and not only due to historial alliance but also due to the fact that Isreal was the only country to help us caught Apo . 
I do n't think you are in the knowledge that there is a place called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus , with an army , government , representatives and they held election every four years . 
Oh I forgot , you guys are still not recognizing that they are a separate government . 
Just an fyi do n't say that around a Northern Cypriot . 
They go bezerk if you say they live under siege . 
In any case Turkey does not have to prove itself to people one by one . 
The history will show ... March 22 , 2011 at 10:31 am | Reply It sounds to me that is a bunch of rhetoric with no substance . 
That is the answer you give to someone that has no idea about history and facts . 
You claim that you are a historian ? 
I believe you are more like the department of mis-information . 
During second WW2 Turkey made a choice to stand by the sidelines while the rest of Europe was getting destroyed by the Germans . 
Many other countries were poor as well but they made a choice to stand up against Hitler and the extermination of thousand of Jews and others . 
Turkey took the easy road out and did nothing while thousands were tortured and killed . 
You claim Turkey was so poor from Ottoman debts that they could n't fight a war ? 
However , they found the necessary means to exterminate millions of Armenians , uproot thousands of Greeks from their ancestoral homes and kill without mercy just before 1923 . 
I seriously doubted whether or not Israel is going to be normal ever again . 
Cyprus : Are you kidding with the puppet Turkish pseudo-state ? 
Nobody in the world is recognizing that except the invaders themselves . 
Numerous UN resolutions call for the withdrawal of the Turkish military from the island - Of course the Turks do not really pay attention to any of that . 
In addition the Turkish occupation of part of the Republic of Cyprus -LRB- Full memebr of the EU -RRB- is prohibiting Turkey 's asparations to enter the EU . 
If Turkey does not plan to comply with EU requirements then they should withdrawal their application and form their own club . 
As far the `` illegal '' Armenian children ??? Really ???? Illegal to who ? 
And thousands of Turkish illegal settlers in Cyprus are what ? 
We only cheer with friends . 
Re : `` exterminate millions of Armenians '' - the lack of money is one of the reasons how still we do n't understand those 1.5 M fictitious number managed to get killed without our knowledge . 
Why should we keep it secret , I can tell how many Cypriot was shot to death trying to climb a flag-pole , among one of the things they should n't be doing . 
You were misinformed heavily which only serves to make you hate us ... if you 're unsure about the reasons see where it serves . 
Cyprus was not invaded after EU , actually , Greece was taken into EU after Turkey has intervened freely , legitimately and successfully -LRB- though this part is arguable -RRB- . 
May be we should start talking about the Greek legitimacy over Crete , and the Rhodes + 12 islands . 
I would also love to see if you can price several of the big ones that are close to the shore . 
We can be `` partners '' March 23 , 2011 at 8:52 pm | In 1009 , Gadhafi was allowed back into the USA -- given $ 400,000 by our Govt to go into his children 's charity . 
While , we had unemployed people at one of its highest rates -LRB- 2009 -RRB- . 
Money that could be applied to our own country . 
When this war was launched against Lybia , Obama said that the Arab countries were onboard . 
Then when the tomahawks began landing on Lybia 's soil-the Arab countries backed away . 
The planning of the uprising in the Middle East has been cleverly planned -- people who have interest want control of Egypt -- Muslim Brotherhood who strongly believe in the Sharia law . 
When riots presents a coup to over throw leaders of nations , choas leads to getting the wrong people into power . 
Saddam Hussein was a man who used mustard gas on his people -- killed those who sought to over throw him-YET WHEN PRESIDENT BUSH TOOK HIM OUT-HE WAS CONDEMNED -- HATED -- Now THE CHANGE of Obama is not any different than Bush 's . 
Obama is helping rebels -LRB- coup -RRB- to over throw their leader . 
Obama said that Gadhafi was capable of using mustard gas on his own people-WELL HUSSEIN ADMITTED HE USED MUSTARD GAS ON HIS PEOPLE IN 1988 . 
NOW OBAMA IS IN THE SAME BOAT AS BUSH ! 
March 22 , 2011 at 1:24 pm | Reply In 2009 , Gadhafi was allowed back into the USA given $ 400,000 by our Govt to go into his children 's charity . 
While , we had unemployed people at one of its highest rates -LRB- 2009 -RRB- . 
Money that could be applied to our own country . 
When this war was launched against Lybia , Obama said that the Arab countries were onboard . 
Then when the tomahawks began landing on Lybia 's soil-the Arab countries backed away . 
The planning of the uprising in the Middle East has been cleverly planned people who have interest want control of Egypt Muslim Brotherhood who strongly believe in the Sharia law . 
When riots presents a coup to over throw leaders of nations , choas leads to getting the wrong people into power . 
Saddam Hussein was a man who used mustard gas on his people killed those who sought to over throw him-YET WHEN PRESIDENT BUSH TOOK HIM OUT-HE WAS CONDEMNED HATED Now THE CHANGE of Obama is not any different than Bush 's . 
Obama is helping rebels -LRB- coup -RRB- to over throw their leader . 
Obama said that Gadhafi was capable of using mustard gas on his own people-WELL HUSSEIN ADMITTED HE USED MUSTARD GAS ON HIS PEOPLE IN 1988 . 
NOW OBAMA IS IN THE SAME BOAT AS BUSH ! 
March 22 , 2011 at 1:25 pm | Reply John , what is an Islamist anyway ? 
I am interested in learning what is meant exactly by this term as I am a Muslim who practices prayer fasting and the other pillars , I believe in divine law based upon the Qur ` an and tradition of the Prophet Muhammad . 
We do not believe in enforcing our beliefs and values upon anyone nor do we support terror or radical ideologies and yes born and raised in good ol USA mom grandma and everyone for the past two hundred plus years . 
Here is some research on the salafist perspective regarding radicalsim and thes contemporary issues we deal with IMO an Islamist does seek to impose Shiria law and lacks tolerance for those who are not Muslim , and very often also for those who are not Muslim of the same stripe . 
There is a militancy to Islamists in which force is justified because of the end , and\/or those to whom it is directed against are marginalized as `` infidels '' , unbelievers , or otherwise lesser human beings whose killing and targeting does n't count . 
A common trait in Islamists is a paranoia that all others are out to destroy them . 
Oftern , there is some bases to the paranoia as others , feeling threatened by the militancy of the Islamist , but perhaps not differentiating between Islamist and Muslim , push back , sometimes in the process of fighting the militancy of the Islamist , commiting atrocities of their own -LRB- see Uzbeckistan 's history since breaking apart from the USSR as an example of the push back being practiced on a state wide level with horrendous brutalitiy -RRB- . 
I also see a similar distinction between a Zionist and a Jew , and between radical western religious zealots and Christians . 
I have real problems with Zionists -LRB- as I do with Islamists and western zealots -RRB- , but no issues with Muslims or Jews or Christians per se . 
Once the mindset shutters out those not of the same belief as enemies , and the mindset of the extremist group can justify all manner of injustice and atrocity against those not in their group , the process of dehumanizing the practioner has begun , and the result is the fanatism we see all over the world today . 
Most recently much of that fanaticism has involved the Islamists , but it comes in phases , and the Zionists have had their turn , as has the western zealots , and each may come to the forefront again . 
March 22 , 2011 at 5:52 pm | Reply `` I am a Muslim who practices prayer fasting and the other pillars , I believe in divine law based upon the Qur ` an and tradition of the Prophet Muhammad . 
We do not believe in enforcing our beliefs and values upon anyone nor do we support terror or radical ideologies '' I wanted to second these words if I may . . 
I myself am a muslim too , and we , in Turkey have our own right to choose how to believe and how to practice our belief ... that the same Turkey , in a different name , have waved the banner of ISLAM for great many centuries without spreading an islamic terror of any kind -LRB- knowing we still have aunts of my father who remained to be christians back in kosovo as their men in the army had to pull back with the shrinking borders -RRB- . 
Perhaps this is not a good place , but to underline the irrelevance of any religious role in Turkey 's hesitation , we do believe we accept what Jesus had brought and had told , and we do not distinguish any of those coming with the same knowledge , Mohammad or Jesus or Noah . 
For those who may not know , Qur ` an says `` leave my people alone '' it does n't say `` go and teach them a good lesson '' . 
March 23 , 2011 at 7:22 pm | Reply There is a big immigration from Armenia to Turkey at the moment . 
Unfortunately Armenia had not been able to create jobs , and Armenian skilled labor force is moving to where ever they find job . 
Those ones are not Turkish citizens and most of the time they do n't get work visa . 
Meantime you are mixing up the second world war and the first world war . 
If Turkey was that rich why the Soviet Russia tried to entice Ataturk to move to their block by offering gold ? 
By the way why are you twisting my words ? 
I am just stating the facts . 
Maybe you do n't like the facts . 
Maybe you are pro-current Turkish government . 
You sound like one that is for sure . 
March 23 , 2011 at 10:31 am | Reply I love turkish people and their country . 
-LRB- 3 we need more positive outlooks this day and age and stop dwelling on past event no matter how tragic any of them maybe we will never be able to move forward with this negative finger pointing outlook . 
March 23 , 2011 at 3:05 pm | Reply While we are having this `` fictitious '' speech , IMAGINE THAT all of a sudden this `` bar '' is being bombed and rifled by Frenchman , just because we can get to there and make our own business , buy drinks , give to each other , talk in the way we like . 
The place is being closed and possibly there 'll be a new land-owner ; in a show-only arabic name or not , certainly we are sick of this idea . 
Hope my example was clear , yet there is the drinks you ought to repay March 23 , 2011 at 7:07 pm | Reply Hi Guys . 
I actually were wrong , once check my facts I understood what a whack job I am . 
I apologise from Turkish people . 
I understood that during the uprising Armenians killed more Turkish and Kurdish people . 
All the things I wrote above just dismiss it . 
Oops March 23 , 2011 at 7:53 pm | Reply Fake Mike , Thanks for proving my point that the Turks are not to be trusted . 
This is a simple forum where people express their ideas and of course this particular Turkish person positing as me , `` mike '' is trying to do what Turks are known for doing for ages , dis-information , chaos , propaganda and yes steal others identities so they can re-inforce -LRB- in their own minds -RRB- their positions on subjects that are just plain wrong and criminal . 
There is NO freedom of speech in Turkey . 
You dare speak against `` Turkisheness '' and you are done . 
Nobody will ever find you again ... not in a million years . 
Yes , Turkey is peaceful when and if you play by their rules and their rules only . 
In other words allow them to take whatever they want from their neighbors , rape whoever they want and kill unarmed prisoners of war and even civilians over a piece of cloth . 
That is what Turkey represents ... basically nothing good or human . 
I live in stanbul and I can just laugh what you write my friend-Mike - . 
First we had an independence war against emperyalist powers during 1920-1923 . 
Just researched who came to Anatolia to conquer the Turkish lands in these years and learn what happened after that . 
Secondly , Turkey is the only country which had kicked out emperyalist goverments -LRB- not nations -RRB- like France , England , Greece and taly . 
We have no problem with any nations . 
We have problem with the mind that tried to execute our culture . 
I am proud of my grandfather who had defensed my country in anakkale during WW1 . 
I really respect other nations as my nationality but as I say We had a problem with capitalist forces in the past . 
Also , I am sorry but I must say that I can not breathe anywhere except my country and I feell so lucky that Turkish people is not cold people like some European nations but we like all nations . 
If Israel soldiers kill babies on beaches in Palestine , I must show my reaction and If a Palestinian person tries to kill Jewish people , I feel the same and show reaction in the same way . 
For Greeks and Armenian , nobody talks about Turkish people who had been killed by Armenian and Greek partisans . 
I listened a lot of stories from my grandmother about what Greek did in my hometown K tahya after WW1 and what armenians did in the east of Turkey . 
After these , you can not except any nations not to do anytithing to stop this extermination !!!! Some people can not see the other perspectives of the situations . 
I can just thank to Mustafa Kemal ATAT RK Hope the Turkish air force soon will start to chase and hunt down the Hypocrite French Vultures over the Libyan sky !! March 24 , 2011 at 5:26 am | Reply You do n't like teh French , The Germans , The Greeks , The Cypriots , The Armenians , The Syrians , The Iranians , The Kurds , The Russians , The Austrians , The Serbs , The Bulgarians , The Lebanese , The Jews , The Dutch , The Chinese ... and on and on and on ... Who exactly do you like ? 
I wonder why all those nations do not trust the Turks ? 
Could all these nations be wrong ? 
This is not about nationality . 
This is about greedlines of the governments and I think you had a person who were kicked out from somewhere because of your greedlines like emperyalist forces in 1923 in Anatolia . 
take a rest and Go to holiday And killing unarmed civilians climbing a poll to take down a piece of cloth and also beating to death unarmed civilians for expressing their feelings and their frustrutions with a continuation of occupation and plain disregard of all UN and EU resolutions ... . 
of course you are not about nationality ... ... Riiiiiiiiiiiiight ... ... March 27 , 2011 at 11:28 am | Reply Withdraw your application form the EU -LRB- you really do n't belong in there - it is only for civilized countries -RRB- and start your own club with all the criminal nations in the world ... You can hook up with Venezuela , N. Korea , Libya , and any other criminal countries and have a good time ... FOR YOUR HYPHOTESIS ; THERE APPEARS A RESULT THAT SHOWS EVERY NATION AND COUNTRY IS CRIMINAL Yes you are right to a certain point . 
I believe Germany today does not continue to do the things they have done in the past . 
Plus I believe they are paying for their mistakes and they accepted responsibility . 
I do n't think France is occupying Algeria . 
America is paying dearly for the Vietnam fiasco plus I do n't believe they are occupying any part of Vietnam . 
I do n't think Russia is occupying any part of Afghanistan plus they paid dearly as well . 
Armenia vs Azerbajan . . 
I do n't believe that is a fair example . 
It is one sided from the Turksih point of view . 
Seem international opinion and historical facts on this one . 
England ... well that is your friends . 
You learn from each other how to occupy other lands and claim them your own . 
Turkey ... is still occupying foreign territory -LRB- Cyprus for example -RRB- and they are still violating all laws in regards to Cyprus . 
Turkey ... still deny the self detemination of millions of Kurds to establish homeland . 
Not only that but the treatment of the Kurds is extremely harsh and unbearable conditions . 
Turkey is still threatening Greece every other week ... Violating the Greek air space as well as sea borders . 
Turkey is in violation of more EU resolutions than any other counrty . 
Turkey is in violation of a number of EU chapters ... more than any other country that wanted to be a member . 
Freedom of Speech and Religion do not exist . 
Stll denying the Patriarchate of Constantinople to operate the theological school of Halki . 
The Patriarch must be a Turkish citizen ... Really ? 
Is that Freedom of what ? 
The rights of the handful of Greeks still remaining in Turkey are being abused regularly . 
So you are comparing today 's Turksy to who again ? 
You may want to compare today 's Turkey with Iran , Iraq , Libya , N. Korea , Venezuela , Afghanistan , Pakistan , Azerbarjan , Syria , S. Arabia , Sudan , Yemen ... and you may be on to something . 
You can laugh all you want . 
That is an indication of your inability and unwillingness to grasp the situation . 
March 28 , 2011 at 4:55 pm | Reply This is an indication that you can not recognize why eastern countries are in bad conditions . 
This is a result of imperialist spreading at the beginning of 20th century . 
We know everything , the 3th world countries will protect their culture and how cant you understand that these criminal leaders of these countries that you mentioned were the result of western policies . 
You must be blind ... This is my last answer and good luck for you to give up your bias against poor countries . 
You can not see that there are no criminal countries , there are several criminal leaders and these criminal people live in criminal countries are trying to get rid of these dictators . 
And we all know that they could not remain their positions without the help of super powers ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . . 
March 29 , 2011 at 10:38 am | -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
