BP claims to be slowing flow of oil into Mexican Gulf Small tube inserted into fractured pipe is capturing 1,000 barrels a day but far larger amounts are still pouring into sea Monday 17 May 2010 22.40 BST Oil barrels stacked up in a yard . 
BP 's tube can collect an amount of oil equal to 1,000 of these each day . 
But between 4,000 and 99,000 barrels per day are still leaking into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Kay Nietfeld\/Corbis The company said that it would now be able to capture 1,000 barrels of oil a day after inserting a small tube into the end of the broken pipeline lying on the seabed . 
Official estimates put the spill at 5,000 barrels of oil a day , but some scientists say the spill could be as much as 100,000 barrels daily . 
BP says there is no way to measure it accurately . 
BP began funnelling some of the leaking oil and gas using the tube yesterday . 
The tube , 4 inches in diameter , has been inserted into the 21-inch diameter pipeline . 
A BP spokesman said the company hoped later this week to divert more than the 1,000 barrels of oil per day now envisaged . 
He said the ramp-up would be slow to prevent the build-up of crystal-like gas hydrates , which have hampered previous efforts to stem the flow . 
He did not give the maximum amount the tube could divert and BP released a statement cautioning that this was a new technology , so `` both its continued operation and its effectiveness in capturing the oil and gas remain uncertain '' . 
BP is storing the captured oil in vessels on the surface and flaring the gas . 
The company said it hoped to stop the leak entirely when it attempts to re-activate the blow-out preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- , which failed to shut down the well , as designed , in a week . 
BP engineers working in a crisis center at the company 's US headquarters in Houston say they assume each attempt to stem the flow will fail , so always have an alternative plan . 
Chief operating officer Doug Suttles told the US news channel CNN : `` We 're throwing absolutely everything at this . '' 
Journalists ringing BP 's general press inquiry number in the US for information about the disaster are greeted with a recording asking for anyone with `` suggestions about possible technical solutions '' to get in touch . 
Concern is also growing that vast plumes of oil are forming beneath the surface , creating huge `` dead zones '' where marine life can not survive . 
BP has pumped more than 500,000 gallons of chemical dispersant into the sea , much of it at the source of the leak . 
Scientists say these unprecedented quantities of dispersant are preventing most of the oil from reaching the surface but could be making the pollution worse . 
BP staff involved in the oil spill response operation are providing conflicting accounts of the effects of the dispersant . 
Ian Cavanagh , vice-president for subsea , surface and wells and one of BP 's leadership team directing the response based in Houma in Louisiana , told the Guardian last week that the effect of the dispersant was to break the oil down into smaller and smaller separate molecules until they dispersed into the eco-system . 
But Melanie Bell , operations team leader with oversight of the near shore booming and shoreline clean-up operations in the Venice area , said that the dispersant , oil and water were forming jelly-like blobs , which were washing up on the shore . 
A BP spokesman admitted that dispersant , which toxicologists liken to very strong detergent , is less effective if it comes into contact with oil that has already been in water for several days . 
The chief executive of the British oil company , Tony Hayward , sparked controversy last week when he told the Guardian that the amount of leaking oil and dispersant used were `` relatively tiny '' compared with the `` very big ocean '' of the Gulf of Mexico . 
The faulty BOP has been subpoenaed by US investigators . 
BP has been taking images of the device using underwater robots , which it believes will exonerate it of any blame for the accident , which is on course to surpass the Exxon Valdez spill as the worst oil disaster in US history . 
Even when the well is shut down , BP says it will take three or four months to bring the 450 tonne BOP to shore to be examined properly . 
A version appeared on p17 of the Main section section of the Guardian on Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
