President Assad : `` Our anger -LRB- at the Houla massacre -RRB- was indescribable '' Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad has denied his government 's forces had any role in the Houla massacre . 
More than 100 people , many of them children , were killed in the attack overnight between 25 and 26 May , most knifed or shot at close range . 
Mr Assad described the killings as an `` ugly crime '' that even `` monsters '' would not carry out . 
Addressing parliament , he blamed `` foreign meddling '' for Syria 's divisions . 
`` What happened in Houla and elsewhere -LRB- in Syria -RRB- are brutal massacres which even monsters would not have carried out , '' he said in the televised address . 
`` If we do n't feel the pain the pain that squeezes our hearts , as I felt it , for the cruel scenes - especially the children - then we are not human beings , '' he said . 
UN investigators have said most of the dead were summarily executed , and eyewitnesses had said pro-government militias had carried out most of the killings . 
The massacre has triggered international condemnation and led to several countries expelling Syrian diplomats in protest . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut Anybody hoping that President Assad 's first public speech since January might open up some lines of advance towards a solution will have been disappointed . 
He repeated his regime 's long-standing argument - that it is facing not an internal political crisis but an outside plot , using domestic instruments , to destroy the country , because of its resistance to Israel . 
This `` imposed war '' as he called it , had failed through all its cycles - first popular disturbances , then armed action , then terrorist assassinations and bomb attacks , and now , he said , attempts to stir up sectarian strife through such atrocities as the massacre at Houla , which he described as so horrible that even monsters could not have committed it . 
To accuse the Syrian army of doing it , he said , was tantamount to accusing every Syrian citizen of being a terrorist . 
Mr Assad again blamed `` terrorists '' , supported by foreign powers , for fomenting discord and creating `` a project of ... dissent '' inside the country . 
He said Syria was `` facing attempts to weaken Syria , breach its sovereignty '' . 
The only way to resolve the crisis , he said , was through political dialogue . 
But he said he would not negotiate with those who , he said , did not represent the will of the Syrian people . 
The international peace envoy Kofi Annan , sent by the United Nations and the Arab League , expressed frustration on Saturday that Mr Assad was not turning his words into actions . 
He said the Syrian president `` must make bold and visible steps immediately to radically change his military posture and honor his commitment to withdraw heavy weapons and cease all violence '' . 
Violence continued on Saturday in Syria where , according to the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights quoted by Agence France Presse , 89 people , including 57 soldiers were killed . 
If confirmed , it would be the largest number of casualties the military has suffered in a single day since the uprising began in March 2011 . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
