President Putin , left , will hold talks with Jose Manuel Barroso , center , and Herman Van Rompuy EU officials are expected to press Russian President Vladimir Putin to take a stronger line on the crisis in Syria during a summit in St Petersburg . 
EU member states want Russia to put pressure on its ally to withdraw heavy weapons from cities and comply fully with UN envoy Kofi Annan 's peace plan . 
Russia and China are also resisting US and European calls to condemn President Bashar al-Assad and seek his removal . 
On Sunday , Mr Assad denied his forces had any role in the Houla massacre . 
In a televised address , President Assad told parliament the killing of more than 108 people in their homes , including 49 children , was an `` ugly crime '' that even `` monsters '' would not carry out . 
Witnesses have blamed pro-government militiamen for the massacre , which has triggered international condemnation and led to several countries expelling Syrian diplomats in protest . 
Mr Assad said the only way to resolve the crisis was through political dialogue , and that `` foreign meddling '' was to blame for Syria 's divisions . 
Russia 's role is crucial for the success of Annan 's plan '' End Quote Catherine Ashton EU foreign policy chief European Council President Herman Van Rompuy , European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso and EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton are among those attending Monday 's summit . 
On Sunday , Mr Putin invited the EU leaders for dinner ahead of the talks at a lavish estate on the outskirts of the city . 
European diplomats regard the meeting as a chance to renew ties with Mr Putin since his return to the presidency earlier this month . 
The leaders are also expected to discuss trade and Iran 's controversial nuclear program . 
Russia will also be looking to speed up moves towards visa free travel in Europe . 
But correspondents say Syria is likely to dominate the agenda . 
`` We need to make sure that Russia is using fully its leverage in convincing the -LRB- Assad -RRB- regime to implement -LRB- the peace plan -RRB- , '' an EU official quoted by the Reuters news agency said . 
`` The Russian side has certainly not been very helpful in finding solutions in terms of a political way out . '' 
President Assad blamed outside forces for causing divisions in his country Moscow insists it is not protecting Mr Assad but says his removal can not be a precondition for political dialogue . 
Baroness Ashton , who met Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov before Sunday 's dinner , said in a statement : `` Russia 's role is crucial for the success of Annan 's plan . '' 
She said the EU wanted to `` work closely with Russia to find a way to end the violence '' . 
The statement added that Baroness Ashton had spoken to Mr Annan by telephone on Sunday and they had agreed that the crisis was at `` a critical point '' . 
Analysts say pressure is growing on Moscow to concede that the initiative is stalled and to promote a compromise in which President Assad stands down to allow a transition of power . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on Sunday that she had `` made it very clear '' to Mr Lavrov in a telephone conversation that the focus was shifting to a political transition . 
`` Assad 's departure does not have to be a precondition , but it should be an outcome so the people of Syria have a chance to express themselves , '' she said during a visit to Stockholm . 
The BBC 's Steven Rosenberg in Moscow says that although the summit is not expected to produce any major breakthrough in relations between Russia and the EU , it is still important . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
4th June 2012 - 16:16 Putin has the ace . 
The beauty is that by slight of hand he can force Bashar al-Assad to change course completely . 
But will he do so ? 
That is the pertinent question . 
Or he could ask Assad to step down and offer him asylum . 
There are so many options . 
But will these options ever satisfy President Assad ? 
In the meanwhile the conflict takes a sinister turn with harrowing reports of death and suffering . 
Syria is the only country that he can actually excert that influence so he is going to protect the Assad regime up to the very last minute . 
I think all the EU and other countries know this and are only going through the motions . 
4th June 2012 - 12:13 People may or may not be right to be sceptical that pressure can successfully be applied to Mr Putin to change his position , but that does not mean that no one should try . 
I am really not certain what people who are critical of this want - to become involved in a war we can not win , or to sit back and say nothing when we know that attrocities are being committed ? 
4th June 2012 - 11:15 The west has a recent track record of getting involved in unnecessary wars , Putin has a track record of telling the west they should show restraint . 
Who should we trust ? 
What sort of government would take over Syria ? 
Who exactly are these `` opposition activists '' and would Syria become a more tolerant peaceful country if Assad stepped down and allowed them to take over ? 
4th June 2012 - 9:01 Is Putin or the Russians going to listen to a failing continent that can not even solve their financial problems . 
The Russians wont even listen to the US so its highly unlikely that the EU can waver politicians in Russia who have vested interest in Syria and the Iranians . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
