Could you please review your estimated mortality rate for Swine flu -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- . 
It is wrong to give the impression that the mortality rate is 5-6 % . 
In the right hands , with access to modern healthcare , the mortality rate is probably similar to normal seasonal flu or a little higher . 
Its very difficult to make true estimates of mortality as the disease is evolving but 5-6 % is too high . 
Having a mortality rate similar to normal seasonal flu is not a reason for countries to lower their guard though . 
This infection seems to have a `` hospitalisation rate '' of around 2 % which is likely to put huge pressures on hospitals as they go into Autumn and Winter seasons . 
... and on that note , is the mortality rate of regular seasonal flu really \* 98 % \* for those over 65 ? 
I find that very hard to believe . 
But if this is really the case then I will certainly recommend that my parents have their annual flu jab from now on ! 
According to the WHO , laboratory-confirmed cases of new influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- as officially reported to WHO as of 17:00 GMT 15 June 2009 are : ... giving a Mortality Rate of 0.45 % . 
If the the Lab-confirmed cases are indicative of the spread and impact of infections to date , then the mortality rate of `` 5 % to 6 % '' as reported in the graphic above is overly excessive -LRB- unless , ACTUAL deaths are a lot higher than REPORTED deaths -RRB- . 
The 5 to 6 % in Mexico would be an initial number based on limited information in April . 
Currently , Mexico has reported 6241 cases with 108 deaths which is a rate of 1.7 % . 
However , their testing is not as inclusive as the testing that is occuring in other countries , so it is very likely that there are many more cases . 
The actual rate is more than likely equivalent to the current global rate of 0.4 % -LRB- 167 deaths , 39620 cases -RRB- . 
However , this number is greatly influenced by the Mexico numbers . 
The United States has the next highest number of identified cases . 
Their approximate rate is 0.2 % -LRB- 44 deaths , 17855 cases -RRB- . 
Also keep in mind that these rates only account for identified cases . 
There are many more that have not been tested and are not included in the numbers . 
How on earth do you have the mortality rate calculated for H1 N1 ? 
It is nowhere near as high as 5-6 % . 
I think the chart is very misleading . 
As to not repeat history , we must be wary of influenza and the characteristics that it posses to survive . 
Even though this first wave seems innocuous as it did during the 1918 pandemic , we can not let our guard down . 
Numbers , hospitalizations and current death rates do not encumber all aspects of the seemingly mild influenza season , so that it is ... The next wave of the flu is what we should prepare for . 
This is the sort of irresponsible rubbish that is fuelling panic over the `` flying pig '' flu . 
If the mortality rate was over 2 % it would be a the most serious form of pandemic for which the WHO recommends draconian action such as closing national boarders . 
In publishing this incorrect information , you are saying that `` flying pig '' flu is already much , much worse than 1918 Spanish flu !!!!! As for a 98 % mortality from seasonal flu for those over 65 what utter crap . 
This whole affair is revealing how scientifically and mathematically challenged journalists actually are . 
We cant give all the blaim to the reporters , they only report what they are told . 
There is hardly any concrete investigative reporting these days due to time restraints . 
We all tend to lean on what is told is the supposedly truth , which is in many cases far from it . 
Look at how far this global warming issue has gone . 
Although we all agree that the problem is real , no one truely understands its cause and direction . . 
There are less deaths from H1 N1 then from the ordinary flu that goes around every year . 
It is anything but a pandemic . 
I am not sure why Who has called it a pandemic and it seem the rest of their numbers are off the charts as well . 
I have ever only had a flu shot once and after I was horribly sick . 
The only reason I decided to get it was I was working with a large group of people . 
I am sorry I did get the bloody thing . 
Other then that I have never had one and have never gotten the flu and if I did it was so mild one would n't even have noticed . 
The most I have ever really had is a mild cold . 
Everbody needs to back off with the `` journalists are horrible '' comments and look at the graphs again . 
The estimated rates are NOT actual rates . 
These are based upon the latest data and then projected , like any other probability . 
Also , I totally agree with Judy H. Remember , not every country in the world has a viable , working health surveillance system . 
It is guaranteed that there are more cases out there that we do n't know about . 
I would n't be surprised if there was a HIGHER mortality rate in certain populations . 
Also , p emery is absolutely correct . 
We have n't seen the full impact of this current outbreak yet . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
