ZURICH | Fri Jun 12 , 2009 4:45 pm EDT ZURICH -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Novartis AG expects a vaccine for the H1N1 virus , the source of the first flu pandemic for 40 years , to be available by the autumn after it produced the first batch for testing ahead of schedule . 
Meanwhile , U.S. company Baxter International Inc said it is in full-scale production of an A\/H1N1 flu pandemic vaccine that could be ready for commercial use as early as next month . 
The Baxter and Novartis vaccines were both developed using cell-based technology that could allow for much more rapid production and distribution than traditional vaccines produced using chicken eggs . 
The Novartis vaccine will enter clinical trials next month , the Swiss drugmaker said on Friday , a day after the World Health Organization declared a pandemic and warned governments to prepare for a long battle against the virus . 
Baxter said it had completed testing and evaluation of the virus and would submit its A\/H1N1 vaccine for approval upon completion of initial manufacturing runs . 
European drugmakers Novartis , Sanofi-Aventis , GlaxoSmithKline and Solvay all obtained the influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- seed virus in recent weeks and aim to have a vaccine ready ahead of the northern hemisphere flu season . 
The WHO has estimated vaccine makers could produce up to 4.9 billion pandemic flu shots a year in a best-case scenario , leaving some of the world 's 6.5 billion population unprotected , particularly if more than one injection was needed to gain immunity . 
Novartis said first results with the H1N1 wild type strain showed it was quicker to make the vaccine through cell-based rather than through egg-based production , and it had completed its first batch weeks earlier than expected . 
Its cell-culture vaccine plant in Marburg , Germany had the potential to produce millions of doses per week , but it was difficult to predict output capacity for now . 
Spokesman Eric Althoff said Novartis should have the vaccine ready in September or October . 
He was unsure if other companies had completed the first stage of the production process . 
Glaxo said Friday it would be able to meet advance purchase commitments for 150 to 180 million doses , and the 50 million it donated to the WHO for developing countries . 
Wayne Pisano , head of vaccines at Sanofi , the world 's largest flu vaccine supplier , said on Thursday his company would `` produce the largest number of doses of vaccine in the shortest time frame , '' though it would be another four months before the first supply of bulk concentrate was ready . 
Novartis shares closed up 4.4 percent , while Baxter shares were up 3.5 percent . 
The H1N1 strain has spread widely , with 28,774 infections confirmed in 74 countries to date , including 144 deaths , according to the WHO 's latest tally . 
Although the strain seems mild at present , health officials are worried it might return in a more virulent form in the northern hemisphere winter . 
While commercial production of vaccines usually depends on how easily a virus strain grows in chicken eggs , Novartis said its cell-based technology means it can produce a vaccine without having to adapt the virus strain to grow in eggs . 
`` The cell-based manufacturing puts Novartis at the forefront of supplying pandemic vaccines to governments around the world , '' said Helvea analyst Karl-Heinz Koch . 
A number of national public health authorities have agreements with Baxter that allow them to place orders for its vaccine now that a pandemic has been declared by WHO , Baxter said . 
Novartis said more than 30 governments have made requests for vaccine ingredients , combining preexisting pandemic vaccine supply agreements and new requests for vaccines across all production platforms . 
The H1N1 flu outbreak is the first to be declared a pandemic since 1968 , and WHO Director-General Margaret Chan said on Thursday different regulatory authorities needed to work together to speed registration of a safe vaccine . 
The question of how the vaccine would be dispensed was still open , Novartis ' Althoff said . 
`` This will depend on government programs and what health authorities , the WHO and others say on how they want to make it available , '' he said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Katie Reid ; Additional reporting by Bill Berkrot in New York , Sam Cage in Zurich and Ben Deighton in London ; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter , John Stonestreet ; Editing by Gary Hill -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
