By Ivan Watson and Jomana Karadsheh , CNN NATO accused of killing family in strike An early morning NATO airstrike hits the Libyan town of Zlitan Hours later , relatives weep at the burial of a mother and her two young sons `` This is the protection of civilians , '' says a relative with disgust NATO says it has `` no reason to believe there were any civilian casualties '' from the airstrike Zlitan , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- A grown man sobbed as friends led him out of the mosque . 
Mustafa Naji al-Mrabet 's left hand and feet were bandaged , there were bloodstains on his robes , and the valve for an intravenous needle still stuck out of his arm . 
He was both a husband and a father , deep in mourning . 
Nearby , his brother-in-law , 26-year-old Abubakr Ali cried like a child . 
Ali pulled back the blankets covering two small coffins . 
Inside lay the bloody bodies of his nephews , Mohamed and Motez al-Mrabet , ages 5 and 3 . 
Their mother Ibtisam lay in a coffin beside them . 
All three were killed early Thursday morning as they slept , neighbors and relatives said , when their house on the outskirts of this coastal city was hit by a NATO airstrike . 
Family members said a third child , 8-year old Naji , was in intensive care after suffering serious injuries . 
Officials from Moammar Gadhafi 's embattled government brought journalists to the ruins of al-Mrabet family 's 2-story villa in a residential neighborhood on Thursday . 
`` In all my 36 years I 've never seen a day like this , '' said a neighbor named Salah Buharto . 
He said the 6:30 a.m. blast was so powerful , he initially thought his own house had been hit . 
Libya 's Zlitan in rebel , NATO sights When asked about the suspected air strike , a NATO spokesman told CNN : `` NATO made a strike in Zlitan at 6:30 a.m. -LRB- Thursday -RRB- local time . 
The target was a command and control facility held by government forces . 
`` We have had no reason to believe that there were any civilian casualties , '' said another NATO spokesman to CNN , also speaking on condition of anonymity . 
`` But we take these reports very seriously and we are looking into the matter . 
We have a process that we go through . '' 
For weeks , Zlitan has been the target of an intense NATO bombing campaign . 
The number of buildings and compounds devastated by air strikes have visibly increased since foreign journalists were taken on a government-controlled tour of the small city last month . 
The Gadhafi regime accuses NATO of hitting food warehouses , health clinics and schools . 
But a tour of one bomb site on Thursday revealed evidence suggesting the target was not entirely civilian . 
At the compound of a bombed-out law school where classroom walls were scorched and broken glass littered the floor , CNN found several military uniforms lying on the ground next to wooden ammunition crates . 
When asked about the military paraphernalia , a government escort said the ammo boxes and uniforms `` belonged to school security guards . '' 
Meanwhile , every few seconds , rocket and cannon fire rumbled in the distance , as rebels and regime loyalists fought a deadly artillery duel across the front lines a few miles to the east of the city . 
Zlitan is located less than 50 miles west of the rebel-held port city of Misrata , which survived a long , bloody siege by Gadhafi forces . 
Over the last week , rebel commanders claimed to have captured parts of Zlitan after advancing west from Misrata . 
But on Thursday , the city center appeared to remain firmly in loyalist hands . 
The combined NATO and rebel offensive have clearly taken their toll on Zlitan . 
On Thursday , the city 's streets were mostly deserted and most of the shops were closed . 
Residents said they suffered from long power outages lasting 10 hours or longer . 
Civilian cars and an ambulance smeared with dirt -- a tactic used by both rebels and regime fighters to camouflage vehicles -- raced through the town center . 
The rebel Transitional National Council and its allies in Washington , London , and Paris have long demanded that Gadhafi step down . 
But more than five months after anti-Gadhafi protests first erupted across Libya , the flamboyant colonel is still clinging to power . 
His government is threatening a war of attrition against his enemies . 
`` This war , this honorable confrontation , could go on for years , '' warned Gadhafi 's main spokesman , Musa Ibrahim , in a press conference on Wednesday . 
`` We do not want it to ... but from the beginning we were preparing ourselves to fight on the diplomatic front for years , on the military front for years , on the economic front for years . '' 
As always in conflict , civilians pay the highest price . 
At Thursday 's funeral , Abubakr Ali watched volunteers carefully bury the bodies of his sister and two nephews next to the neighborhood mosque . 
`` This was a civilian home . 
No army , no military , no Gadhafi forces . 
It 's a family sleeping safely in their place , '' he said . 
`` This is the protection of civilians , '' Ali added with disgust . 
He was referring to the United Nations Security Council resolution which authorizes the use of force in Libya in order to protect civilian lives . 
As tears streamed down his face , Ali took a Kalashnikov rifle and fired a round of bullets into the air . 
`` Screw NATO and the -LRB- rebel -RRB- rats and screw those who gave the coordinates for the attack , '' he yelled . 
`` God damn you now and in the afterlife . 
Moammar -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- , I 'm with you until the last drop of blood . '' 
