From an ancient fort Libyan rebels watch over the front line town of Taji Rebel commander says if Taji and one other town falls , there is little between them and Tripoli The ridge has been used for centuries to watch enemies for on the Libyan plains Today the rebels ' flag flutters from the fort built on the ridgeline Nafusa Mountains , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- The lonely ridge that tops the Nafusa Mountains has been used for centuries as a lookout point , a place where enemies are watched . 
Two thousand years ago , Berber men would sit in a stone lookout over the majestic brown plains , watching for strangers or enemies approaching their villages . 
Today , their descendants use the same ridgeline to watch over their own enemies -- the forces of Moammar Gadhafi entrenched in the dusty city of Tiji below . 
Tarek Zambou was an intelligence officer in those forces , until the revolt began and he defected , returning home to the town of Kabaw , a few kilometers from where he now stands . 
He commands the area 's Military Council . 
Today he stands on the windswept point next to a solitary tank standing sentry and points to Taji , nine kilometers away but clearly visible across the flat desert plain . 
`` It is a very important place for us to take , '' he said . 
`` And we will take it , no problem . '' 
Rebels find mines left by Libyan troops Ramadan does n't slow civil war in Libya He says if Taji and then the smaller town of Bader a few kilometers to the east are taken there will be little between his men and the doorstep of Tripoli . 
The rebels made significant advances last week , sweeping off the mountain high ground to the plains , and capturing half a dozen towns and cities . 
That advance stopped at Tiji , the city now sealed off by rebels on three sides . 
The fourth , to the northeast , is the way to Tripoli . 
Zambou says his men prodded forward and engaged Gadhafi forces on the city 's outskirts earlier this week , withdrawing when they saw civilians inside . 
They had believed most , if not all , had fled . 
`` In this situation we 're facing a big problem , '' he said . 
`` Gadhafi is using people as a human shield , and we do n't want to hurt civilians . '' 
But he says patience is wearing thin . 
Multiple warnings have been sent to civilians inside Tiji , telling them to leave , and leave soon . 
`` We -LRB- will -RRB- go in . 
We -LRB- will -RRB- try as we can to avoid the civilian people but we should go -LRB- in -RRB- . 
Because we give them the chance , '' he said . 
During our visit to this historic observation post , we heard anti-aircraft fire coming from the city . 
`` No problem , '' Zambou calls out to our crew , trying to be reassuring . 
`` They see us and they shoot , but the ammunition they shoot wo n't reach here . 
I like to hear it -- it means they 're wasting bullets . '' 
We follow Zambou 's car down the winding mountain road , closer to Tiji , our crew still marveling at the brutal yet spectacular terrain . 
Three rebel fighters sit beneath a flapping tarpaulin , peering down the deserted road to the besieged city . 
There 's another rebel position two more kilometers down the road , Zambou tells us . 
A Grad rocket killed three of his fighters there recently . 
We tell him we want to go to that final post , to interview the men there , but Zambou refuses . 
`` No , too dangerous - the road is very exposed on the way there , '' he said . 
`` Gadhafi troops will see you and probably fire with anti-aircraft guns , maybe rockets . 
`` I 'm not worried about you , '' he added . 
`` But the rockets could hit my men . 
Do n't go . '' 
We do n't , and so we return to Kabaw . 
