The BBC 's Lina Sinjab in Damascus : '' Syria 's words are on one level and their actions are on another level completely '' Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has told visiting UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan that no political dialogue can succeed in his country while `` armed terrorist groups '' are operating . 
Mr Assad said Syria would back `` any honest effort to find a solution '' . 
The UN said Mr Annan 's task was to call for an immediate ceasefire by the army and the opposition . 
Fighting on Saturday left 63 people dead , activists say , in a report which could not be verified independently . 
Most of the deaths reported by the Local Coordination Committees -LRB- LCC -RRB- were in the Idlib area of the north-west , where the army was said to be shelling the city of the same name . 
The UN says more than 7,500 people have died since the violence began nearly a year ago . 
Earlier , UN humanitarian chief Valerie Amos said `` limited progress '' had been made on aid but much more was needed . 
Calls for reform that began with pro-democracy protests a year ago have degenerated into violence that has brought Syria to the brink of civil war . 
Mr Annan 's talks with Mr Assad lasted for more than two hours , after which Mr Annan met Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem over lunch . 
The meetings were held in a `` positive '' atmosphere , Syrian state television said . 
Mr Assad said : `` Syria is ready to make a success of any honest effort to find a solution for the events it is witnessing . 
`` No political dialogue or political activity can succeed while there are armed terrorist groups operating and spreading chaos and instability . '' 
The BBC 's Lina Sinjab in Damascus says this is a clear message that the military operation , and violence , will continue . 
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights , another activists ' group , said the shelling of Idlib was the heaviest since army reinforcements arrived earlier in the week . 
The Observatory said the bombardment was an apparent prelude to a ground assault , as happened in the city of Homs . 
One activist in Idlib told Reuters news agency by telephone that government tanks were entering the city . 
The Associated Press news agency reported families fleeing the violence with their belongings . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said earlier he had asked Mr Annan to pursue an immediate ceasefire in Syria . 
If a ceasefire could not be agreed simultaneously , then government troops should stop first , followed by the opposition , he argued . 
Mr Annan , who is due to meet Mr Assad again on Sunday , is expected to also seek talks with opposition figures before he leaves . 
Coinciding with Mr Annan 's arrival , a meeting of Arab League foreign ministers has been taking place in Cairo , attended by Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov . 
The BBC 's Jon Leyne in Cairo says the meeting has revealed bitter divisions between the League and Moscow , with Russia finding out just how little support its policy on Syria has . 
Mr Lavrov warned against `` crude interference '' in Syria 's internal affairs , insisting that Russia was not `` protecting any regimes . 
The Qatari delegation said it was time to send Arab and international forces in to Syria , as there was a `` moral and humanitarian obligation to stop the daily systematic killing there '' . 
Nevertheless , a final joint statement set out several points of agreement , including the rejection of foreign intervention in the conflict-stricken country . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
10th March 2012 - 11:19 In ten years we 'll be looking back at this in shame for not acting . 
It might not be perfect in Libya , but the results of not acting could be far , far worse . 
I would rather we intervene and see some chaos , than see thousands of deaths , ethnic cleansing , and decades of retribution by the regime . 
I wish Annan well , but the outside world seems incapable of doing anything without endless bureaucracy . 
10th March 2012 - 10:53 Would like to wish Kofi Annan all the best , but does anyone REALLY believe this can all end well ? 
Asad has too much to lose and wo n't give anything up easily 10th March 2012 - 10:44 I wish Mr Annan well and hope he can arrange a ceasefire . 
He needs to be able to meet the opposition leaders in Syria and not just those outside the country . 
Unfortunately I do n't hold out much hope . 
Looks like the media have decided it 's going to be another regime change . 
10th March 2012 - 10:33 I cant help feeling Kofi Annan would be more effective trying to convince China and Russia to agree with the UN on a suitable response to this crisis ... unless he has already tried behind the scenes , failed and is now trying to tackle the problem at source ! 
10th March 2012 - 10:14 I wish Mr Annan well but ultimately nothing will come of it . 
The Arab league should have dealt with this months ago , but they won t because if it all goes pear shaped they would have no-one to blame . 
The UN could go in , but they won t be thanked for it ; In fact it would only be a matter of time before the activist turn on them . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
