Kofi Annan wants a ceasefire and greater access for humanitarian aid As the special UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan embarked on what looked like a Mission Impossible that was unlikely to produce swift results , the way ahead in Syria was shrouded in the smoke of war . 
But amidst the many confusions and complexities , there were a few elements that could be taken as givens unless something changes dramatically . 
President Bashar al-Assad and his associates will continue the campaign they launched in late January to crush all armed resistance and secure the country 's borders against the infiltration of fighters , guns and money . 
Accepting a ceasefire that fell short of that , would not only put on a level footing what the regime regards as armed terrorists implementing a foreign plot , but would also risk seeing large tracts of the country slipping permanently out of its control . 
For the same reasons , any access for humanitarian aid will have to happen in co-ordination with the Syrian authorities . 
Damascus would see the establishment of cross-border aid corridors giving independent and unrestricted access to trouble spots as an unacceptable infringement of its sovereignty . 
In these key positions , the regime seems to enjoy solid and crucial support from both Russia and China . 
So there will be no immediate ceasefire , nor will blanket permission be given for aid deliveries outside regime control . 
All that is quite apart from the positions adopted by most of the Syrian opposition , which also make an early peaceful solution look unlikely . 
Most groups refuse to consider talking to the regime - or at least President Assad - because so much blood has been spilled in ruthless repression that continues on the ground . 
Most activists simply want the downfall of the regime , not some compromise that would allow it to survive in a perhaps only slightly mutated form . 
They would see negotiations now as being from a position of weakness , especially given the regime 's aggressive reassertion of military control since late January . 
Mr Annan also finds himself in the anomalous position of representing an Arab League which has thrown its weight behind regime change too . 
The League 's 22 January resolution , which triggered the regime 's crackdown , drops all mention of dialogue with Damascus , prescribes a menu for political change starting with President Assad handing power immediately to his deputy , and gives political cover for Arab states to provide military and other support to the opposition . 
Most opposition activists simply want the downfall of the regime , not a compromise That formula worked in Yemen . 
But Syria is not Yemen . 
The Arab League position is also supported by most of the Western powers and their allies . 
That is sharply at odds with the balanced positions adopted by Kofi Annan himself , who insists that any political solution must involve dialogue with all the `` actors '' on the ground , necessarily including the regime . 
He is against arming the opposition or any form of outside military intervention , arguing that they will complicate an already drastic situation . 
On paper at least , that actually puts him closer to the Russian and Chinese positions than to those of the Western powers . 
He will have to draw on all his considerable skills and experience if he is to find common ground between these polarised stands . 
Clearly , that is going to take time , if it is indeed attainable . 
If Mr Annan is to stand a chance of producing a peaceful political solution , he would have to persuade the Saudis , Qataris and other key players in the Arab League , and indeed the West , that pushing for regime change is going to plunge Syria and the region into deeper chaos . 
The West , also set on regime change , finds itself casting around with few valid options for bringing that about swiftly and surely . 
Nato and its member powers have from the outset ruled out external military intervention as in Libya , and they continue to do so for a wide variety of compelling reasons - despite the hopes of many Syrian opposition groups that they can somehow be drawn in . 
Qatar 's Prime Minister has been pushing for Arab military intervention in Syria The West is also wary of pouring arms into the opposition , for fear of fuelling a sectarian civil war in which Sunni Islamist radicals could come to the fore - especially since al-Qaeda has begun urging jihadis to join the fray , raising anxieties on which the regime has skilfully played . 
The Western powers ' strategy of economic and political sanctions has helped isolate and pressure the regime . 
It is certainly feeling the pinch , as the value of the Syrian pound plummets , cash flows dry up , and industry and tourism grind to a halt . 
But as Iraq showed , such pressures can continue for years without necessarily bringing about the desired result . 
The Syrian opposition , still badly fragmented both politically and militarily , also finds itself in a bind . 
After months of ruthless repression , and the years that preceded it , taking up arms is a natural development , and one which has inflicted a cost on the regime . 
But it is also playing the regime at its own game and engaging in a confrontation which the rebels could only hope to win decisively with the kind of outside intervention that tilted the balance so abruptly against Col Muammar Gaddafi in Libya . 
Imagine what the situation might be there now , had Nato not intervened , and that might give some idea of what may lie ahead in Syria . 
If Kofi Annan can not induce major shifts in position on the part of many of the key players in this bloody and convoluted drama , the most likely scenario will be this : The regime will complete its crushing of armed resistance wherever it finds it , with much of the immediate focus shifting north-westwards to Idlib province and the borderlands with Turkey . 
But it will continue to face a low-level insurgency as well as civil protest in many -LRB- mainly Sunni -RRB- areas , where it has clearly lost the hearts and minds of the people . 
Some neighbors , especially Turkey , may become increasingly permissive in terms of allowing the cross-border fuelling of insurgents . 
And some Arab states , notably the Saudis and Qataris , may become more assertive and open in arming and financing the rebels , while the Western powers continue their efforts to unify the opposition and provide its military wing with non-lethal assistance . 
This route could still lead to a collapse of the regime as its fabric slowly unravels , with accelerated military defections , the gradual spread of dissent and the worsening of economic and social conditions . 
But , while there could be surprises , it risks being a long and brutal process which might tear the country apart at the seams - along fault-lines which run through the wider region . 
It has in it the already apparent seeds both of a Syrian sectarian civil war and of the kind of regional and international proxy conflict which consumed neighbouring Lebanon for decades and which is still latent there . 
The regime may ultimately be doomed , but the fact is that it retains some bedrock support not only among the party faithful but also among sections of society fearful of a plunge into the unknown . 
It maintains an iron grip which has so far prevented military units defecting en masse , and it has shown every sign of determination to fight to the bitter end even if that means bringing the house down around it . 
Given everything that has happened , few of the regime 's domestic or external adversaries believe that the inner circle of power is genuinely prepared to envisage a graceful transition to real democracy , either through negotiations or through the regime 's own reform process that should see multi-party general elections in May . 
That , and all the blood , is why most of the opposition reject dialogue and regard mediation with the regime as simply buying it more time . 
Kofi Annan has already won one Nobel Peace Prize . 
If he can conjure a peaceful solution out of the elements he is working with now , he will surely deserve another . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
