The past few years have been tough for democracy around the world , and most observers have jumped to the conclusion that the U.S. financial crisis will only make things worse . 
Those who believe free markets are essential to democracy fear that the discrediting of market capitalism will undermine free and open governance . 
Even those less enamored of capitalism are afraid that the global identification of democracy with markets is so strong that the crisis will weaken the standing of liberal politics . 
There are other reasons for concern . 
For one thing , the Great Depression was devastating to democratic progress . 
The period between the first and second world wars included what Samuel P. Huntington characterized as the first `` reverse wave of democratization , '' as many of the European democracies that emerged after World War I succumbed to economic hardship and the rise of fascism . 
Under harsh economic conditions , it is more difficult for a democratic government to deliver the prosperity that its politicians promise and its citizens seek . 
Long-established democracies with deeply rooted institutions and strongly liberal political cultures may be able to withstand even sharp drops in income and steep increases in unemployment , but newer and less consolidated democracies will find it much harder to avoid political breakdowns . 
Yet these concerns present only one side of the picture . 
In fact , on balance , the economic crisis could bring global gains for democracy , largely because of its impact on democracy 's competitors . 
In just the past few years there has been not only a stagnation of democratic progress but also , for the first time since the end of the Cold War , the emergence of nondemocratic political systems that can claim to offer attractive models . 
Some observers lump together these nondemocratic alternatives under the label `` authoritarian capitalism '' -LRB- though this is little more than a catchall category of countries that seem to be achieving economic success without providing political freedom -RRB- . 
It can not be denied that , until late last year , several such countries -- China , Russia , Venezuela , Iran -- were riding high . 
But the economic crisis has rapidly gone global and reached them as well . 
With oil prices a fraction of their highs from just a few months ago , the oil exporters have taken a severe hit . 
Even China 's remarkable economic growth is likely to be imperiled as the downturn prompts its export markets to contract . 
In this sense , what the crisis reveals is that the gains of nondemocratic countries have ultimately depended on the economic engine provided by the world 's advanced democracies . 
Democrats can hardly gloat about the fallout from the crisis , given the breadth of the suffering and the inevitability that some democracies will be at risk . 
Yet democrats ' rivals are likely to suffer even more . 
For the most part , the `` authoritarian capitalist '' regimes are not based on a coherent ideology that has wide support among their populations . 
Instead , regimes such as those in Russia and China are propped up by what political scientists call `` performance legitimacy '' : As long as they deliver the economic goods , most of their citizens may be willing to accept the accompanying limits on their political freedom . 
Russian citizens who endured poverty after the fall of communism appreciated the improvement in their quality of life that Vladimir Putin 's regime offered . 
But when such regimes stop delivering , what other sources of legitimacy can they fall back on to justify their rule ? 
Over the long term , democracies , too , may succumb if they fail to deliver , but in the short term they have other resources -- not just popular attachment to political liberty but also the ability to change their governments via elections without changing their regimes . 
Today 's authoritarian regimes are likely to be more vulnerable than their democratic counterparts . 
In the 1970s , the French political scientist Pierre Hassner used the phrase `` competitive decadence '' to describe the Cold War contest between the United States and the Soviet Union . 
This notion suggested that the superpowers were each beset with serious internal problems and that whichever side decayed more slowly was likely to emerge the winner . 
The global economic crisis may well stimulate a similar kind of dynamic between democracy and its rivals . 
But democracy 's advantages in such a struggle are not limited to its ability to take a punch and outlast its glass-jawed competitors . 
Democracy has often displayed a remarkable ability to reform and renew itself . 
This gives it a resilience that may prove decisive in the competition with its more brittle authoritarian challengers . 
Marc F. Plattner is co-editor of the Journal of Democracy and vice president for research and studies at the National Endowment for Democracy . 
