AJDABIYAH , Libya | Thu Apr 7 , 2011 6:34 pm EDT AJDABIYAH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebels fighting to overthrow Muammar Gaddafi said five of their fighters were killed when NATO planes mistakenly bombed a rebel tank column near the contested port of Brega in eastern Libya . 
In Washington , the head of U.S. Africa command told a Senate hearing the United States should not provide arms to the rebels without a better idea of who they were . 
Asked if there was an emerging stalemate in the seven-week-old conflict , General Carter Ham replied : `` I would agree with that at present , on the ground . '' 
In rebel-held eastern Libya , wounded rebels being brought to a hospital Ajdabiyah said their trucks and tanks were hit on Thursday by a NATO air strike outside Brega . 
NATO said it was investigating an attack by its aircraft on a tank column in the area along the Mediterranean coast on Thursday , saying the situation was `` unclear and fluid . '' 
The fighting for Brega , the only active front , has dragged on for a week and has entered a daily pattern of advances back and forth with neither side making major gains . 
Medical workers carried blood-soaked uniforms from hospital rooms in Ajdabiyah , gateway to the insurgent stronghold of Benghazi in the east , after wounded fighters were ferried back from Brega . 
`` It was a NATO air strike on us . 
We were near our vehicles near Brega , '' wounded fighter Younes Jumaa said from a stretcher at the hospital . 
Nurse Mohamed Ali said at least five rebels were dead . 
`` NATO are liars . 
They are siding with Gaddafi , '' Salem Mislat , one of the rebels , said . 
A rebel commander said it appeared to be a case of `` friendly fire '' and said it did not cause tension with NATO although the rebels wanted an explanation . 
Rebels had brought about 20 tanks out of storage and were advancing with them along the coastal desert strip that divides Ajdabiyah and Brega when they were hit , he said . 
`` We would assume it was NATO by mistake , friendly fire , '' Abdel Fattah Younes told a news conference in Benghazi , speaking through an English translator . 
It was the second time in less than a week that rebels had blamed NATO for bombing their comrades by mistake . 
Thirteen were killed in an air strike not far from the same spot on Saturday . 
Rebel spokesmen told Reuters Gaddafi forces killed five people and wounded 25 in an artillery bombardment of the isolated and besieged western city of Misrata on Wednesday . 
The barrage forced the temporary closure of Misrata 's port , a vital lifeline for supplies to besieged civilians , the spokesmen said . 
Misrata , Libya 's third city , rose up with other towns against Gaddafi in mid-February and has been under siege for weeks , after a violent crackdown put an end to most protests elsewhere in the west of the country . 
A rebel spokesman told Reuters that people in Misrata were crammed five families to a house in the few safe districts , to escape a rain of mortar shells from Gaddafi forces which have subjected them to weeks of sniper and artillery fire . 
Two rebel spokesmen reported fighting on a key road to the city 's port as government forces tried to advance . 
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon expressed concern about deteriorating conditions for civilians in Misrata and Zintan in the west , and Brega in the east . 
He said the situation in Misrata was particularly grave with the city under heavy bombardment and shortages of food , water and medical supplies . 
Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan said Turkey was working on a `` road map '' to end the war in Libya which would include a ceasefire and the withdrawal of Gaddafi 's forces from some cities . 
Turkey has held talks with envoys from Gaddafi 's government and representatives of the opposition . 
A rebel spokesman said later the rebels rejected talks with Gaddafi and demanded he leave power . 
Sweden said its warplanes operating from Sicily took part in NATO operations against Gaddafi on Thursday , the first combat sortie by the Nordic country 's air force since the early 1960s . 
The civil war has cut Libyan oil output by 80 percent , a senior government official said on Thursday , as rebels and Gaddafi 's forces traded exchanged accusations over who had attacked oil fields vital to both sides . 
Rebels say government attacks on three different installations in the east have halted production of the oil they desperately need to finance the uprising against Gaddafi . 
The government 's Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Kaim told reporters the British air force had damaged an oil pipeline in a strike against the Sarir oilfield which killed three guards . 
NATO denied the alliance carried out any air strikes in the Sarir area and said forces loyal to Gaddafi were responsible for an attack which started a fire in the oilfield . 
Shokri Ghanem , chairman of the government National Oil Corporation , told Reuters on Thursday the country 's production had fallen to 250,000 to 300,000 barrels per day compared with 1.6 million before the uprising . 
The Liberian-registered tanker Equator sailed from the port of Marsa el-Hariga , near Tobruk , on Wednesday , apparently with the first cargo of crude sold by rebels since their uprising began in February . 
Oil traders said the cargo , vital to fund the uprising , was headed for China . 
After reported advances by Gaddafi forces from Brega toward Ajdabiyah during the day , both sides appeared to have withdrawn within their secure lines by nightfall , following a familiar pattern . 
A senior Treasury official said Washington had frozen more than $ 34 billion of Libyan assets as part of sanctions against Gaddafi and his top officials . 
European governments had also frozen a substantial amount he said . 
`` Mr. Gaddafi knows what he must do , '' Clinton told a news conference with Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini , reiterating calls for a ceasefire , the withdrawal of his forces from cities they have stormed and his departure from Libya . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It is morally incorrect to support a rebellion , whose leaders one does not know , whose aims one is not sure of , I mean how would it turn out if say the rebels turned out to be Al Qaeda ? 
I dont know if they are , maybe they are all very nice people , but so was Qaddafi when he first took power . 
This is an ill conceived mission that makes no sense at all . 
Gaddafi and some people say that NATO is killing innocent civilians and it has to stop because it is unacceptable . 
For some reason I do n't hear anyone saying that someone has to stop Gaddafi because he is using Human Shields and killing innocent civilians now and for 41 years for his and his sons amussment . 
What has to happen is that NATO needs to find a way aroung Gaddafi 's tactics and save the rebels that are being killed in Misrata and around Libya before it 's too late . 
All the rebels want is to be free of a tyrant and to live in a Democratic country . 
The other day I saw a picture of a little girl in Misrata with a severe wound caused by Gaddafi 's fighters firing wildly into Misrata . 
Tell me is a little girl no more then ten years old a rebel fighter or an innocent civilian , now who is killing innocent civilians , I believe Gaddafi 's govenment fighters are killing more innocent civilians then NATO by a far amount . 
This is an Unconstitutional war that we have no right being in . 
When will Obama be held accountable for this war ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
