U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article Libya war reaching stalemate , Washington says AJDABIYAH , Libya | Thu Apr 7 , 2011 11:29 pm IST AJDABIYAH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya 's seven-week-old civil war is reaching stalemate , a senior U.S. general said on Thursday , after rebels fighting to overthrow Muammar Gaddafi said a NATO air strike killed five of their fighters . 
Wounded rebels being brought to a hospital in Ajdabiyah in rebel-held east Libya said they were hit by a NATO strike on their trucks and tanks outside the contested port of Brega . 
NATO said it was investigating an attack by its aircraft on a tank column in the area along the Mediterranean coast on Thursday , saying the situation was `` unclear and fluid '' . 
General Carter Ham , head of U.S. Africa command , told a Senate hearing Washington should not provide arms to the rebels without a better idea of who they were . 
Asked if there was an emerging stalemate , he replied : `` I would agree with that at present , on the ground . '' 
The fighting for Brega , the only active front , has dragged on for a week and has entered a daily pattern of advances back and forth with neither side making major gains . 
Medical workers carried blood-soaked uniforms from hospital rooms in Ajdabiyah , gateway to the insurgent stronghold of Benghazi in the east , after wounded fighters were ferried back from Brega . 
`` It was a NATO air strike on us . 
We were near our vehicles near Brega , '' wounded fighter Younes Jumaa said from a stretcher at the hospital . 
Nurse Mohamed Ali said at least five rebels were dead . 
Rebel fighters were weeping on their knees in the corridor . 
`` NATO are liars . 
They are siding with Gaddafi , '' said Salem Mislat , one of the rebels . 
It was the second time in less than a week that rebels had blamed NATO for bombing their comrades by mistake . 
Thirteen were killed in an air strike not far from the same spot on Saturday . 
A doctor who had been at the front among rebel ambulance crews said they were hit by a government rocket attack immediately after the air strike . 
One medical worker was killed . 
The air strikes have paradoxically caused the stalemate , grounding Gaddafi 's air force and preventing him from landing a knockout blow . 
However , the rag-tag rebel army is too undisciplined to press the advantage accorded by air power . 
Rebel spokesmen told Reuters Gaddafi forces killed five people and wounded 25 in an artillery bombardment of the isolated and besieged western city of Misrata on Wednesday . 
The barrage forced the temporary closure of Misrata 's port , a vital lifeline for supplies to besieged civilians , the spokesmen said . 
Misrata , Libya 's third city , rose up with other towns against Gaddafi in mid-February and has been under siege for weeks , after a violent crackdown put an end to most protests elsewhere in the west of the country . 
A rebel spokesman told Reuters people in Misrata were crammed five families to a house in the few safe districts , to escape a rain of mortar shells from Gaddafi forces which have subjected them to weeks of sniper and artillery fire . 
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon expressed concern about deteriorating conditions for civilians in Misrata and Zintan in the west , and Brega in the east . 
He said the situation in Misrata was particularly grave with the city under heavy bombardment and shortages of food , water and medical supplies . 
The civil war has cut Libyan oil output by 80 percent , a senior government official said on Thursday , as rebels and Gaddafi 's forces traded charges over who had attacked oil fields vital to both sides . 
Rebels say government attacks on three different installations in the east have halted production of the oil they desperately need to finance the uprising against Gaddafi . 
The government 's Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Kaim told reporters the British air force had damaged an oil pipeline in a strike against the Sarir oilfield which killed three guards . 
NATO denied the alliance carried out any air strikes in the Sarir area and said forces loyal to Gaddafi were responsible for an attack which started a fire in the oilfield . 
It said Gaddafi was trying to disrupt oil supplies to the rebel-held port of Tobruk . 
An oil executive in rebel territory called for more NATO air strikes to defend the fields , saying government forces were exposed in open areas away from civilians . 
Shokri Ghanem , chairman of the government National Oil Corporation , told Reuters on Thursday the country 's production had fallen to 250,000 to 300,000 barrels per day compared with 1.6 million before the uprising . 
He called a reported shipment of Libyan oil by the rebels `` very sad '' and said it would only contribute to tension and divide the country . 
The Liberian-registered tanker Equator sailed from the port of Marsa el-Hariga , near Tobruk , on Wednesday , apparently with the first cargo of crude sold by rebels since their uprising began in February . 
Oil traders said the cargo , vital to fund the uprising , was headed for China . 
After reported advances by Gaddafi forces from Brega towards Ajdabiyah during the day , both sides appeared to have withdrawn within their secure lines by nightfall , following a familiar pattern . 
A senior U.S. Treasury official said Washington had frozen more than $ 34 billion of Libyan assets as part of sanctions against Gaddafi and his top officials . 
European governments had also frozen a substantial amount he said . 
Gaddafi appealed for a halt in the air campaign in a rambling three-page letter to U.S. President Barack Obama bluntly dismissed by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Wednesday . 
`` Mr. Gaddafi knows what he must do , '' Clinton told a news conference with Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini , reiterating calls for a ceasefire , the withdrawal of his forces from cities they have stormed and his departure from Libya . 
Civil war in the vast North African desert oil producer ignited in February when Gaddafi tried to crush pro-democracy rallies against his 41-year-old rule inspired by uprisings that have toppled or endangered other rulers across the Arab world . 
A senior aid worker said on Thursday desperate refugees from North Africa had dragged each other under water and drowned when an overloaded migrant boat sank off Sicily . 
Up to 250 people were still missing from the capsized boat , which was said to have left Libya on Monday . 
