TRIPOLI | Thu Apr 7 , 2011 1:49 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Walking down a Tripoli street with a bag full of freshly baked bread , a Libyan man frowned when he saw crowds of children chanting the praises of Brother Leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
As explosions from what appeared to be NATO air strikes echoed in Tripoli , hundreds of children were taken by bus to a square outside a United Nations office , given green flags of Gaddafi 's revolution and told to shout anti-Western slogans . 
`` The children were brought here . 
This is their education . 
They shout all day instead of studying , '' said the man , shaking his head . 
He said he always supported Gaddafi but was upset with the authorities allowing Libya to descend into civil war . 
`` Cameron is a problem , he is bombing Libya , '' he said , in a reference to Britain 's part in the NATO campaign against Libya . 
`` But this is a problem too , '' he added , pointing at the children . 
Gaddafi has been in power for more than four decades and two generations have grown up under his iron rule . 
In a country with a median age of about 24 , most Libyans have known no other leader . 
A rebellion in the east may have emboldened Libyans there to speak about democratic change , but here in Gaddafi 's stronghold his personality cult still weighs heavily on people 's minds . 
His portraits , usually showing Gaddafi in military uniform with rays of light shining behind him , adorn many houses . 
Soldiers , their heads wrapped in green turbans , patrol the city . 
State television plays patriotic songs and broadcasts images of Libyan tanks rolling through the desert . 
Dancing under the watchful eye of teachers and government minders , hundreds of children chanted `` Down , down USA '' and set off firecrackers outside the gates of the U.N. office . 
Some held gold-framed portraits of Gaddafi . 
Adults encouraged children to kiss the leader 's image in front of television cameras . 
Outside coffee shops , passersby clutching steaming cups stopped to watch the procession with bewilderment . 
Most children seemed indifferent to their task . 
For them , Gaddafi 's dominance is no novelty in a country where they have to study his Green Book of aphorisms as part of their curriculum . 
While the propaganda machine works overtime to prop up the image of a strong state , weeks of conflict and Western air strikes seemed to have loosened Gaddafi 's hold on people 's minds . 
Even during the most tightly controlled events , dissent is always evident . 
People are talking about change with varying degrees of openness , saying it is time for Gaddafi to go . 
`` People need to hope for change , '' a bookshop owner said quietly on a recent visit . 
`` Nothing more needs to be said . '' 
Ali , owner of a clothing shop , said he could not forgive a government that had given orders to shoot its own people during peaceful anti-government protests in February , a chain of events at the start of the uprising that led to the war . 
`` I used to love Gaddafi but many people have died , '' he said . 
`` It changed everything . 
Business was good before February . 
We can not live like this . 
Things have to change . '' 
On the surface , Gaddafi 's influence is still strong in Tripoli . 
People avoid eye contact with foreign journalists . 
`` Sarkozy , Cameron , Obama killer for petroleum , '' says an English-language banner in central Green Square . 
At al Fatah university , the picture was much the same . 
Hundreds of students , some draped in green flags head to toe , were taken by bus into the campus from all around Tripoli to celebrate Gaddafi 's rule on Thursday . 
`` We love Gaddafi . 
We hate the world , '' shouted one high school student . 
`` We want to kill our enemies . '' 
