Michael Jackson 's doctor to be tried for manslaughter Conrad Murray -LRB- c -RRB- faces up to four years in prison if convicted A judge has ordered the personal doctor of Michael Jackson to stand trial for involuntary manslaughter . 
Judge Michael Pastor gave the ruling against Dr Conrad Murray at a preliminary hearing in Los Angeles . 
Prosecutors say that he gave Jackson a lethal dose of a powerful anesthetic mixed with other sedatives and then failed to provide proper care . 
Dr Murray , 57 , has pleaded not guilty , and says he did not give Jackson anything potentially lethal . 
Judge Pastor made the order against the cardiologist on the sixth day of the hearing . 
He also granted a request by the California Medical Board to suspend the licence of Dr Murray to practice in the state . 
Dr Murray faces up to four years in prison if convicted at trial . 
Earlier , Detective Orlando Martinez , who interviewed Dr Murray two days after Mr Jackson 's death in June 2009 , gave evidence to the court . 
Mr Martinez told the hearing Dr Murray said that Jackson told him on the day he died he would have to cancel his comeback concerts in London unless he had a dose of the anesthetic , propofol . 
Michael Jackson was rehearsing for a series of concerts in London when he died The detective said Dr Murray admitted giving Jackson it after a night administering lesser drugs to help him sleep . 
The doctor said he then left the room for `` two minutes '' to go to the bathroom , but on returning found the singer had stopped breathing , Mr Martinez said . 
Dr Murray started to try to resuscitate Mr Jackson but told the detective he did not call for an ambulance himself because `` he said he was caring for his patient and he did not want to neglect him '' . 
Prosecutors say that phone records show the doctor made a series of other calls before an ambulance was finally called more than an hour later . 
Mr Martinez also said Dr Murray told him he had given Mr Jackson doses of propofol six nights a week for two months but was trying to wean him off the drug as he feared his patient was becoming addicted . 
During closing arguments at the hearing , Dr Murray 's lawyer , Joseph Low , said the case should be dismissed because prosecutors had not adequately proved how Dr Murray caused Jackson 's death . 
He also said Jackson 's health may have been a contributing cause . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
