The Iraqi president , Jalal Talabani . 
Photograph : Vahid Salemi\/AP The two-month political deadlock over the make-up of Iraq 's new leadership ended with the election of the Kurdish leader Jalal Talabani as president today . 
More than nine weeks after the January 30 elections , the Iraqi parliament voted in Mr Talabani - a veteran of the Kurds ' Saddam-era struggles for independence - and paved the way for a new government in Baghdad . 
A presidential council of Mr Talabani and his two deputies , the former president Ghazi Yawer , a Sunni Arab tribal leader , and the finance minister , Adel Abdul Mahdi - who is a Shia - will now appoint a prime minister to lead Iraq until the next set of elections take place in December . 
Their choice , to be announced within the next two weeks , is expected to be Ibrahim al-Jaafari , a conservative Islamist also from the majority Shia community . 
However , the election of Mr Talabani , Iraq 's first Kurdish president , reflects the largely pro-US minority 's clout in post-war Iraq . 
On paper , the Iraqi presidency is a largely ceremonial post , but the presence of 72-year-old Mr Talabani in Baghdad will prove influential . 
`` This is the new Iraq - an Iraq that elects a Kurd to be president and an Arab former president as his deputy , '' the parliamentary speaker , Hajem al-Hassani , said after the vote . 
`` What more could the world want from us ? '' 
Mr Talabani , who was hailed by a standing ovation in parliament , pledged to work with all ethnic and religious factions to rebuild Iraq after decades of conflict and dictatorship . 
For weeks , the Islamist-led Shia alliance that won a slim majority in parliament and the Kurdish coalition that came second in the polls have been arguing about forming a government . 
Kurdish parties were especially keen to counter Shia influence by including representatives of the Sunni Arab minority in a national unity government . 
Disagreement over which Sunni would be vice-president held up a deal , but political leaders decided late yesterday to favor Mr Yawar over elder statesman Adnan Pachachi . 
Frustration among Iraqis who braved suicide bombs and threats to vote grew as the wrangling went on . 
Some key decisions - such as who occupies the important oil and defense ministries - remain to be made . 
Many Iraqis complained that politicians had let them down by taking so long to form a government , fearing the delay could have benefited Iraq 's still active insurgency . 
A western diplomat in Baghdad told the Associated Press : `` The people are waiting for success , while the insurgents are waiting for failure . '' 
According to the interim law , Mr Jaafari will have two weeks to form a government , which must be approved by a two-thirds vote in parliament . 
Even if an administration can be named , the future of a Shia-Kurdish alliance looks shaky . 
The secular Kurds are seeking to distance their region from the central government . 
The Shia-led alliance is backed by the religious establishment in Najaf , and is dominated by Islamists , many of whom are centralisers . 
There have been suspicions that some secular-minded leaders were deliberately holding up progress to undermine Mr Jaafari . 
`` There is little common ground other than a shared past of resistance against Saddam Hussein , '' one western observer in Baghdad said . 
`` There does not seem to be any clarity about the future . '' 
