Wednesday 6 April 2005 12.47 BST It looks like a Naomi Klein book . 
It has her name emblazoned on the cover . 
In a tilt to her bestseller , No Logo , it 's called No War . 
The design is strikingly similar . 
The book 's synopsis on Amazon namechecks the activist writer in the first sentence . 
But , according to Klein , No War by Naomi Klein is not by her at all . 
It is an anthology of essays which , says Klein , `` contains one previously published magazine article by me that has been available free-of-charge on my website for eight months '' . 
Klein is adamant that `` No War is not my book ; I had no role in choosing the title , and will accept no revenue from its sales . 
`` I am very concerned that readers will mistakenly believe that they are purchasing original writing , despite my best efforts to convince the publisher to clearly label the book what it is : an anthology of previously published articles by multiple authors , '' she adds . 
So what 's going on ? 
The # 4.99 paperback is published by Gibson Square books , a publishing company founded in 2001 by Martin Rynja , the former commissioning editor of Duckworth 's . 
According to its website , Gibson Square `` specialises in books with either a strong biographical element , or those which are based in some relevant way on personal experience . 
They will , in addition , have a high publicity potential and be able to provoke or contribute to a current debate '' . 
Gibson Square Books is certainly no stranger to controversy . 
Last July the independent publisher picked up Craig Unger 's House of Bush , House of Saud after Random House pulled out of a deal amid fears it could be sued for libel . 
The book inspired some of the more sensational allegations contained in Michael Moore 's film Farenheit 9\/11 and Amazon . 
co. uk refused to stock the book although all the major bookchains and Amazon 's US site carried it . 
According to Martin Rynja , the confusion over No War has arisen because of a last minute change of format of the book . 
Gibson Square had originally intended to publish Klein 's article on its own . 
Rynja says that he read the piece and thought it was `` mind-blowing - it 's long but it 's punchy and casts a light on the Iraq war which I found completely compelling . 
It has the ` a-ha ! ' 
element - after you have read it , something you have always vaguely thought becomes crystal clear '' . 
He sought rights from Klein via her website and was sent a standard response email about the essay which said that the rights were controlled by Harper 's , the original publishers of the article . 
The magazine agreed to sub-licence the article . 
Rynja says that all was running smoothly until about three weeks before the publication date when he had two long conversations with Klein about the book . 
`` I heard that she is working on a new book on the subject and did n't want the essay published on its own , '' he says . 
`` She felt passionately that the book should be turned into an anthology with more authors included . 
We could have gone ahead and published the essay on its own , as planned , if we had wanted as we had the rights , but because she felt very strongly and I admire her as a great thinker and writer - in the calibre of Noam Chomsky or Hannah Arendt - I did what I could and we missed the original publication date in order to include three other extremely strong authors who develop the seam of the lead article further . '' 
The three other contributors are Susan Watkins , writing on the Iraq war as a front for US commercial , interests , Brian Miller on selling Iraq and Walter Lecoeur on terrorism . 
According to Rynja , the reason the other contributors are not mentioned on any of the online information about the book is because the revised data submitted to Neilson Bookdata and Amazon has not yet been updated and the sites are still displaying information referring to the original version of the Klein-only book . 
In response to Klein 's claim that the writing in the book is not `` original '' , Ryjna argues that many books are published first in the US and then in the UK , or carried from one medium to another and that the work itself stays original . 
`` There is a market for books in their physical form rather than in electronic form , '' he says , `` it 's simply bringing her very important message to different markets . '' 
However , the situation may be murkier than it first appears . 
While it is true that Harper 's had syndication rights on Klein 's essay , the author retained the book contract rights and the sale of them to Ryjna by Harper 's was a mistake - one about which Klein says she knew nothing until three weeks before the book was due to be published . 
At this point , having failed to persuade Ryjna to withdraw the book , Klein and her agent tried to salvage the situation as best they could , and avoid a protracted legal battle , by mooting the possibility of an anthology in which all the contributors would be equally credited . 
Again , however , Gibson Square have a different take on events : they reiterate that they did approach Klein , via her website , to ask for the rights to publish the essay in book form in the UK and were told to approach the magazine , from whom the rights were obtained . 
They then claim they went back to Klein in the first week of March to ask for corrections or additions , at which point the idea to include three other writers came up , and was agreed to . 
Politico 's , the specialist political online bookstore , is advertising No War as being `` by Naomi Klein '' on its website , and reports no complaints about it from customers but they have not yet sold a single copy of the book . 
`` I was not aware of Naomi Klein 's statement but I will look into it , '' said a spokesman for Politicos , `` If the book is being mis-sold we will take it off the site . '' 
Waterstone 's Economist 's Bookshop at the LSE said that they had sold three copies of the book , from a stock of about 25 , and had received no complaints from customers . 
The book is officially published on April 18 and , says Rynja , Gibson Square 's wholesalers have already sold nearly a thousand copies of the book . 
Meanwhile , Naomi Klein is encouraging readers interested in her essay , Baghdad Year Zero , to download it for free from her website , nologo.org . 
