WASHINGTON -- A newly discovered type of oil-eating microbe is suddenly flourishing in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Scientists discovered the new microbe while studying the underwater dispersion of millions of gallons of oil spilled into the Gulf following the explosion of BP 's Deepwater Horizon drilling rig . 
And the microbe works without significantly depleting oxygen in the water , researchers led by Terry Hazen at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley , Calif. , reported Tuesday in the online journal Sciencexpress . 
`` Our findings , which provide the first data ever on microbial activity from a deepwater dispersed oil plume , suggest '' a great potential for bacteria to help dispose of oil plumes in the deep-sea , Hazen said in a statement . 
Environmentalists have raised concerns about the giant oil spill and the underwater plume of dispersed oil , particularly its potential effects on sea life . 
A report just last week described a 22-mile long underwater mist of tiny oil droplets . 
`` Our findings show that the influx of oil profoundly altered the microbial community by significantly stimulating deep-sea '' cold temperature bacteria that are closely related to known petroleum-degrading microbes , Hazen reported . 
Their findings are based on more than 200 samples collected from 17 deepwater sites between May 25 and June 2 . 
They found that the dominant microbe in the oil plume is a new species , closely related to members of Oceanospirillales . 
This microbe thrives in cold water , with temperatures in the deep recorded at 5 degrees Celsius -LRB- 41 Fahrenheit -RRB- . 
Hazen suggested that the bacteria may have adapted over time due to periodic leaks and natural seeps of oil in the Gulf . 
Scientists also had been concerned that oil-eating activity by microbes would consume large amounts of oxygen in the water , creating a `` dead zone '' dangerous to other life . 
But the new study found that oxygen saturation outside the oil plume was 67-percent while within the plume it was 59-percent . 
The research was supported by an existing grant with the Energy Biosciences Institute , a partnership led by the University of California Berkeley and the University of Illinois that is funded by a $ 500 million , 10-year grant from BP . 
Other support came from the U.S. Department of Energy and the University of Oklahoma Research Foundation . 
Sciencexpress is the online edition of the journal Science . 
