' I do give a damn ' After years of writing superior spy thrillers , author David Cornwell , aka John Le Carr , has evolved into an impassioned political commentator . 
The film of his novel The Constant Gardener - which opens this year 's London film festival - is a searing indictment of Britain 's recent record in Africa . 
In a rare interview , he talks to Stuart Jeffries about his ` radical period ' One day , perhaps , David Cornwell will write a book called A Strange Kind of Patriot . 
It will make the narrative twists and turns of The Spy Who Came In from the Cold seem like plot devices for the Teletubbies . 
Its principal character will be someone who was a master at Eton , went on to become our man in Hamburg , served Her Majesty 's Secret Services -LRB- both MI5 and MI6 -RRB- , and who was exposed as a spy to the Soviets by the traitor Kim Philby . 
But it will also be about a man who , when asked why he stays in this benighted country , replies : `` When Simon Wiesenthal was asked why he lived in Vienna , he said , ` If you want to study the disease , you live in the swamp . ' 
So I live in the swamp . '' 
Cornwell is , most likely , being histrionic . 
After all , Britain is not a swamp . 
You ca n't , for instance , play cricket in swamps . 
And cricket is not a small matter to Cornwell , the man who has written 19 novels under the pen name John Le Carr . 
He sweeps into the interview suite at a London hotel looking sartorially the very image of an MCC buffer , demanding to know the Test score after being confined for the past hour to a round-table grilling by continental journalists . 
This is a patriot who tells me he could easily have defected if he had wanted to , though it would have deprived him of excursions to Lord 's to see England attempt to rout uppity ex-colonials . 
But his patriotism only goes so far . 
In a key scene in the new film adaptation of his novel The Constant Gardener , for instance , Britain and all it stands for gets rubbished . 
In it a fey , eponymous and very English career diplomat called Justin Quayle -LRB- played by Ralph Fiennes -RRB- has just delivered a fatuous speech in which he has asserted that , `` Diplomacy is the map and measure of civilisation '' , only to be taken to task by a firebrand law student called Tessa -LRB- Rachel Weisz -RRB- , whom Cornwell describes in the novel as an `` angel waif with a cudgel '' and who will soon afterwards become Quayle 's wife . 
`` Whose map ? '' 
she asks pointedly , implying that the British map of civilisation would be very different from , say , that of a country in the developing world . 
She then launches into a rant against Britain and its presumption to have an ethical foreign policy while its armed forces are mired in Iraq , which she describes as `` Vietnam , the sequel '' . 
`` You are being paid to apologise for this pathetic country , Britain , '' she tells Quayle . 
He folds under this assault but is more than a little turned on . 
Cornwell did not write this dialogue . 
It was a free adaptation by the screenwriter -LRB- the novelist Jeffrey Caine -RRB- , in which he updated their conversation . 
Why did Cornwell not write the screenplay himself ? 
`` I was getting into another novel , so I was very glad not to be saddled with writing the script . '' 
But were n't you uncomfortable about what Caine did to your story , especially the way he updated the exchange between Justin and Tessa ? 
`` Not at all . 
It 's not smoke up your arse , but I was very happy with the adaptation of the film . '' 
I jump at this , partly because a potty mouth is not what one expects from this suave man , but also because it is unusual for Cornwell to feel other than mauled when his books hit the screen . 
`` I have been through the sheep dip with movies before but , like everybody else , I blame myself . 
I have written what I thought were very attractive books that have broken down badly for film . 
If they were n't satisfactory movies , I was part of the process that made them unsatisfactory . 
I do n't feel that I was used or traduced , but many were n't very good . 
Some , though , were . 
The film of The Spy Who Came In from the Cold was pretty good . 
Tinker Tailor was really good . '' 
He understandably forbears from naming those sheep-dip adaptations , but The Russia House , The Little Drummer Girl and The Tailor of Panama are surely contenders . 
And now , in Cornwell 's estimation , the adaptation of The Constant Gardener is really good , too . 
But does that approbation extend to topical references inserted by his screenwriter to Britain 's role in the Iraq war ? 
`` Refitting the script was admissible , I thought , '' he says crisply . 
More than admissible , surely . 
Caine has accurately reflected , in Tessa 's swingeing words , much of what Cornwell has said about the war on Iraq . 
Since the publication of The Constant Gardener , he has gone on record opposing the Anglo-American ousting of Saddam Hussein . 
He told James Naughtie on BBC Radio 4 's Today program a couple of years ago that , `` To me there 's no bigger sin that a politician can commit than allowing his country to go to war under false pretences . '' 
`` Actually , '' says Cornwell , `` I believe the sin was greater than simply taking us to war . 
It destroyed our relationship with the Middle East and with south-east Asia and took us on a flight of fantasy about our relationship with the US . 
Those are terrible sins . '' 
And those purported sins were committed by his nemesis , Tony Blair , a politician whose failings he once ascribed to his education , saying : `` I think that the extremely old-fashioned schools such as Fettes -LRB- in his day , anyway -RRB- leave marks of puritanism and deformation . '' 
For the record , Cornwell believes Britain 's public schools should be abolished . 
For the record , too , his dislike of them is a lifelong phenomenon - young David persuaded his father to send him to school in Switzerland after reportedly feigning a nervous breakdown at Sherborne school , which he detested . 
But Cornwell 's rancor is now directed not just at Blair and the anti-egalitarian establishments that made him what he is . 
`` Our tragedy as a nation is bigger than Blair . 
Blair 's rise and rise is consonant with the collapse of the Conservative party and the leaderless condition of the Liberal party . 
I think it is becoming not just a social but a patriotic duty to attest to the shit that we are being subjected to . '' 
Again with the jarring potty mouth . 
It is worth asking if at any point he was tempted to defect from this pathetic country ? 
`` Well , I have had every chance of defecting from Britain for every reason - financial reasons or whatever . 
But I 'm part of this . 
It made me and ultimately I love it . '' 
If , however , you read The Constant Gardener , it is hard to detect a man who loves his homeland . 
Widely hailed as his best novel for many years , it depicts the British high commission in Nairobi as working hand in glove with the most contemptible mutations of late capitalism , the international pharmaceutical industry . 
It hardly makes one want to hoist the Union Jack . 
And even though the novel includes a postface in which he disclaims any indictment of the high commission , the sour taste remains that our men and women abroad are protecting British interests in a grubbily neo-colonial and unprincipled manner . 
For them , the novel implies , it matters little if Africans die from taking a dodgy drug that has been improperly tested , so long as the pharmaceutical company developing it creates 1,500 jobs in Britain . 
Cornwell finds such government collusion with corporations nauseating . 
`` Mussolini 's definition of fascism was that when you ca n't distinguish corporate power from governmental power , you are on the way to a fascist state . 
If you throw in God power and media power , that 's where we are now . '' 
Is he saying Britain is a fascist state ? 
`` Does it strike you as democratic ? '' 
None the less , Cornwell says : `` I 'm sorry to have portrayed the high commission in such miserable terms . 
The fact is that they got into the line of fire because they have to enforce government policy . 
So they became the whipping boys . 
I was having fun with a former colony , as I often do . 
British habits and postures are very comic . 
Every foreign mission is slightly frozen in time . 
People are living at a level that they never could in Britain . 
It 's the same whichever embassy you go to . 
At the German embassy there 's a Bismarckian opulence . '' 
But despite Cornwell 's depiction of Britain 's miserable diplomatic efforts in Kenya , the real target is the British government . 
`` Yes , I believe this movie is in the line of movies that should be made about political subjects . 
There is an absence of opposition in parliament . 
The concerns and information possessed by the man in the street are not expressed . 
There is a truth gap that desperately needs to be filled . 
In that sense , this is a useful movie . 
Of course there need to be others . '' 
But is n't his book a fiction ? 
`` This is a kind of documentary . 
It is a report which is fictional but incontrovertible in fact . '' 
He argues that The Constant Gardener is also a useful movie because it indicts western pharmaceutical companies for their greed in trying to make profits by using the world 's most poor and vulnerable people as expendable . 
`` The multinational pharmaceutical world , once I entered it , got me by the throat and would n't let go . 
Big Pharma , as it is known , offered everything : the hopes and dreams we have of it ; its vast , partly realized potential for good ; and its pitch-dark underside , sustained by huge wealth , pathological secrecy , corruption and greed . '' 
In The Constant Gardener we see poor Africans being given a drug called Dypraxa that tests for HIV . 
But its recipients are unwittingly taking part in dubious clinical trials to find out whether the pills could also serve as a hugely profitable anti-tubercular wonder drug for rich westerners . 
And all with the connivance of a British government seeking to boost domestic employment , and an African government bribed to accept trials on their people . 
`` Our story is about human guinea pigs and the faking of clinical trials , '' he says . 
But why would a pharmaceutical company fake trials ? 
Cornwell snorts at my naivety . 
Most of them have bigger marketing than R&D budgets , '' he says . 
`` This happens a lot with big pharmas . '' 
`` Nothing that has happened in the years since I wrote that book has changed . 
Some things have got worse . 
The posture , particularly of the American administration , is shameful . 
Pharamaceuticals are priced for the American industry . '' 
Cornwell was thrilled to have a Brazilian , Fernando Meirelles , director of the extraordinary Rio-slum-set City of God , at the helm of the film : `` Fernando brought to it a third-world view . 
From the moment he was aboard , the story was about the victim rather than the perspective I had in the novel . '' 
In the novel , Tessa Quayle arrives newly married in Nairobi , where her husband is to take up a diplomatic post . 
Instead of becoming a diplomat 's complaisant wife , she becomes a campaigner against the big pharmas and submits a report to the high commission pointing out that Dypraxa is being tested on sick Africans for mercenary motives . 
The foreign office hushes up the report in the name of trade . 
Tessa is the story 's conscience , an irritant who stands against the grubby self-interest that lies behind western neo-colonialism . 
In this , she bears considerable resemblance to Yvette Pierpaoli , the dynamic French aid worker who sought to help war widows , displaced persons , landmine victims , homeless families , street children and other refugees . 
Cornwell has written eulogies to her work and dedicated The Constant Gardener to her : `` For Yvette Pierpaoli , who lived and died giving a damn . '' 
Tessa , too , gives a damn , but only after her death does her husband realize the value of his dead wife 's passion for justice . 
Tessa is murdered in a remote area of northern Kenya . 
Her traveling companion , a charismatic doctor , appears to have fled the scene , which seems to indicate that it may have been a crime of passion . 
Certainly the bereaved Quayle is encouraged to believe this . 
But he does not : her traveling companion was gay and , in any case he starts to discover there are many more plausible motives for her murder . 
High commission drones , foreign office invertebrates , Kenyan officials and corporate thugs are keen to ensure he does not . 
Tessa is killed on page one of the book and it is fundamental that the film follows its non-linear structure . 
Cornwell has written a particularly affecting and unusual love story , about a bereaved husband falling more intensely in love with a woman whose true nature he scarcely realized during her life and whose work he realizes he must devote himself to continuing . 
Thus the stories of political awakening to the evils of capitalism rampant and a poignantly observed posthumous romance are inseparable . 
The Times described the novel as `` Le Carr with a new twist , the Old Master developing new techniques for a new age ... What is different in this book , however , is the passion . '' 
Belatedly , one might think , he has started to live like Pierpaoli , and to give a damn . 
And to write as if he did , too . 
His latest novel after The Constant Gardener was 2003 's Absolute Friends , in which Smiley 's people - his favored dramatis personae of cold war double agents - were retooled as bitter old men seething over what they saw as the idiocy of Bush-Blair geopolitics . 
Cornwell describes Absolute Friends as `` a piece of political science fiction '' aimed at showing `` what could happen if we allow present trends to continue to the point of absurdity where corporate media are absolutely at the beck and call in the United States of a neo-conservative group which is commanding the political high ground , calling the shots and appointing the state of Israel as the purpose of all Middle Eastern and practically all global policy '' . 
For some , this was irksome : the Guardian lamented the novel 's strident editorialising . 
Its radical anti-American credentials were unimpeachable . 
In the acknowledgments he thanked John Pilger for his `` words of wisdom over dinner '' , while anti-globalisation campaigners Naomi Klein , Joseph Stiglitz , Noam Chomsky and George Monbiot were name-checked in the text amid rhetorical denunciations of American neo-imperialism , of the Atlantic alliance and of Tony Blair for taking us into war with Iraq . 
This led one critic to suggest that Cornwell had come up with new villains : in his old novels they were KGB spymasters ; now they are the people who defeated them . 
What prompted the 73-year-old to become so radical in his past two novels ? 
Cornwell denies that it is a new departure . 
`` I think it was just a coming out . 
If you look at the books from quite early on , none of them is satisfied with the status quo . 
The Spy Who Came In from the Cold was locked in the ice of the cold war . 
The other books - A Perfect Spy was very cheeky . 
The Tailor of Panama - I do n't know if you would say that belongs to my radical period . '' 
If he finds it hard to date his radical period , we can only speculate . 
Perhaps it began when , in the mid-80s , he turned down a new year 's honor from Margaret Thatcher and started to become sympathetic to the Arab world - a sympathy that led him into a rather unedifying public spat in 1997 in which he criticised Salman Rushdie for insulting Islam in the Satanic Verses , and Rushdie retorted that Cornwell supported the Islamists who wanted to murder him . 
Cornwell 's Islamic sympathies have hardly diminished in the new millennium . 
`` We went through a terrible period when it was defined among neo-conservatives of Bush 's first administration that they would equate liberalism with pro-Islamism . 
That was the absolute nadir of relations between the American government and the media . 
What Bush is doing can only happen with the complicity of an appalling corporate media , along with religious doctrine . 
`` I believe that when the history of this is told , what will be perceived as most awful is the collapse of the US media as a critical voice . '' 
What about the British media ? 
`` Once we were in there we were telling the same lies . 
The spin doctors have done some gruesome things . 
The price is we live in ignorance . '' 
Are these issues that will resurface in the next book ? 
`` I never talk about what I 'm working on . '' 
But for such a writer who , since the millennium , has been unafraid to inject agitprop into his fiction , it seems unlikely he will be able to keep the politics out , nor cease to explore his loathing for his beloved homeland . 
The Constant Gardener opens the London film festival on October 19 . 
It goes on general realease on November 11 . 
