GULF SHORES , ALA. -- When Friday dawned , it was still Groundhog Day in Alabama . 
There were tar balls congealing in the sand , again . 
There were more people walking head-down into the BP claims center , holding their tax forms . 
At the Purple Octopus souvenir shop , the naughty T-shirts and hermit-crab houses still were n't selling . 
But there still something different , hopeful about this day . 
There was news to watch : a cap on BP 's leaking well , and tests to determine if it would hold . 
If the well really was capped , it still would n't mean the end of this beach town 's troubles . 
But it would mean that an end was coming eventually -- welcome news for people who had felt they were doomed endlessly to repeat the same awful day of oil , unemployment and worrying . 
And so , on the 88th day , they waited . 
If the well stays capped , `` we would draw a line on the calendar and we 'll say , ` We can be done by this day , ' '' Gulf Shores Mayor Robert Craft said Friday morning . 
`` Wow , it would be fantastic . '' 
They would have to deal with the oil that 's already spilled into the gulf , but they would at least feel like they had escaped from a cycle of cleaning oil off the beaches one day , only to wake up and see they had been hit again . 
Locals compared their plight to that of Bill Murray 's character in the movie `` Groundhog Day , '' who must repeatedly relive the same miserable day . 
On the gulf floor , the new cap on BP 's runaway well held for a second day Friday -- underwater images showed only water where the gusher of oil had been . 
On Thursday , underwater submarines closed valves on a new `` containment cap , '' stopping the flow after 87 days . 
The question Friday was whether high-pressure oil would leak out underground and bubble up into the gulf . 
There was no sign that was happening , officials said . 
`` At this point , there is no evidence that the well does not have integrity , '' Kent Wells , BP 's senior VP of exploration and production , said late Friday afternoon . 
But the pressure within the well did n't reach as high as officials had hoped , hitting about 6,700 pounds per square inch , Wells said . 
If the well was entirely bottled up , officials wanted to see a reading of 8,000 pounds per square inch . 
Scientists are now trying to decipher the meaning of a pressure reading in the intermediate range , and every six hours they and BP engineers will be convening to decide whether to keep the well shut in , at the risk of creating new leaks , or open it back up . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
