AL-MAYA\/TRIPOLI | Sun Aug 21 , 2011 7:24 pm EDT AL-MAYA\/TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebel fighters streamed into Tripoli as Muammar Gaddafi 's forces collapsed and crowds took to the streets to celebrate , tearing down posters of the Libyan leader . 
A convoy of rebels entered a western neighborhood of the city , firing their weapons into the air . 
Rebels said the whole of the city was under their control except Gaddafi 's Bab Al-Aziziya-Jazeera stronghold , according to al-Jazeera Television . 
Gaddafi made two audio addresses over state television calling on Libyans to fight off the rebels . 
`` I am afraid if we do n't act , they will burn Tripoli , '' he said . 
`` There will be no more water , food , electricity or freedom . '' 
Gaddafi , a colorful and often brutal autocrat who has ruled Libya for over 40 years , said he was breaking out weapons stores to arm the population . 
His spokesman , Moussa Ibrahim , predicted a violent reckoning by the rebels . 
`` A massacre will be committed inside Tripoli if one side wins now , because the rebels have come with such hatred , such vendetta ... Even if the leader leaves or steps down now , there will be a massacre . '' 
NATO , which has backed the rebels with a bombing campaign , said the transition of power in Libya must be peaceful . 
After a six-month civil war , the fall of Tripoli came quickly , with a carefully orchestrated uprising launched on Saturday night to coincide with the advance of rebel troops on three fronts . 
Fighting broke out after the call to prayer from the minarets of the mosques . 
Rebel National Transitional Council Coordinator Adel Dabbechi confirmed that Gaddafi 's younger son Saif Al-Islam had been captured . 
His eldest son Mohammed Al-Gaddafi had surrendered to rebel forces , he told Reuters . 
Only five months ago Gaddafi 's forces were set to crush the rebel stronghold of Benghazi , the leader warning in a television address that there would be `` no mercy , no pity '' for his opponents . 
His forces , he said , would hunt them down `` district to district , street to street , house to house , room to room . '' 
The United Nations then acted quickly , clearing the way for creation of a no-fly zone that NATO , with a campaign of bombing , used ultimately to help drive back Gaddafi 's forces . 
`` It 's over . 
Gaddafi 's finished , '' said Saad Djebbar , former legal adviser to Libyan government . 
Al Jazeera television aired images of people celebrating in central Tripoli and tearing down posters of Gaddafi , which had dominated Libyan cities for decades . 
In Benghazi in the east , thousands gathered in a city-center square waving red , black and green opposition flag as news filtered through of rebel advances into Tripoli . 
`` It 's over ! '' 
shouted one man as he dashed out of a building , a mobile telephone clutched to his ear . 
Celebratory gunfire and explosions rang out over the city and cars blaring their horns crowded onto the streets . 
Overhead , red tracer bullets darted into a black sky . 
`` It does look like it is coming to an end , '' said Anthony Skinner , Middle East analyst , Maplecroft . 
`` But there are still plenty of questions . 
The most important is exactly what Gaddafi does now . 
Does he flee or can he fight ? '' 
`` In the slightly longer term , what happens next ? 
We know there have been some serious divisions between the rebel movement and we do n't know yet if they will be able to form a cohesive front to run the country . '' 
Gaddafi , in his second audio broadcast in 24 hours , dismissed the rebels as rats . 
`` I am giving the order to open the weapons stockpiles , '' Gaddafi said . 
`` I call on all Libyans to join this fight . 
Those who are afraid , give your weapons to your mothers or sisters . 
`` Go out , I am with you until the end . 
I am in Tripoli . 
We will ... win . '' 
A Libyan government official told Reuters that 376 people on both sides of the conflict were killed in fighting overnight on Saturday in Tripoli , with about 1,000 others wounded . 
A diplomatic source in Paris , where the government has closely backed the rebels , said underground rebel cells in the capital had been following detailed plans drawn up months ago and had been waiting for a signal to act . 
That signal was `` iftar '' -- the moment when Muslims observing the holy months of Ramadan break their daily fast . 
It was at this moment that imams started broadcasting their message from the mosques , residents said . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Hopefully gas prices come down . 
there is new ledership in libya ! 
no dought a great improvment over the presant leadership , I 'm sure freedom and liberty will now run rampent , this is a great day for somebody . 
Gaddafi must have ties and complications with communist and axis ideals . 
`` If '' this process removes him , all the better , `` if '' not , all the worse . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
