LONDON | Sun Aug 21 , 2011 12:37 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan rebel forces ill-equipped to fight their way into a city the size of Tripoli may look to locally brokered deals or a burgeoning popular uprising to break the will of Muammar Gaddafi 's forces . 
Libya 's civil war so far has involved some serious urban fighting in towns such as Misrata , but most battles have been relatively small skirmishes . 
If Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi retains the loyalty of large numbers of security forces in the capital , the ragtag opposition forces could struggle and there would be little NATO air strikes could do without risking civilians . 
`` I 'm assuming the Tripoli fighting could be the fiercest , '' said Hayat Alvi , lecturer in Middle East politics at the United States Naval War College . 
`` The wild card will be the Tripoli public . 
True loyalties will have to finally manifest themselves . 
I 'm predicting in the rebels ' favor , but we do n't know what Gaddafi and his sons have up their sleeves . '' 
Gauging the loyalty of Tripoli 's population is far from easy . 
Gaddafi loyalists have put on many marches and demonstrations of loyalty in recent months , but hundreds if not thousands of his opponents also took to the streets in the early stages of the uprising before they were cowed . 
The rebels will hope security forces will melt away . 
Some say Gaddafi himself might already have fled , perhaps to his hometown of Sirte or a desert base further south . 
The long speeches at boisterous public meetings have given way to broadcast addresses delivered on scratchy telephone lines . 
But others say the nascent uprising reported in Tripoli on Saturday night might have come too soon , with opposition forces still too far away to help . 
Despite rhetoric of taking Tripoli and ending the war in hours or days , some analysts suspect it is more likely the rebels will cement their stranglehold on the city and then see how events play out . 
`` I think they 'll wait on the outskirts and hope for either an uprising or that Gaddafi decided to call it a day and leaves , '' said David Hartwell , Middle East analyst for IHS Jane 's . 
`` If they do go in , they could find it very difficult and they will be keen to avoid that . 
It 's relatively obvious that NATO has been providing close air support for the rebels . 
`` That 's one thing in open countryside or lightly populated areas -- although it pushes the Security Council mandate , to put it mildly -- but it would be almost impossible in Tripoli . '' 
Gaddafi 's government seems keen to broker some kind of last-minute ceasefire that would keep them in power . 
But few believe either the rebels or NATO would agree to that at this stage . 
In Paris , a diplomatic source said rebel cells undercover in Tripoli were putting into action plans prepared months ago . 
He said , however , the rebels were under orders not to enact revenge killings or summary executions against senior members of Gaddafi 's camp . 
Saad Djebbar , a former lawyer for the Libyan government , told Reuters he believed many key figures loyal to Gaddafi had already fled to other countries in Africa such as Niger , Mali and Chad where they had good contacts . 
`` The big sharks have already left the scene , he said . 
`` It 's not going to be Stalingrad . 
Tripoli is very small . 
People know each other . 
People negotiate their way forward . 
Gaddafi is bound to have some people who will put up a symbolic fight . 
But these are mostly thugs and there is no organized force left of any size to check the rebels . '' 
If the rebels are wrong and significant Gaddafi forces remain , strategists say they could be in serious trouble . 
Urban warfare is notoriously challenging and bloody , giving a clear advantage to the defender , while some doubt the opposition have sufficient supply lines to sustain an offensive . 
`` The costliness of urban fighting can not be overestimated , '' said political risk consultancy Stratfor in a note . 
`` Such warfare requires a well-trained force with high morale , and the rebel forces in the west are known to be few in number ... and extremely ill-trained . '' 
The key battle now , Stratfor said , was psychological -- with the rebel agenda to paint a picture of inevitable victory that would enthuse new uprisings and prompt Gaddafi loyalists to abandon their cause to save their necks . 
Much , of course , will depend on how Gaddafi himself chooses to play the endgame . 
He could still perhaps go into either internal or external exile or simply try to copy Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein and disappear into the post-war chaos . 
Saddam evaded U.S. forces for months following the 2003 fall of Baghdad before they eventually tracked him down -- although most analysts believe such a scheme would prove tougher in Libya because of its more disparate geography . 
Even if opposition forces were able to take much of Tripoli relatively easily and bloodlessly , they might still struggle to take down the final remnants of the regime . 
Then , the situation could resemble that seen earlier this year in Ivory Coast , where opposition fighters loyal to Alassane Ouattara took much of the capital Abidjan but seemed unable to capture incumbent leader Laurent Gbagbo . 
It took the actions of French helicopter gunships and troops already based in the country to eventually breach his compound and bunker , allowing his capture by local forces . 
The International Criminal Court in The Hague indicted Gadaffi , his eldest son and spy chief for crimes committed during their initial crackdown . 
That might yet prompt foreign military action to help the rebels capture him . 
`` I would have thought NATO would be very keen let the rebels get Gaddafi themselves as they possibly can , '' said IHS Jane 's Hartwell . 
`` But if it really came down to getting him out of a hole , you could see some Western involvement as we did in Abidjan . 
The ICC warrant could make it justifiable in that context . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
They can simply cut off Tripoli from gasoline and electricity and wait . 
There seems to be enthusiasm in western media for the regime 's collapse , and this irrationally translates proximity of rebel forces to Tripoli into their imminent success . 
The regime seems poised to fall , but it wo n't come from gun-toting , untrained , western-backed rebels on the capitol 's fringes . 
The regime will fall when there is a mass popular uprising in the city , and when deals have been struck between high-level military leaders and -LRB- mostly external -RRB- parties that have an interest in the regime 's collapse . 
No patriot can give up a throne without a strong fight . 
NATO 's approach was lopsided and propelled a rebel group to try and take over so that NATO has puppets in power . 
Greed , barbarism led NATO to twist the UN mandate . 
The leaders in NATO countries could not allow for a better solution , they seem to have no regard for casualties of African or third world countries as long as the strategic interest of the west and achieved . 
NATO must let Libyans settle there own problems without ludicrous foreign interference with bombs . 
UN needs to stop this war now , if it really has any worth as a world and not a club for the western countries This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
