Syria : HRW urges suspension by Arab League Doctor in Homs : `` It 's a horror story ... we are really in crisis ... heroes are treating patients on the street '' Human Rights Watch has called on the Arab League to suspend Syria , saying the abuses against civilians in Homs are crimes against humanity . 
The US-based group has issued a report documenting allegations of torture and unlawful killings in the city of Homs . 
The city has been a focus for anti-government demonstrations . 
Dozens were reported killed there on Thursday . 
The UN says at least 3,500 people have been killed in Syria in protests against President Bashar al-Assad . 
They were beating me , and pouring water on me , and then using electric stun guns '' The government blames the unrest on armed gangs and militants and say hundreds of soldiers and police have been killed . 
But Sarah Leah Whitson , Middle East director at Human Rights Watch said the city of Homs represented : `` A microcosm of the Syrian government 's brutality '' . 
She said that the Arab League , who are due to meet to discuss the crisis in Syria , must apply pressure after the country failed to honor the League 's plan to end the unrest . 
`` The Arab League needs to tell President Assad that violating their agreement has consequences , and that it now supports Security Council action to end the carnage . '' 
Syrian authorities had agreed in early November to withdraw from restive cities , set political prisoners free and start talks with the opposition . 
But , since then , the UN says that the killing has continued . 
On Thursday , nearly 40 people were killed across the country , including five soldiers and an eight-year-old girl , Syrian activists said . 
The eight-month-old uprising has become increasingly armed , with Syrian soldiers joining the anti-government protesters in some areas , including Homs . 
The city has seen repeated clashes between army defectors and security forces , who have been mounting raids in pursuit of protesters . 
Human Rights Watch said it had conducted more than 110 interviews with witnesses and victims of the violence in Homs , both the city and the surrounding province of the same name . 
In a report , entitled We Live As In War , HRW documents what it says are `` dozens of incidents in which security forces and government-supported militias violently attacked and dispersed overwhelmingly peaceful protests '' . 
The HRW witnesses describe security forces firing machine guns or heavier weapons into districts of cities where protests have been taking place , to frighten the residents . 
The BBC 's Jonathan Head , in neighbouring Turkey , says the report backs up accusations against the Syrian authorities by activists . 
Syrian forces have sought for months to quell anti-government protests However , the allegations can not be independently verified because the Syrian government has banned most foreign journalists from entering the country . 
Checkpoints around the district are set up to control movement and troops in armored vehicles move in to conduct raids . 
One resident of Homs told HRW that when he and others tried to bring food into Bab Sba ' district , security forces opened fire , killing one person and wounding another in his group . 
One woman protesting in Homs on 15 August with her family told HRW : `` It was calm , so everything seemed OK . 
`` Then two cars showed up suddenly and opened fire , targeting people even as they were ducking and lying on the ground . 
They were white Kia Cerato cars with tinted windows , like those used by air force intelligence , '' she said . 
Access to Arab and international media Government-opposition dialogue within two weeks Her son was shot in the stomach . 
`` The doctors were able to remove the bullet , but it left a lot of damage , '' she said . 
Thousands of people have been arrested since the anti-government protests began in March . 
While most are eventually released , HRW says several hundred are missing . 
Former detainees interviewed by HRW described being tortured with heated metal rods , electric shocks , beatings and being forced into `` stress positions '' for long periods . 
`` They beat -LRB- me -RRB- with cables and then hanged me by my hands from a pipe under the ceiling so that my feet were n't touching the floor , '' one former detainee said . 
`` They were beating me , and pouring water on me , and then using electric stun guns , '' he added . 
HRW said it had independently confirm 17 deaths in custody . 
Twelve of these people `` bore unmistakable marks consistent with torture , including bruises , cuts and burns '' . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites 
