By Jon Leyne BBC News , Cairo Mass rallies in Syria demand the Arab League suspend Syria 's membership . 
The effects of the demonstrations there , that unseated President Mubarak earlier this year , are still reverberating round the organization 's headquarters . 
For many years the Arab League was mocked , as the epitome of all that was wrong in the old Arab world . 
It was seen as a body given to making grand statements , which only thinly veiled its powerlessness and its deep divisions . 
But earlier this year , the surprise decision of the league to endorse a no-fly zone over Libya dramatically changed that assessment . 
The move was crucial in building up pressure for a UN resolution , which in turn led to the Nato military intervention in Libya . 
Nervous of their restive populations , Arab governments had made a collective decision that , for once , changed history . 
Now they face an even tougher dilemma over the situation in Syria . 
It took months of violence inside Syria , before the Arab League spoke out . 
Since then , the organization has been increasingly outspoken . 
Just under two weeks ago it negotiated a peace plan with Syria , which , if implemented , would have made a huge difference to the situation there . 
Syria pledged to end violence against protesters , pull back its tanks , release political prisoners , and move quickly to open a political dialogue with the opposition . 
Despite Syria agreeing to the peace plan , protesters continue to be killed . 
But while Syria claims to be putting the plan into action , there 's little obvious sign of it on the ground . 
So the Arab League once again faces the danger of being written off as irrelevant and powerless . 
Once again there are huge divisions , between those Arab governments who represent the old order , and the countries which may now be moving to democracy . 
But even the most conservative governments have realized that the situation in Syria has become dangerous to their own survival . 
The dilemma for the members of the Arab League is how to wield their limited power . 
Many Syrian opposition supporters want it to expel Syria . 
It would be a bitter blow to a country proud of its support for pan-Arabism , and it could increase pressure for tough UN action , though no-one is expecting a Libyan-style military intervention . 
But the move would also mark the end of the Arab League 's role in the crisis . 
Once Syria was out of the League , that would be it . 
So it seems that for the moment , the members of the League are reluctant to go that far . 
Suspicious as they are of Syria 's intentions , they are still working with its government , and with opposition groups , to try to encourage political dialogue . 
No-one in the League has any illusions about the chances of success , and the suspension of Syria from membership may eventually become inevitable . 
But it is clear that the Arab countries that make up the League want to exhaust every option before they take that radical step . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites 
