'' This Story : Read + | Watch + | A series of internal investigations over the past decade warned senior BP managers that the oil company repeatedly disregarded safety and environmental rules and risked a serious accident if it did not change its ways . 
The confidential inquiries , which have not previously been made public , focused on a rash of problems at BP 's Alaska oil-drilling operations . 
They described instances in which management flouted safety by neglecting aging equipment , pressured employees not to report problems and cut short or delayed inspections to reduce production costs . 
Similar themes about BP operations elsewhere were sounded in interviews with former employees , in lawsuits and little-noticed state inquiries , and in e-mails obtained by ProPublica . 
Taken together , these documents portray a company that systemically ignored its own safety policies across its North American operations -- from Alaska to the Gulf of Mexico to California and Texas . 
Executives were not held accountable for the failures , and some were promoted despite them . 
Tony Hayward has committed himself to reform since becoming BP 's chief executive in 2007 . 
Under him , the company has worked to implement an operating safety system to create `` responsible operations at every BP operation , '' said Toby Odone , a company spokesman . 
BP has used the system at 80 percent of its operations and expects to bring it to the rest by the end of the year , he said . 
Odone said the notion that BP has ongoing problems addressing worker concerns is `` essentially groundless . '' 
Because of its string of accidents before the April 20 blowout in the Gulf of Mexico , BP faced a possible ban on its federal contracting and on new U.S. drilling leases , several senior former Environmental Protection Agency department officials told ProPublica . 
That inquiry has taken on new significance in light of the oil spill in the gulf . 
One key question the EPA will consider is whether the company 's leadership can be trusted and whether BP 's culture can change . 
The reports detailing the firm 's Alaska investigations -- conducted by outside lawyers and an internal BP committee in 2001 , 2004 and 2007 -- were provided to ProPublica by a person close to the company who thinks it has not done enough to fix its shortcomings . 
A 2001 report noted that BP had neglected key equipment needed for an emergency shutdown , including safety shutoff valves and gas and fire detectors similar to those that could have helped prevent the fire and explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig in the gulf . 
A 2004 inquiry found a pattern of the company intimidating workers who raised safety or environmental concerns . 
It said managers shaved maintenance costs by using aging equipment for as long as possible . 
Accidents resulted , including the 200,000-gallon Prudhoe Bay pipeline spill in 2006 -- the largest spill on Alaska 's North Slope -- which was blamed on a corroded pipeline . 
Similar problems surfaced at BP facilities in California and Texas . 
