Katrina comes home to roost President Bush is to blame for the scale of the disaster as a result of his administration 's policies and actions Friday 2 September 2005 10.29 BST Biblical in its uncontrolled rage and scope , the storm has left millions of Americans to scavenge for food and shelter , and hundreds reportedly dead . 
With its main levee broken , the evacuated city of New Orleans has become part of the Gulf of Mexico . 
But the damage wrought by Hurricane Katrina may not entirely be the result of an act of nature . 
A year ago the US army corps of engineers proposed to study how New Orleans could be protected from a catastrophic hurricane , but the Bush administration ordered that the research not be undertaken . 
After a flood killed six people in 1995 , the Congress created the Southeast Louisiana Urban Flood Control Project . 
Operated by the corps of engineers , levees and pumping stations were strengthened and renovated . 
In 2001 , when George Bush became president , the Federal Emergency Management Agency issued a report stating that a hurricane striking New Orleans was one of the three most likely potential disasters - after a terrorist attack on New York City . 
But by 2003 the federal funding essentially dried up as it was drained into the Iraq war . 
By 2004 , the Bush administration cut the corps of engineers ' request for holding back the waters of Lake Pontchartrain by more than 80 % . 
By the beginning of this year , the administration 's additional cuts , reduced by 44 % since 2001 , forced the corps to impose a hiring freeze . 
The Senate debated adding funds for fixing levees , but it was too late . 
The New Orleans Times-Picayune , which before the hurricane published a series on the federal funding problem - whose presses are underwater and can now only put out an online edition - has reported : `` No one can say they did n't see it coming ... Now in the wake of one of the worst storms ever , serious questions are being asked about the lack of preparation . '' 
The Bush administration 's policy of turning over wetlands to developers almost certainly has contributed to the heightened level of the storm surge . 
In 1990 , a federal task force began restoring lost wetlands around New Orleans . 
Every two miles of wetland between the Crescent City and the Gulf reduces a surge by half a foot . 
Bush promised a `` no net loss '' wetland policy , which had been launched by his father 's administration and bolstered by President Clinton . 
But he reversed the approach in 2003 , unleashing the developers . 
The army corps of engineers and the Environmental Protection Agency announced they could no longer protect wetlands unless they were somehow related to interstate commerce . 
In response to this potential crisis , four leading environmental groups conducted a study that concluded in 2004 that without wetlands protection New Orleans could be devastated by an ordinary - much less a category four or five - hurricane . 
`` There 's no way to describe how mindless a policy that is when it comes to wetlands protection , '' said one of the report 's authors . 
The chairman of the White House 's council on environmental quality dismissed the study as `` highly questionable '' , and boasted : `` Everybody loves what we 're doing . '' 
`` My administration 's climate change policy will be science-based , '' President Bush declared . 
But in 2002 , when the Environmental Protection Agency submitted a study on global warming to the UN , reflecting its expert research , Bush derided it as `` a report put out by a bureaucracy '' , and excised the climate change assessment from its annual report . 
The next year , when the EPA issued its first comprehensive Report on the Environment , stating : `` Climate change has global consequences for human health and the environment '' , the White House simply removed the line and all such conclusions . 
At the G8 meeting in Gleneagles this year , Bush stymied any common action on global warming . 
But scientists have continued to accumulate impressive data on the rising temperature of the oceans , producing more severe hurricanes . 
In February 2004 , 60 scientists warned in a statement , Restoring Scientific Integrity in Policymaking : `` Successful application of science has played a large part in the policies that have made the US the world 's most powerful nation and its citizens increasingly prosperous and healthy ... Indeed , this principle has long been adhered to by presidents and administrations of both parties in forming and implementing policies . 
The administration of George W Bush has , however , disregarded this principle ... The distortion of scientific knowledge for partisan political ends must cease ... '' Bush ignored the statement . 
In the two weeks preceding the storm , the trumping of science by ideology and expertise by special interests accelerated . 
The Food and Drug Administration announced it was postponing sale of the morning-after pill , despite overwhelming scientific evidence of its safety and approval by the FDA 's scientific advisory board . 
The UN special envoy for HIV\/Aids in Africa accused the Bush administration of responsibility for a condom shortage in Uganda as a result of pushing its evangelical Christian agenda of `` abstinence '' . 
The chief of the board of justice statistics in the justice department was ordered by the White House to delete its study that African-Americans and minorities are subject to racial profiling in police traffic stops . 
He refused to concede and was forced to quit . 
When the army 's chief contracting oversight analyst objected to a $ 7bn no-bid contract awarded for work in Iraq to Halliburton , she was demoted despite her superior professional ratings . 
On the day the levee burst in New Orleans , Bush delivered a speech comparing the Iraq war to the second world war and himself to Franklin D Roosevelt : `` And he knew that the best way to bring peace and stability to the region was by bringing freedom to Japan . '' 
Bush had boarded his very own Streetcar Named Desire . 
Sidney Blumenthal , a former senior adviser to President Clinton , is author of The Clinton Wars Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : . 
