If you want to know what London was like in 1905 , come to Washington in 2005 . 
Imperial gravitas and massive self-importance . 
That sense of being the center of the world , and of needing to know what happens in every corner of the world because you might be called on - or at least feel called upon - to intervene there . 
And yet , gnawing away beneath the surface , the nagging fear that your global supremacy is not half so secure as you would wish . 
As Joseph Chamberlain , the British colonial secretary , put it in 1902 : `` The weary Titan staggers under the too vast orb of his fate . '' 
The United States is now that weary Titan . 
In the British case , the angst was a result of the unexpectedly protracted , bloody and costly Boer war , in which a small group of foreign insurgents defied the mightiest military the world had seen ; concern about the rising economic power of Germany and the US ; and a combination of imperial overstretch with socio-economic problems at home . 
In the American case , it 's a result of the unexpectedly protracted , bloody and costly Iraq war , in which a small group of foreign insurgents defies the mightiest military the world has seen ; concern about the rising economic power of China and India ; and a combination of imperial overstretch with socio-economic problems at home . 
Iraq is America 's Boer war . 
Remember that after the British had declared the end of major combat operations in the summer of 1900 , the Boers launched a campaign of guerrilla warfare that kept British troops on the run for another two years . 
The British won only by a ruthlessness of which , I 'm glad to say , the democratic , squeamish and still basically anti-colonialist US appears incapable . 
In the end , the British had 450,000 British and colonial troops there -LRB- compared with some 150,000 US troops in Iraq -RRB- , and herded roughly a quarter of the Boer population into concentration camps , where many died . 
In a recent CNN\/Gallup poll , 54 % of those asked said it was a mistake to send American troops into Iraq , and 57 % said the Iraq war has made the US less safe from terrorism . 
The protest camp outside President Bush 's ranch in Crawford , which grew around the mother of a soldier who died in Iraq , exemplifies the pain . 
CNN has aired a documentary explaining in detail how the intelligence on Saddam 's weapons of mass destruction was distorted , abused , sexed up and , as the program was entitled , Dead Wrong . 
This will hardly be news for British or European readers , but the facts have not been so widely aired in the US . 
In another poll , the number of those who rated the president as `` honest '' fell below 50 % for the first time . 
He has again attempted to bolster support for his administration and his war . 
It does n't seem to be working . 
A recent article in the New York Times plausibly estimated the prospective long-term cost of the Iraq War at more than $ 1 trillion . 
Now that Iraqi politicians have finally agreed a draft constitution for their country , only the world 's greatest optimist can believe that it will turn Iraq into a peaceful democratic federal republic . 
Increasingly , the Islamic Republic of Iran quietly calls the shots in the Shia south of Iraq . 
As the Washington joke goes : the war is over , and the Iranians won . 
Meanwhile oil prices of $ 70 a barrel put the price of petrol at American pumps up to $ 3 a gallon for basic unleaded fuel . 
For someone from Europe this is still unbelievably cheap , but you should hear the shrieks of agony . 
`` Gas prices have changed my life , '' moaned a distressed California commuter . 
If higher energy prices persist , they threaten not just a still vibrant economy but a whole way of life , symbolised by the Hummer . 
Besides instability in the Middle East , the main force pushing up oil prices is the relentless growth of demand for energy from the emerging economic giants of Asia . 
The Chinese go around the world quietly signing big oil supply deals with any oil-producing country they can find , however nasty its politics , including Sudan and Iran . 
When a Chinese concern tried to buy a big California energy company , that was too much - American politicians screamed and effectively blocked the deal . 
China and India are to the US today what Germany and America were to Britain a hundred years ago . 
China is now the world 's second-largest energy consumer , after the US . 
It also has the world 's second-largest foreign currency reserves , after Japan and followed by Taiwan , South Korea and India . 
In the foreign reserve stakes , the US comes only ninth , after Singapore and just before Malaysia . 
According to some economists , the US has an effective net savings rate - taking account of all public spending and debt - of zero . 
It does not save ; it spends . 
TV channels are full oof commercials , enticing you to spend , spend , spend - and then to `` consolidate '' your debt in one easy package . 
None of this is to suggest that the US will decline and fall tomorrow . 
After all , the British empire lasted for another 40 years after 1905 . 
In fact , it grew to its largest extent after 1918 , before it signed its own death warrant by expending its blood and treasure to defeat Adolf Hitler -LRB- not the worst way to go -RRB- . 
Similarly , one may anticipate that America 's informal empire - its network of military bases and semi-protectorates - will continue to grow . 
The US , like Edwardian Britain , still has formidable resources of economic , technological and military power , cultural attractiveness and , not least , the will to stay on top . 
As one British music hall ditty at that time proclaimed : And we mean to be top dog still . 
Yes , we mean to be top dog still . 
You do n't have to go very far to hear that refrain in Washington today . 
The Bush administration 's national security strategy makes no bones about the goal of maintaining military supremacy . 
But whether the `` American century '' that began in 1945 will last until 2045 , 2035 or only 2025 , its end can already be glimpsed on the horizon . 
If you are , by any chance , of that persuasion that would instinctively find this a cause for rejoicing , pause for a moment to consider two things : first , that major shifts of power between rising and falling great powers have usually been accompanied by major wars ; and second , that the next top dog could be a lot worse . 
So this is no time for schadenfreude . 
It 's a time for critical solidarity . 
A few far-sighted people in Washington are beginning to formulate a long-term American strategy of trying to create an international order that would protect the interests of liberal democracies even when American hyperpower has faded ; and to encourage rising powers such as India and China to sign up to such an order . 
That is exactly what today 's weary Titan should be doing , and we should help him do it . 
