LONDON\/DUBAI | Thu Jul 28 , 2011 9:26 am EDT LONDON\/DUBAI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A tanker carrying crude oil has sailed from Benghazi , headed towards Sardinia , as Libya 's rebels sell the last of their stockpile to raise urgently needed funds , industry sources and ship tracking data said on Thursday . 
Traders said the tanker , Captain X Kyriakou , was chartered by Swiss-based trading house Vitol earlier in July and had been seen this week off Marsa El Hariga near Tobruk and Benghazi in eastern Libya , the rebels ' stronghold . 
The ship can carry up to 1 million barrels but was only partially loaded . 
The oil was from storage tanks rather than being fresh barrels from oilfields , the sources said . 
`` The cargo is the second export from the rebels and it may be the last before Libyan production restarts , '' one source said . 
Oilfields in eastern Libya have been unable to pump due to the escalating civil war as rebels have sought to oust the government of Muammar Gaddafi since February . 
In April , Vitol lifted a cargo of crude oil and delivered it to Hawaii . 
AIS ship tracking data showed the destination of Captain X Kyriakou was the Italian island of Sardinia , where it would await further orders , and the estimated arrival date is July 29 . 
Italian refiner Saras has the only oil refinery in Sardinia . 
Saras declined to comment . 
A Vitol spokesman and shipowner Athenian Sea Carriers also declined to comment . 
Vitol , along with Qatar Petroleum , has been permitted by the United States to help market oil for Libya 's Transitional National Council -LRB- TNC -RRB- . 
Britain , one of the main foreign players in the campaign to oust Gaddafi , on Wednesday joined the United States in recognizing the rebels . 
Despite gaining increased international recognition , the rebels are short of funds and their advance has stalled . 
France and Britain earlier this week dropped their insistence that Gaddafi leave the country as part of any settlement , a softening of position that indicated a growing anxiety to end a conflict that has now lasted five months . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
