LONDON | Thu Apr 29 , 2010 11:29 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Shares in London-based BP Plc fell 7 percent on Thursday after the oil major said a leaking well in the Gulf of Mexico was gushing at five times the rate initially thought . 
Investors are growing increasingly concerned about the impact of the leak . 
Since the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig caught fire , BP 's shares have fallen 11 percent , knocking around $ 20 billion off its market capitalization . 
`` It could have a material impact on the company 's financials , '' one fund manager said . 
The drop is despite the company reporting much better than expected first quarter results on Tuesday . 
BP 's shares traded down 6.8 percent at 582 pence at 1516 GMT , lagging a 1 percent drop in the STOXX Europe 600 oil and gas index . 
As happened in previous days , the biggest share price drop came after markets opened in the United States where BP also has a listing . 
BP said the clean-up operation was costing it $ 4 million a day , although this is likely to increase sharply if the slick hits land . 
BP could face much higher costs from potential lawsuits , punitive damages and reputational damage , which would hit its ability to grow output in the United States , its most important market . 
The clean-up team , which includes the U.S. Coast Guard and other agencies , began a controlled burn on parts of the slick on Wednesday , to try and limit the amount of oil that looks set to hit the shore . 
Eleven workers are missing and presumed dead after the worst oil rig disaster in almost a decade . 
Swiss-based Transocean Ltd 's Deepwater Horizon rig sank on April 22 , two days after it exploded and caught fire while it was finishing a well for BP about 40 miles southeast of the mouth of the Mississippi River . 
Five thousand barrels of oil are leaking a day , up from an earlier estimate of 1,000 barrels . 
Underwater robots failed to activate a cutoff valve on the ocean floor to stop the leak . 
BP is hoping a plan to cover the well with a steel cap and capture the leaking oil will avert an environmental disaster . 
However , this will take four weeks to put in place , by which stage over 150,000 barrels could have been spilled . 
If the steel cap does not work , BP will have to rely on stemming the flow by drilling a relief well , which would take two to three months . 
By this stage , the spill could be over 300,000 barrels - larger than the 258,000 barrels leaked by the Exxon Valdez in the U.S. 's worst oil spill to date . 
However , a BP spokesman said the environmental damage from and cost of tackling the leak from the Macondo well would not be in the same range as the Exxon Valdez tragedy , which happened close to shore in the narrow Prince William Sound in Alaska . 
Exxon spent $ 3.5 billion cleaning up the Valdez spill and had hundreds of millions of dollars in damages awarded against it . 
The fact the Macondo spill can be treated offshore and that the oil involved is light , rather than the heavy crude the tanker Valdez carried , should reduce the environmental damage . 
