\* Transocean and Halliburton also named as defendants \* Lawsuit is first for economic losses from blowout \* Suit filed on behalf of all coastal Louisiana interests HOUSTON , April 29 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Louisiana shrimpers have filed a class-action lawsuit against oil giant BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- and owners of the oil rig that exploded in the Gulf of Mexico , marking the first claim for economic losses stemming from the disaster . 
The lawsuit was filed late on Wednesday in U.S. District Court in New Orleans as London-based BP and the U.S. Coast Guard fought to contain a massive oil slick expected to hit the Gulf Coast on Friday . 
-LRB- ID : nN29104665 -RRB- The suit was filed on behalf of two commercial shrimp fishermen named in the suit , and all other coastal Louisiana residents whose livelihoods are threatened by the spill . 
The Coast Guard estimates that 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons -RRB- of crude oil a day is gushing from the sea floor where the blowout occurred , and authorities have said it could take weeks to cap the leak as BP mounts what it calls the largest oil spill containment operation in history . 
The suit names as defendants BP , which holds the lease to the offshore well ; Swiss-based Transocean Ltd RIGN . 
N -RRB- , owner of the Deepwater Horizon drilling platform that exploded in flames on April 20 and collapsed two days later ; and Halliburton Energy Services Inc -LRB- HAL . 
N -RRB- , which the suit says was engaging in cementing operations of the well and well cap . 
The complaint says Halliburton `` improperly and negligently performed these duties , increasing the pressure at the well and contributing to the fire , explosion and resulting oil spill . '' 
The suit also names Cameron International Corp -LRB- CAM . 
N -RRB- , which supplied the rig 's blow-out prevention equipment `` that failed to operate upon the explosion -LRB- and -RRB- should have prevented the oil spill . '' 
There was no immediate comment about the lawsuit from any of the companies . 
The semi-submersible oil drilling rig burst into flames while finishing a well for BP about 40 miles -LRB- 64 km -RRB- southeast of the mouth of the Mississippi River . 
All the defendants are accused of negligence in the lawsuit , which seeks economic and compensatory damages of at least $ 5 million . 
That sum is the minimum amount required by the federal Class Action Fairness Act , on which jurisdiction for the suit is partially based . 
The legal action also seeks an unspecified amount of punitive damages . 
`` While we 're still in the embryonic stages of quantifying the environmental impact , we 're watching in real time , and somewhat helplessly , a slow-motion disaster , '' Louisiana-based lawyer Richard Arsenault , a partner in one of 10 law firms joining the legal action , said in an email . 
The case is Cooper and Anderson vs. BP , 2:10 - cv-01229 . 
