London swine flu cases up by 95 The healthcare worker fell ill on Wednesday Ninety-five new swine flu cases have been confirmed by the Health Protection Agency -LRB- HPA -RRB- , taking the total number of cases in the capital to 289 . 
A healthcare worker from Royal Free hospital in Hampstead , north London , and an employee at Canary Wharf branch of Waitrose were among the new cases . 
A hospital spokesman said the female worker fell ill at work on Wednesday . 
Waitrose said in a statement their worker had not been into the store for nine days and was making a recovery . 
There are currently 1,752 confirmed cases of swine flu across the UK . 
A Waitrose spokesman said : `` A partner at our Canary Wharf branch has been confirmed as having contracted swine flu . 
`` The partner , who has not been into the branch for nine days , has been treated with Tamiflu by their GP and is making a good recovery . '' 
The supermarket branch had remained open following advice from the Health Protection Agency -LRB- HPA -RRB- and the World Health Organisation . 
The spokesman from Royal Free Hospital said the healthcare worker was sent home as soon as she reported feeling unwell and has not been back at work . 
She was recovering at home . 
Two pupils from the school tested positive The spokesman added that all those who came in contact with her have been asked to report any symptoms but no-one has come forward yet . 
Her job involved having contact with patients . 
The hospital received the results of the tests on Thursday . 
Over the past two days , 13 primary school children from three schools were confirmed to have contracted the H1N1 virus . 
Two pupils at Bentworth Primary School in west London tested positive for the flu . 
Eight Year Six students and a teacher from Immanuel and St Andrew Church of England Primary School in Streatham fell ill after a trip to Surrey . 
Three other boys from Year Seven at The Hall School in Belsize Park contracted the flu after returning from a school trip to Normandy . 
The schools have remained open on the advice of the HPA . 
