State officials say they are feeling the effects , both environmentally and financially , and that they need much more than what BP is offering to recover lost wages and taxes . 
Florida Attorney General Bill McCollum sent a letter to BP on Thursday requesting that the company deposit $ 2.5 billion into an escrow account to cover potential losses , the Journal reported . 
The spreading spill likely represents `` a staggering blow '' to the state 's economy and already has `` seriously '' hurt local tourism and fishing , McCollum wrote . 
BP said late Thursday it would give an additional $ 25 million each to Florida , Alabama and Mississippi to help with recovery efforts . 
It made identical grants to the three states in early May , in addition to a combined $ 55 million grant in mid-May for tourism marketing efforts . 
Joe Morton , Alabama 's education superintendent , told The Wall Street Journal that he plans to deliver a sizable bill to BP in the coming weeks to cover lost income and sales-tax receipts that contribute 90 percent of the state 's $ 5 billion annual budget for schools . 
Like most state governments , Alabama 's has been reeling from the impact of the recession on its revenue . 
`` We 're already down to the bone '' in terms of funding , Morton told the newspaper . 
The state cut its education budget by 7.5 percent this year , to $ 5.3 billion . 
Meanwhile , efforts to contain the spill and clean up the oil continued on Saturday . 
BP has been capturing some of the leaking oil since installing a containment system last week , though the well will not be sealed until August , when two relief wells now being drilled are due to be completed . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Wow , the tourism industry thinks they have a claim because people self-select to vacation elsewhere . 
Can I get claim money since I no longer can get my weekly oysters in Cincinnati ? 
Maybe to expedite the claims ' process for the residents is that after the gov. freezes BP assets , then claiments , working with the IRS could then provide the last 3 years of tax returns and get these people some money !!!! United States Patent US5276934 -- A series of ballons can be attatched to tubes , and , by lowering a tube into the well and deep underground , they can be filled , causing them to expand -- all ballons should be filled at once to avoid a collapse . 
These will slow the flow long enough to backfill the well with cement . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
