Q&A : BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill From the rig 's explosion to the ongoing effect on wildlife , fishing and tourism in the Gulf of Mexico , Felicity Carus answers the most frequently asked questions about the worst environmental disaster the United States has faced Thursday 1 July 2010 12.23 BST The Deepwater Horizon oil rig burning in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : AP How much oil is being lost ? 
Can they stop the leak ? 
In the meantime , BP has placed a containment cap on Deepwater Horizon 's failed blow-out preventer which takes some of the oil and gas to a drillship , the Discoverer Enterprise . 
However , a technical problem has meant the cap had to be removed for a short time and tropical storms or hurricanes could also cause the containment to be paused . 
Why did top kill fail ? 
`` Top kill '' was BP 's attempt to plug the oil leak by pumping huge quantities of mud into the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- that sits on the seabed . 
Two high pressure pumps were used to force mud into the BOP , with the aim of pushing the oil and gas back down the well shaft . 
BP hoped this would halt the flow for long enough for it to pump cement into the shaft , sealing it . 
Early signs were encouraging a webcam pointing at the site showed that mud , rather than oil , was leaking out of the well pipe . 
But ultimately the pressure forcing the oil upwards proved greater than the force of the mud , which was delivered at a pressure of 6,800 pounds per square inch . 
BP 's chief operating officer , Doug Suttles , said it decided to pull the plug on top kill after its `` best and brightest people '' agreed it was not working . 
Oil industry experts had warned that the pressure of the mud might fracture the rock around the well , dissipating the pressure and letting the oil and gas surge back up . 
What else could BP try ? 
BP 's two relief wells are designed to intercept the existing shaft . 
That will allow it to inject concrete deep into the seabed and permanently stop the leak . 
Some experts believe this is the only certain way of stopping the disaster . 
The first relief well is already over 12,000 ft deep , but it is likely to take until the end of July to complete . 
The second well was paused last week so that its BOP was available in case BP tries the BOP-on-BOP procedure . 
Could these relief wells hit problems ? 
The most obvious risk is the weather . 
Hurricane season officially started on 1 June , and a serious storm could force BP to suspend drilling -LRB- as well as upset efforts to protect the US coastline from the spill -RRB- . 
Hurricane Alex already looks likely to disrupt clean-up efforts . 
Johnson believes hurricanes are `` a threat '' , but that BP should be able to complete the drilling before the serious storms arrive in August and September . 
`` You can stay on site through many storm conditions , but in the worst cases you have to pull up the well . 
The reality is that a big storm this early is not likely . '' 
A dead sea turtle washed ashore at Pass Christian , Mississippi . 
More than 425 turtles are known to have died in the spill zone . 
Photograph : Dave Martin\/AP What are the environmental costs ? 
How much will it cost BP ? 
The White House tried to impose a six-month moratorium on any oil drilling off the Gulf of Mexico , but rig operators overturned it in court . 
The Obama administration will appeal the decision . 
Photograph : Jim Young\/Reuters What does this mean for offshore drilling ? 
The American Power Act launched by Senator John Kerry was initially prepared with new offshore oil fields in mind to increase energy security in the US and appease the oil industry . 
But the `` catastrophic '' oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico has prompted the draft bill to continue with the moratorium and enable states to veto drilling in waters up to 75 miles off their coasts . 
