TRIPOLI | Wed Mar 2 , 2011 8:17 am EST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Muammar Gaddafi , facing calls to step down after a bloody crackdown threatening his 41-year rule , blamed al Qaeda cells on Wednesday for creating turmoil and said there was a conspiracy to control Libya and its oil . 
Gaddafi , who said no more than 150 people were killed in the unrest caused by `` terrorists , '' told a loyal audience in an address shown on state television that if the United States or foreign powers entered Libya they would face a bloody war . 
The Libyan leader said he was willing to discuss constitutional and legal change without arms or chaos and was ready to talk with al Qaeda if they had demands . 
`` There is a conspiracy to control the Libyan oil and to control the Libyan land , to colonize Libya once again , '' he said . 
`` This is impossible , impossible . 
We will fight until the last man and last woman to defend Libya from east to west , north to south , '' Gaddafi told his supporters who punctuated the address with cheers of support and declarations of loyalty . 
`` You will remain great ! '' 
chanted the crowd to Gaddafi , who was full of confidence and vigor but apparently in denial about swathes of Libya occupied by anti-Gaddafi rebels . 
`` We will enter a bloody war and thousands and thousands of Libyans will die if the United States enters or NATO enters '' Gaddafi said . 
On the sequence of events that started the unrest , Gaddafi , who in a previous speech said protesters against his rule were brain-washed by Osama bin Laden and had their milk and Nescafe spiked with hallucinogenic drugs , said : `` How did that all begin ? 
Small , sleeper al Qaeda cells . '' 
Wearing long , white robes , a brown head-dress and gesticulating , Gaddafi said : `` Al Qaeda 's cells attacked security forces and took over their weapons ... After Bayda , the Qaeda cells moved to Benghazi and Derna . '' 
Gaddafi , 68 , said there were no protests against his rule in Libya and that `` underground groups '' were whipping people up and reports by the media to the contrary were wrong . 
There were no political prisoners in Libya , he said . 
The international community should set up a fact-finding committee to find out just how many people had been killed in the Libyan unrest and accusations against Libya , he said . 
`` I dare you to find that peaceful protesters were killed . 
in America , France , and everywhere , if people attacked military storage depots and tried to steal weapons , they will shoot them , '' Gaddafi said . 
The world did not understand the Libyan system that puts power in the hands of the people , Gaddafi said . 
`` Muammar Gaddafi is not a president to resign , he does not even have a parliament to dissolve , '' he said at the celebration to mark the declaration of Libya as a Jamahiriya in 1977 . 
`` We put our fingers in the eyes of those who doubt that Libya is ruled by anyone other than its people , '' he said , referring to his system of `` direct democracy '' which he outlines in his famous Green Book . 
`` The Libyan system is a system of the people and no one can go against the authority of the people ... The people are free to chose the authority they see fit , '' Gaddafi said . 
`` I am not in a seat to resign from it , by asking me to resign , they are doubting the accomplishment of the people . 
Libya is ruled by the people , '' Gaddafi said . 
At one point during the address , a woman in black robes and a green scarf seized a microphone and shouted : `` How can you go ? 
You will not go and you will never leave ! 
You are all that is good ! 
You are a sword that does n't bend . '' 
Gaddafi told the excited supporters : `` Calm down youths . '' 
On media coverage of the uprising , Gaddafi said : `` News reached the world from stations and agencies that did not have correspondents in Libya , unfortunately ... Libyans do not like foreign correspondents , '' he said . 
The images came from inside a hall with long , red curtains and Gaddafi moved through the hall before sitting on a podium in front of the clapping gathering . 
He joined them in singing the national anthem . 
-LRB- Reporting by Dina Zayed , Shaimaa Fayed , Tom Perry , Sherine Al Madeny , : Writing by Edmund Blair and Peter Millership in Cairo -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
