TUNIS | Wed Mar 2 , 2011 12:20 pm EST TUNIS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Food stocks are depleted and supply chains disrupted in Libya , the United Nations ' World Food Programme -LRB- WFP -RRB- said on Wednesday , calling for urgent humanitarian aid to the country hit by political unrest . 
Responding to the critical situation in North Africa , the WFP is launching a $ 39 million emergency operation to provide food assistance to 2.7 million people in Libya , Egypt and Tunisia , it said in a statement . 
`` We call for safe humanitarian access , especially to western Libya , '' WFP Executive Director Josette Sheeran said in a statement , after visiting the Libyan-Tunisian border on Tuesday . 
`` Cutting off food supplies must not be used as a weapon , '' she said . 
Under its contingency plans , the WFP has re-routed shipments of wheat and flour to the Tunisian border and the Libyan port of Benghazi . 
`` We are planning for a three-month emergency operation that will help shore up Egyptian and Tunisian food safety nets and will also purchase food from the region to help ensure that recovery from the disruption can begin immediately , '' she said . 
Thousands of migrant workers desperate to leave Libya are stranded at the border with Tunisia , sleeping in the open and getting little if any assistance . 
Meanwhile , WFP says it is also worried about the food situation within the country . 
`` People arriving at the crossing are reporting that food availability varies from town to town . 
Food is scarce in some parts of the country , '' WFP spokeswoman Abeer Etefa said by phone from the border . 
Food shortages were reported in Zawiyah , a city 50 km west of Tripoli held by rebels but surrounded by pro-Gaddafi forces , where some refugees said the price of bread had gone up 20 percent . 
Libya relies on imports for over 90 percent of its food . 
`` It 's clear that the turmoil and the fact that roads are not safe are putting pressure on food supplies , '' Etefa said . 
The WFP dispatched a team to Benghazi on Wednesday to check if the port was safe for food deliveries and inspect the food supply situation there . 
-LRB- Reporting by Silvia Aloisi in Tunis and Svetlana Kovalyova in Rome , editing by Keiron Henderson -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
