Has Volkswagen discovered the Holy Grail of carmakers ? 
Full Article India struggles with Libya evacuation , concerns mount NEW DELHI | Wed Mar 2 , 2011 3:06 pm IST NEW DELHI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - India 's government is facing criticism at home for failing to evacuate citizens swiftly out of Libya as China did , but it said such a comparison was unfair . 
A quarter of about 18,000 Indians , most of them employed in the oil , construction and health sectors in Libya , have been brought out after the government chartered cruise ships , and through special flights of the state carrier Air India . 
China , meanwhile , evacuated 32,000 of its citizens in an operation involving four heavy-lift IL-76 military aircraft , chartered aircraft and a navy frigate . 
The United States has already completed evacuation operations , with the last Americans flying out of the besieged capital Tripoli on Friday . 
`` We are not in competition with China here . 
We 're focused on the task of bringing back our people safe and sound . 
Please let 's not devalue this , '' Indian Foreign Secretary Nirupama Rao said in a tweet as concerns increased about the fate of Indians stranded in the North African country . 
The United States said Libya could sink into civil war unless long-time ruler Muammar Gaddafi quits amid fears that the uprising , the bloodiest against long-serving rulers in the Middle East , could cause a humanitarian crisis . 
The Indian navy has sent three ships to help in the evacuation but they will take a week to reach Libya . 
A Defense Ministry official said the air force was on stand-by to deploy IL-76 aircraft to rescue Indians stranded in the interior of Libya , but it would need overflight clearance from a host of countries . 
`` Out of Libya India crawls , the rest are safe at home , '' the Indian Express said , adding India remained the only major country with thousands of nationals stranded there . 
On Tuesday , Indian Foreign Minister S.M. Krishna spoke to his Libyan counterpart , Moussa Koussa , seeking help to evacuate Indians . 
The Indian Foreign Ministry said in a statement it was looking at setting up air bridges with the cities of Sirte in the east and Sebha in the south to fly citizens out . 
The government has also turned to private Indian air carriers to run flights to Tunisia and Cairo to pick up citizens who had landed there fleeing the turmoil in Libya . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
