CAIRO | Wed Mar 2 , 2011 7:54 am EST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Libya crisis is an internal Arab affair and foreign powers should refrain from any intervention , Iraq 's foreign minister said at meeting of the Arab League , which has suspended Muammar Gaddafi 's government . 
Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshiyar Zebari , in opening remarks to an Arab foreign ministers meeting in Cairo on Wednesday , said the Libyan leadership must make brave decisions to stop violence and respect the `` legitimate rights '' of the people . 
The Cairo-based Arab League has suspended Libya 's participation in condemnation of a violent crackdown by Gaddafi forces against protests that have grown into a rebellion against his rule . 
Zebari called on the ministers to stand in silence in memory of Arabs killed in a wave of pro-reform protests that have swept the leaders of Egypt and Tunisia from power and are challenging the rule of others in Bahrain and Yemen , as well as Libya . 
`` We hope the Libyan people can overcome these difficult conditions , and that the Libyan leaders take brave stands to stop bloodshed and respect the legitimate desires and rights of its people to live in a free , democratic nation , '' Zebari said . 
He said the Arabs confirmed their `` desire for no foreign intervention '' in Libya , whose seat stood empty at the Cairo meeting . 
A draft resolution drawn up by Arab League representatives on Tuesday stated the Arabs ' rejection of `` any foreign military intervention in Libya '' and stressed `` the unity and integrity of Libyan soil . '' 
The foreign minister of Oman , one of the states where protesters have been challenging their rulers , said Wednesday 's meeting was the first of a `` new Arab renaissance . '' 
Speaking about the Arab nation , Youssef bin Alawi bin Abdullah said `` nobody should interfere in her affairs . '' 
The United States has sent warships toward Libya and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has said the country and its NATO allies are still considering a `` no-fly '' zone over Libya , though Western states appear hesitant to stage an intervention . 
Amr Moussa , the Arab League 's secretary general , did not mention the prospect of foreign intervention in his opening remarks to the meeting . 
`` The situation in Libya is sorrowful and it is not correct that we accept it or live with it , '' said Moussa , who intends to run for the Egyptian presidency from which Hosni Mubarak was toppled on February 11 . 
`` The reality is the Libyan people are suffering greatly and facing violations and attempts to assassinate its desire for freedom , '' he said . 
Libya 's Arab League representative is one of the Libyan diplomats around the world who have deserted Gaddafi 's administration . 
The Libyan delegation has renounced links to Gaddafi , saying it now represented the will of the people and condemned `` the heinous crimes against unarmed citizens . '' 
