The Deepwater Horizon sank following an explosion and fire By Michael Hirst and David Walker Stopping a potentially devastating slick from a damaged oil well in the Gulf of Mexico is only part of the headache currently facing BP . 
The company also faces a massive clean-up bill , plus legal action from those affected and possible damage to its global brand . 
It is not the first time BP has faced controversy and anger in the US . 
An explosion at a refinery in south Houston in 2005 killed 15 people and injured 170 , the worst US industrial accident since 1990 . 
BP was fined a record $ 87m -LRB- # 53m -RRB- after US health and safety experts cited 270 violations at the refinery . 
It was also fined $ 50m by the Department of Justice in 2007 to settle criminal charges stemming from the explosion . 
BP leases the Deepwater Horizon rig that suffered a huge explosion on 20 April and later sank . 
Eleven workers are still missing , presumed dead . 
As a huge slick heads for the US coastline , the company is now braced for what could be the oil industry 's biggest disaster in history . 
The oil spill was found to be far worse than initially feared The British-owned firm will be hit by the cost of building a dome-like device that could be lowered over the leaking pipe while a $ 100m relief well is drilled . 
It is also footing the bill for efforts to stem the leak using robotic submarines . 
While some legal experts say that Transocean , which owns the rig , was responsible for safety on Deepwater Horizon , BP also faces costly litigation over the accident . 
A lawsuit has already been filed against BP and Transocean on behalf of the 11 missing rig workers . 
Two Louisiana shrimpers have also filed a lawsuit for damages against all those operating the rig , including BP . 
Others named in the action include Transocean and Cameron International , a Houston-based oil well services company . 
As alarm spread through US coastal communities most at threat from the giant spill , White House spokesman Nick Shapiro said on Thursday that the cost of cleaning up the spill would fall on BP . 
Tony Hayward , BP 's chief executive , was quick to grasp the gravity of the situation , flying to the US shortly after the accident , and saying his company was being `` very aggressive '' in its approach to the problem . 
`` This is the biggest response by anyone in the industry ever , and we 're able to do it because we planned for it , '' he said . 
`` We will be judged by our response . '' 
Doug Suttles , BP 's chief operating officer of exploration and production , said the company was spending $ 6m a day trying to clean up the spill and stop the leak . 
It is more likely to prompt a gut feeling -LRB- in the markets -RRB- that the crisis will be expensive and damaging for the company Russell Corn , corporate analysis firm Diligence But he said it was n't clear what had caused the spillage . 
He told US broadcaster ABC : `` The company that owned the drilling rig and that owned the blowout preventer was Transocean and they were actually operating the rig . 
`` At the time the accident happened , the safety devices , we would have believed would have stopped the flow of oil , they did n't do that . 
We do n't know why they did n't do that and ultimately we will find out . '' 
BP 's share price has already taken a big hit - dropping by 6.5 % on Thursday after the US Coast Guard said five times as much oil as previously estimated was pouring into the gulf . 
Oil industry expert Michael Lynch , writing on the website of Gerson Lehrman Group , said containment and remedial costs could easily exceed $ 500m - and a wave of litigation seems sure to follow . 
`` Control of the well is without question the responsibility of BP , '' he said . 
`` Should an investigation reveal some fault on the part of Transocean , it is possible they could be held jointly responsible . 
But all of the indications are that the explosion was the result of a ` kick ' - abnormal pressure from the crude oil reservoir at the bottom of the well driving a volume of natural gas to the surface . 
`` In any event , the total cost to BP is likely to exceed $ 1bn and could rise to double that . 
With crude oil prices at their present levels , BP could earn perhaps $ 20bn for 2010 before the disaster charges , '' he added . 
BP and Transocean officials are working with the US Coast Guard Russell Corn , Deputy CEO of corporate analysis company Diligence , told the BBC the disaster `` will be preoccupying senior management to an increasing degree '' . 
`` It is more likely to prompt a gut feeling -LRB- in the markets -RRB- that the crisis will be expensive and damaging for the company and will therefore result in some form of negative sentiment around the stock , '' he said . 
Stephen Cheliotis , of The Centre for Brand Analysis in London , told the BBC that environmental disasters can badly affect the image of oil industry giants . 
`` It can have a major impact on a brand , and it can damage a brand in the long term , '' he said . 
`` A lot of people would link , for instance , Exxon with the Exxon Valdez disaster . '' 
He added that the oil spill had come at a bad time for BP , in a week when it was announcing substantial profits . 
`` In the eyes of the public this might be seen as crass and might affect their opinion of the company , '' he said . 
Tom Zara , of brand consultancy Interbrand in New York , said BP had worked to be associated with alternative energy and this incident will remind the world of the `` negative associations '' of fossil fuels . 
There could therefore be an erosion of the goodwill of the brand overall , he said . 
How BP responds will be crucial , he added . 
`` If the brand responds in the wrong way , it may be that long-term damage will be done to their ability to influence governments , NGOs and regulators . 
But people wo n't stop buying from BP gas stations , '' he said . 
Although BP has emphasised its speedy response to the disaster - and its co-operation with US investigations into the accident - its reputation in the US has suffered following previous incidents . 
In December 2009 a Texan jury awarded $ 100m -LRB- # 62m -RRB- in damages to 10 workers at a BP oil refinery who said a leak in 2007 had made them ill . 
BP maintained that any toxic substance had come from outside the refinery - the same plant that had suffered the explosion in 2005 - and the source of the leak was never identified . 
But lawyers for the workers described BP as `` a serial polluter '' - and the jury backed their case . 
