U.S. , Saudi reassure on growth as Libya turmoil drives oil WASHINGTON\/RIYADH | Fri Feb 25 , 2011 6:36 pm EST WASHINGTON\/RIYADH -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The world can weather a spike in oil prices , U.S. President Barack Obama said , as Saudi Arabia offered some respite to fears over Middle East oil supplies by indicating it can cover export cuts resulting from Libya 's civil war . 
After a surge in Brent oil prices to 2 - year highs near $ 120 a barrel , South Korea , the world 's fifth-biggest crude importer , warned that its inflation situation was getting tougher . 
Business executives fretted about rising prices and investment banks said oil was reaching an inflection point that could endanger the world 's recovery from the global financial crisis . 
`` We actually think that we 'll be able to ride out the Libya situation and it will stabilize , '' Obama , referring to fuel prices , told a group of corporate chief executives . 
His Treasury Secretary said the world had plenty of oil reserves . 
`` We have substantial capacity across the major economies in the strategic reserves , '' Timothy Geithner said . 
`` Hopefully , by reminding people of that and calling attention to the fact that there 's a fair amount of excess capacity in parts of OPEC ... hopefully that will make it less likely the market ... starts to build in higher prices over time . '' 
The key risk for the world economy is a sustained rise in the price of oil . 
But after shooting up to close to $ 120 a barrel in intraday trade on Thursday , Brent crude futures ended the day at less than $ 112 , showing just how fraught investors nerves are . 
The sharp fall came after market rumors that Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi had been shot dead and on news that top producer Saudi Arabia could cover any supply disruptions . 
On Friday , Brent crude was trading around $ 112 . 
U.S. crude futures eased to $ 97.60 from a Thursday high of $ 103.41 . 
In Libya , forces loyal to Gaddafi hit back in fierce gun battles with rebels holding towns near the capital but there were no signs they had broken the opposition momentum . 
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries -LRB- OPEC -RRB- has an estimated 4-6 million barrels per day of spare crude production capacity , more than enough on paper to cover Libya 's output of 1.6 million barrels a day . 
But markets are worried that the unrest might spread to bigger producers in the region that would have a much bigger impact on the world economy . 
After public uprisings have already toppled leaders in Egypt and Tunisia , governments in the region are taking notice . 
Saudi Arabia this week unveiled a $ 37 billion package to try to insulate the kingdom from the wave of protests across the Arab world , while Algeria lifted a 19-year-old state of emergency as it tried to appease opposition groups . 
`` When you start adding the potential number of barrels at stake , you can see why the market is tense and would rather be long oil than short , '' said Harry Tchilinguirian , chief commodity strategies at BNP in London . 
Deutsche Bank said oil above $ 120 a barrel would be an inflection point for global economic growth . 
At that price , oil as a share of global GDP starts to move above 5.5 percent , historically a point where global growth has come under pressure . 
Airlines are feeling the brunt of high oil prices as reflected in sharp falls in stock prices . 
Chinese flag carrier Air China Ltd has dropped 14 percent this week . 
`` Unfortunately , oil prices have been rising like mad recently , '' said Li Jiaxiang , head of the Civil Aviation Administration of China . 
Emerging Asia , which led the world 's recovery from the global financial crisis , is already trying to deal with escalating food prices . 
Higher oil prices will add to the dilemma for policymakers of how to contain inflation and support economic growth . 
Yet another complication is that while the crude price spikes this week reflect a supply-side risk , oil prices were already rising as economic activity around the world picked up pace . 
`` The global recovery is ongoing , it is gaining more traction but the developments in the crude-oil sector as a result of the turmoil in the Middle East is putting to question the strength of that recovery , '' said Jose Mario Cuyegkeng , economist at ING in Manila . 
Since most countries have little control over the world price of oil , raising interest rates would not address the issue for their economies . 
But higher fuel prices could feed through to other prices , such as transport , and inflation expectations . 
`` The environment influencing inflation is now much more difficult than what we had expected at the end of last year , '' said Yim Jong-yong , South Korea 's vice finance minister . 
Indonesian central bank deputy governor Hartadi A. Sarwono said he expects a recent drop in food and commodity prices to push monthly inflation down in the country , but oil was a risk . 
`` We have to be cautious on long-term inflation from rising oil prices , '' he told reporters . 
The combination of high oil prices undermining growth while fuelling inflation raises the prospect of stagflation that blighted economies in the 1970s . 
Westpac rates strategist Russell Jones said there was a risk of stagflation but there were economic differences now -- including less reliance on oil and better central bank credibility -- to suggest any outbreak would be mild and short lived . 
Still , it would still result in a pick up in the pace of monetary policy tightening , he said . 
`` The longer that oil prices remain elevated , the more likely that the European Central Bank and Bank of England could hike in the second quarter . 
Emerging market central banks are also apt to tighten more aggressively . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
`` Gouge '' or `` Kick '' ? 
Go gas up your Escalade . 
We know Saudi Arabia and the U.S. is lying . 
Wikileaks has already published an admission by the Saudi government that 's it is pumping at maximum already . 
More lies and more lies . 
No wonder the world is in such a lousy place ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
