Zoo animal placed in quarantine over swine flu fears Wednesday 6 May 2009 15.16 BST It was lonely enough anyway , being the only pig in one of the world 's most devoutly Muslim countries . 
And that was before swine flu . 
The white pig , a resident of Kabul Zoo , and believed to be the only such animal in a country where pork and pig-related products are illegal for religious reasons , has been placed in quarantine over fears it could spread the virus . 
The animal , the sole survivor of a pair of pigs donated by China in 2002 , normally grazes alongside deer and goats at the rundown zoo . 
But at the weekend it was removed and put in solitary confinement after visitors became alarmed . 
`` For now the pig is under quarantine . 
We built it a room because of swine influenza , '' Aziz Gul Saqib , the director of the zoo , told Reuters . 
`` We 've done this because people are worried about getting the flu . '' 
While there is speculation that the new strain of the H1N1 virus could have originated on industrial pig farms before spreading to humans , there would appear to be little risk from a solitary pig , particularly in a country with no direct flight connections with Mexico , where the majority of the 1,000 or so worldwide swine flu cases have been identified so far . 
Saqib conceded that there was no real public health argument for locking the pig away : `` We understand that , but most people do n't have enough knowledge . 
When they see the pig in the cage they get worried and think that they could get ill . '' 
The pig arrived as part of a consignment of animals despatched by China to restock a zoo that had become a symbol of Afghanistan 's descent into chaos during the country 's civil war and the rule of the Taliban . 
Rebel fighters ate the zoo 's deer and rabbits and shot dead its elephant . 
One militant climbed into the pen of the resident lion , Marjan , and was promptly killed and eaten . 
The man 's brother responded by throwing a grenade into the enclosure , leaving Marjan blind and lame . 
China 's planeload of animals included a pair of lions to replace Marjan , who died in early 2002 . 
Lonely though Kabul zoo 's pig might be , it has actually escaped lightly by the standards of its peers in some other countries . 
At the weekend health officials in Baghdad said three wild boars at the city 's zoo had been destroyed because of fears about flu . 
Egypt , meanwhile , has ordered the slaughter of the estimated 250,000 pigs inside the country , eaten by the country 's Christian minority , even though the World Health Organisation stresses that the virus can not be passed on through properly cooked meat . 
