Syria crisis : # 100m Assad assets in UK are frozen Fighters from the Free Syrian Army , who are trying to topple the Assad regime The European Union imposed sanctions on President Bashar al-Assad 's regime after it violently suppressed anti-government protests . 
Most of the UK assets is cash held in bank accounts by people and organizations named in the EU 's action . 
Thousands of people have been killed in Syria since the uprising began against President Assad in March 2011 . 
The White House says the killing in Damascus of three top figures at the heart of Syria 's defense establishment on Wednesday showed President Assad was losing control . 
The attack prompted the UN Security Council to delay until Thursday a vote on a Western-sponsored resolution calling for tougher sanctions on Damascus . 
Russia has said some countries are inciting the opposition rather than calming it down . 
Last year , the EU banned crude oil imports from Syria and in February it expanded sanctions to block trade in gold , precious metals and diamonds with Syrian public bodies and the central bank . 
Earlier this year , President Assad 's British-born wife , Asma , was added to the list of people whose assets were frozen and more names are expected to be added to the list in the coming weeks . 
President Assad and his British-born wife Asma are banned from traveling to EU countries The BBC 's Security Correspondent Frank Gardner says : `` On the ground , on the phone and on the internet , financial trackers in the US and Europe are working to trace and freeze the assets belonging to President Assad and members of his regime . '' 
Our correspondent said the British government 's Asset Freezing Unit lists 129 proscribed individuals from Syria and 49 companies , all subject to EU sanctions . 
But Iain Willis , at the business intelligence firm Alaco , says it is just a fraction of the fortune amassed by the Assad family and its close associates during 41 years in power . 
He estimated the figure at # 1bn and says most of it is beyond the EU 's reach , deposited in Russia and other countries that have yet to apply sanctions on Damascus . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
