By Jonathan Marcus BBC Diplomatic Correspondent Israel has accused Iran of being behind the attack in Burgas As the Syrian crisis worsens , if you thought that things in the Middle East were already complicated and unstable enough , then the attack on an Israeli tourist bus in Bulgaria has just made things that much worse . 
Israeli security experts believe that this is just the latest - and the first successful - attack in a series of operations against Israeli targets around the world , planned by the overseas operational arm of the Lebanese group Hezbollah . 
And behind Hezbollah the Israelis see the hand of Iran ; an Iran smarting at a series of attacks against its nuclear scientists , widely believed to have been planned , maybe even carried out , by the Israelis . 
For its part Hezbollah insists that it had nothing to do with the Bulgarian attack . 
But a series of arrests - most recently in Cyprus - have given credence to Israel 's claims of a long-running Hezbollah plan to attack soft Israeli targets abroad . 
The Burgas attack has potentially brought Israel into the frame of a crisis in which , up until now , it has been a concerned bystander . 
The Syrian military is said to have redeployed troops from the Golan Heights to defend Damascus Indeed , the Burgas attack has the potential to exacerbate three over-lapping crises - the long-standing tensions between Israel and Hezbollah in southern Lebanon ; the growing chaos in Syria ; and the wider struggle between Israel and Iran focussed on Tehran 's nuclear program . 
The stakes are high . 
A new regional conflagration beckons if any of the actors make a wrong move . 
Israel has been watching events unfold in Syria with alarm , perhaps tinged with just a small measure of optimism . 
The demise of the Assad regime - Iran 's principal Arab ally - would be a major blow to Tehran . 
It would greatly constrain Iran 's regional ambitions . 
But on the other hand , the Assad regime - father and son - have been known quantities . 
Israel 's border with Syria on the Golan Heights has been its quietest frontier since the 1973 war . 
The collapse of Syria into sectarian chaos - chaos that could well spread to Lebanon as well - is worrying Israeli political leaders and military commanders . 
There have already been murmurings of concern at Syrian troop levels in the Golan being reduced as the regime pulls reinforcements into the center of the country . 
Israel fears it could have an ungoverned space on its northern border akin to the growing security challenges posed by the breakdown of order in Egypt 's Sinai peninsula . 
Add to this the fear of Syrian weapons - missiles and even chemical weapons - potentially falling into the hands of Hezbollah and it is no wonder Israeli military planners are uneasy . 
Israel and Hezbollah in Lebanon have contrived an uneasy informal truce since Israel 's last major incursion into the country in 2006 . 
Iran says its defences are prepared for any attack by Israel This operation was not a success for the Israeli military . 
Hezbollah emerged battered but with its confidence enhanced . 
Since then it has dramatically built-up its ground-to-ground missile force . 
Israel too believes that it has learned the lessons from its last military operation in Lebanon . 
Both sides are preparing for the next round in their struggle . 
What links both the Syrian regime and Hezbollah in Lebanon - quite apart from their own close ties - is the patronage and support they both get from Iran . 
Of course Israel regards Iran 's nuclear program as a potential existential threat . 
It has trained and planned for an attack against Iran 's nuclear facilities . 
US pressure - not least the imminence of a US presidential election - tougher economic sanctions , and renewed efforts by the major players in the UN Security Council along with Germany to engage Tehran in negotiations have forestalled an Israeli attack up to now . 
But three rounds of talks have not made any significant progress . 
Israel is fast losing patience and Israel 's own domestic political circumstances may come into play . 
After the Kadima party quit the coalition a general election may be in the offing ; perhaps in early 2013 . 
Could this be a factor in determining the timing of a potential Israeli attack against Iran ? 
Of course such an attack could have dramatic consequences across the region . 
The Burgas attack has thus added a new level of complexity to an already difficult strategic picture . 
Israel will no doubt respond against Hezbollah ; but maybe not now . 
It already has bigger strategic threats to worry about . 
