But hysteria did the real damage in the Gulf From the BP leak to terror or ash clouds , politics has spurned its most precious responsibility : to react proportionately to danger ' A sad sight ' : Barack Obama and his daughter Sasha swim at Alligator Point in Panama City Beach , Florida . 
Photograph : Pete Souza\/Reuters The saddest sight this week has been of America 's first family taking a quick one-day holiday in Florida . 
Crashing visitor numbers and plummeting fish sales have devastated the Gulf of Mexico after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . 
There is talk of an 80 % drop in revenues in some resorts . 
Yet figures show just 16 of the state 's 180 holiday beaches are at all polluted , while the bulk of the spill appears to have dispersed , or be dispersing out at sea . 
Having hyped the disaster for political purposes , the president is now frantically trying to play it down . 
The spill has been another classic of state terror in which incident and response are wholly out of proportion to one another . 
As the oil leak began back in April , Obama declared a disaster , banned fishing in 37 % of the Gulf and ordered a halt to underwater oil exploration , putting some 27,000 jobs at risk . 
Columnists screamed it was `` Obama 's 9\/11 '' and demanded he `` harness the nation 's outrage '' . 
He was attacked for playing golf within 58 days of the disaster . 
With dial-a-quote scientists howling blue murder , any who might have looked at previous spills and thought it might not be so bad would have been unpatriotic disaster-deniers . 
Hardly a day passed without the president castigating BP , the hated `` British Petroleum '' never its American site operators , Transocean and Halliburton , or his own regulators . 
It was a field day for xenophobes . 
The president used the sort of language normally visited on global terrorists . 
He was going to `` get BP '' and make them `` pay for this '' . 
It was another Hurricane Katrina , but one that could thankfully be blamed on foreigners . 
A Louisiana seafood supplier declared : `` If I had a bomb , I would put it on London '' which would have him in Guant namo Bay if he were Muslim and speaking of New York . 
Foreigners had raped America . 
It was they , they , they Now , mysteriously , Obama speaks of we , we , we who `` have this thing under control '' . 
His environment adviser , Carol Browner , says `` the vast majority of the oil appears to have gone '' . 
Less than 10 % of coastline saw any oil at all . 
There have been no sightings of dead fish floating in the sea and most fishing will soon be `` back to normal '' . 
The Gulf is apparently `` clean , safe and open for business '' , and a lovely place to take the kids . 
It is OK , everyone . 
Disaster has turned to triumph , so let us all think about the midterm elections . 
So whose fault really was the collapse in the local economy ? 
It began with a failed oil well , responsibility resting with BP , but blame still not apportioned . 
Yet as every terrorist knows , it is not the bomb that does the real damage , it is the publicity multiplier given it by the media and politics . 
The bomb causes the bang ; the target is then relied on to supply the megaphone . 
So it has proved in the Gulf . 
Competing scientists have had a field day . 
While some kept up the hysteria this week with such declarations as `` We do n't know the long term yet '' , those with links to the administration or fishing for BP 's $ 500m offered to Gulf environmental research are suddenly optimists . 
Most of the oil has mysteriously evaporated , like that from the biggest similar disaster , the dumping of oil into the Persian Gulf in 1991 by Iraqi forces . 
America did not turn a hair , any more than it did about the Union Carbide explosion that killed 15,000 Indians in Bhopal in 1984 , with only trivial compensation paid . 
The issue is apparently no longer the number of `` barrels '' spilled but the sort of oil , the location of the spill and the temperature of the ambient water and air . 
Contamination of most wildlife appears to have been minimal . 
Even crustaceans recover fast , while the ban on fishing has boosted fish stocks . 
What we have here is yet another fiasco in the public management of disaster , which is becoming a global pandemic all of its own . 
From oil spills to Icelandic ash clouds , from flu viruses to `` Frankenstein cows '' , from Afghanistan 's `` terror threat to our streets '' , which has already killed more than 300 British servicemen , to the supposed menace of Iran 's nuclear bomb , politics has rejected its most precious obligation , to set the world 's dangers in context and react proportionately . 
The imperative to exploit public fear is as old as power itself , but modern media give it a new menace . 
It enables leaders to suppress the dictates of reason and , however briefly , mesmerise the public into obedience . 
In 2003 Tony Blair decided to show off by sending 400 Household Cavalry in tanks to Heathrow `` to counter terrorism '' , as a preliminary to a blitz of legislation curbing civil liberty . 
The image of a city under siege wiped millions off Britain 's tourism account , but Blair got his legislation . 
The continued efforts of the big defense lobby to persuade the British people that they still live under the threat of a nuclear winter has become little more than high-class job protection and profit maintenance . 
Yet it is bought hook , line and sinker by most politicians and commentators . 
George Osborne has at least boldly told the defense chiefs that , if the nuclear threat to Britain is so grave , that is precisely what the existing defense budget is for . 
There was no threat to Britons , or the world , proportionate with the response to last spring 's ash cloud , swine flu , Osama bin Laden or , for that matter , to liquids in carry-on flight bags . 
Europe 's airport giants are even now wrestling with the question of whether a camembert is a `` liquid '' . 
The great conflation of fear often egged on by `` the science '' is the result of government gladly allowing itself to go mad for a day , to raise a fear , glean a headline or win a budget rise . 
Obama grotesquely exaggerated the oil threat to advance his personal and party cause . 
He is now struggling to downplay it . 
The US Travel Association is suing BP for $ 500m in promotional compensation . 
Why not sue the president ? 
It was he who led the charge in disaster rhetoric , with a daily stream of negative publicity for the Gulf of Mexico , before trying , somewhat pathetically , to make up for it . 
He and others were surely accessories after the fact . 
But hysteria did the real damage in the Gulf | Simon Jenkins This article was published on guardian . 
A version appeared on p29 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 14.59 BST on Wednesday 18 August 2010 Comment is free on Twitter Latest news , views and links from Comment is free journalists and editors philipoltermann : Recognise the young man walking in front of Norman Lamont on Black Wednesday in 1992 in first few seconds of this clip ? 
