` Everyone should know about it ' Are today 's young people as ignorant of history as we fear ? 
We asked Six London teenagers to tell us about the war ... Sixty years on from the end of war in Europe , how much do today 's teenagers actually know about the events surrounding the Second World War ? 
If popular opinion is to be believed , not a lot . 
We decided to put this assumption to the test by gathering together a panel of six London teenagers to discuss what they know about the war and what it means to them today . 
Our team are : Lebbie Larbi , 16 , Efe Olokpa , 17 , Marlin Khondoker , 17 and Jessie McGavin , 17 - who were all born and live in London . 
Bulgarian-born Iva Kazalova , 17 , moved to London with her family about 18 months ago and Enrique Grande , 17 , is from Madrid and is in the UK on a one-year exchange . 
Enrique 's passion is international politics , while Lebbie likes football , basketball and table tennis ; Efe and Iva are into reading , socialising and listening to music ; Jessie loves films and wants to travel ; and Marlin likes history and her cat , Peanut . 
What do you know about the Second World War ? 
Lebbie Larbi : Over 60 million people died . 
Efe Olokpa : Although the war ended in , like , Europe , there was still the war in the Far East , in the Pacific , with the US and Japan . 
Iva Kazalova : I know that over 6 million Jews died . 
Enrique Grande : Germany was blamed for the whole war , and Japan as well . 
Marlin Khondoker : Germany was upset about the Versailles Treaty and they retaliated after they were treated so badly . 
Jessie McGavin : VE Day was on 8 May . 
VJ Day , the victory against Japan , was later , in September . 
What countried were involved in the war and when did it begin ? 
Enrique : I think when Great Britain declared war on Germany was when the Germans invaded Poland in 1939 , was n't it ? 
Then basically the States and everyone joined the Allies and everything started . 
There were two main sides , there was the Allies , France , Great Britain , the States , and Russia . 
Then there was Germany and their partner . 
Efe : Well the USA did n't really join the war , but ... Efe : ... when Japan bombed them ... Marlin : They sort of supported from the sidelines , they gave money to help . 
Efe : Yeah , but they were n't really in it until Japan bombed Pearl Harbour . 
How do you find out about these events ? 
Efe : Well recently there was that thing on television about the Second World War in color . 
Marlin : Occasionally the teachers recommend watching something like the documentary on Auschwitz . 
Jessie : We touch on things about the war in other subjects too , like RE when we used to have general discussions . 
You pick up things that way . 
Was the war fought for a good cause and was Germany fighting for an evil one ? 
Lebbie : I think it was a good cause . 
If the Germans had won I would n't be here . 
The Germans wanted blond-haired , blue-eyed people , and I 'm not blond-haired and blue-eyed ! 
Jessie : I do n't know , I do n't think you can ever say it 's just the goodies and the baddies . 
I think you have to look deeper . 
On the whole , though , it was good that the war happened against Germany and that Germany did n't win . 
Enrique : They were suggesting that we should kill some races just because they thought they were superior to them . 
They were suggesting we should get rid of disabled people , mentally incapable people , things like that . 
I think it was a good cause to fight against them . 
I do n't think it was good that so many people died , but it 's better than having Hitler for 80 years . 
Do you think of the Iraq war in the same terms as the Second World War ? 
Jessie : The Iraq war does n't seem like a war to me at all . 
I think that it 's good that the Second World War happened and that the Germans did n't win . 
Whereas I do n't think the Iraq war should have gone ahead at all . 
Enrique : There were two sides in the Second World War and they were roughly equally powerful in everything . 
In the Iraq war you basically had the States and some other countries crushing these poor people with AK-47s , and they have really powerful guns and planes and everything so I do n't think it 's a war , it 's not fair , it 's not a fair fight . 
Efe : Is n't a war supposed to end and it has n't really ended ? 
They say it 's war and people are dying but there is n't really a reason why ... Iva : You can relate Iraq to the Second World War because it 's something so global , it makes you think ... It 's something that everyone should reflect on . 
It 's the same today , even though we should have learned from the Second World War , with all the extremists and the American invasion and everything ... Lebbie : I agree . 
We get a broader view of the war than other people who do n't know about the Second World War . 
What was life like after the war ? 
Jessie : I think it was still hard , I mean it did n't just end , and everyone was happy and there was plenty to eat . 
There was still rationing and they were still fighting . 
Even after VE Day . 
There was n't really a cut-off point . 
Enrique : Japan and the United States carried on fighting for quite a long time . 
They said officially the war was over , but there was still fighting . 
How do you think being invoved in the war affected the lives of the people living here ? 
Jessie : I think everyone had a member of their family who died or at least everyone knew someone who had died . 
It was very real with the Blitz in London . 
But even though it was really depressing , people were better off during the war . 
Everyone had a sort of aim and that was lost when the war ended . 
Marlin : Because the men were away fighting , everyone bonded together , people had to work together a lot more . 
The war brought more independence for women as well so there was more of a community then than there is now . 
Do you think people were n't totally aware of what was going on ? 
Iva : Everyone was stuck to their radios , it was a major thing , everyone fought in it . 
Obviously today everyone cares about the Iraq war , but it 's not like we 're really participating in it . 
We are definitely more informed with television and newspapers and the internet today . 
Marlin : I think we get both perspectives now . 
Before , if you were in Britain they would have shown Britain as the winning side and they would n't have shown anything bad that was going on in Germany , what they 'd inflicted , kind of thing . 
Before the war started they would 've been excited to be fighting for their country . 
Now , at the start of the Iraq war , we did all those protests and marches against it rather than for it . 
Jessie : There 's more confusion as to who 's the good side and who 's the bad side today . 
Enrique : Germany was doing something bad to Poland , that 's why all the countries felt they should help . 
But what was Iraq doing ? 
Why are the States at war there ? 
It was more clear-cut in the Second World War . 
Jessie : It 's easier to be against war today . 
How will you celebrate on 8 May and do you think you should celebrate ? 
Efe : Maybe in my own special way . 
I 'll read the newspaper that day . 
Iva : At the time it must have been such a relief to know the war was finally ending . 
Today I think we should pay some sort of tribute , I mean more like quiet reflection . 
I do n't think it 's something we should drink to . 
It should make you think about what 's going on in the world today . 
Jessie : The deaths of all those people is not something to celebrate . 
Marlin : It 's a celebration of peace is n't it . 
Like at the end of the war . 
Lebbie : It depends how you see it . 
It is a celebration of the end of a horrible war . 
That 's why people party and drink because it 's a celebration of life . 
Do you think the Second World War should be kept in people 's minds ? 
Lebbie : You ca n't force people to know about it , but if they choose to know about it there should be the resources available . 
Enrique : I disagree . 
Everyone should know a bit about it so we can avoid it happening again . 
If everyone knows what happened , if everyone knows what 's going on , we could avoid it in the future . 
Marlin : Our school does encourage us . 
They brought in a speaker once who was a survivor of Auschwitz . 
He talked to us in assembly . 
Iva : It will fade away . 
There are just fewer and fewer memories and less personal experience to be told . 
Enrique : We 're studying the Nazis in Germany and a lot of people do n't know what happened in Germany just before the war . 
We 've been to Berlin and basically people just blank it out . 
They act like it did n't happen , but our teacher gave a talk about her family in early Nazi Germany and it 's something we would n't get to know otherwise . 
It was shocking because it 's the sort of thing that textbooks do n't tell you and people in Germany would never tell you . 
I think that 's a good way of keeping history going and getting people to know about it because otherwise we would forget about it . 
I do n't think we should forget about what happened . 
