The contracts were flying out of AIG Financial Products . 
Hardly anyone outside Wall Street had ever heard of credit-default swaps , but by early 2005 , investment banks were snapping them up to insure all kinds of deals in case of default , fueling one of the great financial booms in U.S. history . 
During twice-monthly conference calls that originated from the company 's headquarters in Wilton , Conn. , president Joseph Cassano would listen as marketing executive Alan Frost listed the latest swap transactions for associates in the firm 's offices in London , Paris and Tokyo . 
Once a small part of the firm 's business , the increasingly popular contracts had helped boost the company 's profits to record levels . 
The company 's computer models continued to show only a minute chance that the firm would ever pay out a dime on the contracts , and it turned down deals that did n't meet its standards . 
After their reviews , Cassano and his team would consult with AIG executives , sometimes including chairman and chief executive Maurice `` Hank '' Greenberg . 
`` We rode pretty tight rein on them , '' Greenberg recalls . 
But the swaps also exposed Financial Products and its parent AIG , the global insurance titan , to billions of dollars in possible losses . 
By spring 2005 , some Financial Products executives were questioning the surge in volume . 
Among them was Cassano , an early advocate for the swaps business who ran the firm from its London office . 
`` How could we possibly be doing so many deals ? '' 
one executive recalls Cassano asking Frost , the firm 's liaison with Wall Street dealers , during one conference call . 
`` Dealers know we can close and close quickly , '' Frost said . 
`` That 's why we 're the go-to . '' 
Efficiency was n't the only reason . 
Frost did n't have to say aloud what everyone at the firm already appreciated . 
Financial Products had become the `` go-to '' for credit-default swaps in part because of its knowledge and reliability , but also because it had AIG 's backing . 
The parent company 's top-drawer , Triple A credit rating and its deep pockets assured customers that they could rest easy . 
Their comfort turned out to be illusory . 
The credit-default swaps became a primary force in the disintegration of AIG as a private enterprise and a massive government rescue aimed at preventing catastrophic damage to the world 's financial system . 
Never in U.S. history has the government invested so much money trying to save a private company . 
Even as Frost spoke , trouble was brewing for AIG . 
On March 14 , 2005 , Greenberg stepped down amid allegations about his involvement in a questionable deal and accounting practices at AIG . 
The next day , the Fitch Ratings service downgraded AIG 's credit rating to AA . 
The two other major rating services , Moody 's and Standard & Poor 's , soon followed suit . 
The initial fallout came swiftly , as AIG 's annual report to federal regulators disclosed . 
The downgrades had triggered provisions in Financial Products ' existing transaction , the report said , requiring its parent company to post $ 1.16 billion in collateral for the deals . 
The company also warned that the downgrades could erode confidence in Financial Products , a crucial element in the unit 's phenomenal success . 
`` Historically , AIG 's triple-A ratings provided AIGFP a competitive advantage . 
The downgrades will reduce this advantage and -LRB- some -RRB- counterparties may be unwilling to transact business with AIGFP except on a secured basis , '' AIG reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission in May 2005 . 
