BP using undersea robots to try to plug Gulf oil leak British oil firm aiming to siphon leaking crude to the surface in latest attempt to resolve Deepwater Horizon crisis Friday 14 May 2010 15.35 BST A boat loaded with oil boom barriers , which are being used to try to limit the spread of the spill . 
BP is now using undersea robots to try to stem the leak . 
Photograph : Stan Honda\/AFP\/Getty Images BP is using undersea robots to try to thread a small tube into the jagged pipe that is pouring oil into the Gulf of Mexico in the latest attempt to stem the spill from a blown-out well that has pumped out more than 90,000 barrels of crude . 
The company was trying to move the 15cm diameter tube into the leaking 53cm pipe , known as the riser . 
The smaller tube will be surrounded by a stopper to keep oil from leaking into the sea , BP said . 
The plan is for the tube to siphon the oil to a tanker at the surface . 
Since the 20 April drilling rig explosion which caused the spill , BP , the rig operator and leaseholder , has tried several ideas to plug the leak . 
In the fateful hours before the Deepwater Horizon exploded about 50 miles off the Louisiana shore , a safety test was supposedly performed to detect if explosive gas was leaking from the mile-deep well . 
While some information was being transmitted to shore right up until the blast , officials from Transocean , the rig owner , told Congress that the last seven hours of transmissions are missing and that all written logs were lost in the explosion . 
Earlier tests that suggested explosive gas was leaking were preserved . 
The missing data poses a problem for investigators unsure what decisions were made during those hours and what warnings might have been ignored . 
`` There is some delay in the replication of our data so our operational data , our sequence of events ends at 3 o'clock in the afternoon on the 20th , '' Steven Newman , president of Transocean , told a Senate panel . 
The rig blew up at 10pm , killing 11 workers and unleashing the gusher . 
Houston lawyer Tony Buzbee , who represents several rig workers involved in the accident , questioned whether what he called `` the phantom test '' was even performed . 
`` I can just tell you that the Halliburton hands were scratching their heads , '' said Buzbee , whose clients include one of the Halliburton crew members responsible for cementing the well to prepare for moving the drilling rig to another site . 
Details of a likely blowout scenario emerged this week for the first time from congressional and administrative hearings . 
They suggest there were both crew mistakes and equipment breakdowns at key points on the day of the explosion . 
Buzbee said that when Halliburton showed BP and Transocean officials the results of the pressure tests that suggested gas was leaking , the rig workers were put on `` standby '' . 
Buzbee said one of his clients told him `` the Transocean and BP company people got their heads together '' and 40 minutes later gave the green light . 
The attorney said the Halliburton crew members were not shown any new test results . 
`` They said they did their own tests , and they came out OK , '' he said . 
`` But with the phantom test that Transocean and BP allegedly did , there was no real record or real-time recordation of that test . '' 
None of the three companies would comment on whether any data or test results were purposely not sent to shore , or on exactly who made the final decision to continue the operations that day . 
If BP 's tube insertion does n't work , the company could try a second metal containment box , which would be placed over the well and siphon the oil to the surface . 
The first attempt to stem the flow with a huge containment tower failed on Saturday . 
The company might also shoot materials of different shapes and sizes into the holes in the blowout preventer a giant piece of machinery that is allowing some of the oil to escape . 
In this `` junk shot '' , engineers would propel pieces of tyres , golf balls , knotted rope and other items into it in the hope that fragments of the correct size will block the appropriate holes . 
Once the leak is plugged , heavy mud would be poured in . 
The leak would then be sealed off with cement . 
BP also has sprayed chemicals on the oil to break it up into smaller droplets . 
The size of the spill , as measured from satellites , seems to have grown about 50 % from 10 May to late yesterday , said Hans Graber , director of the University of Miami 's center for southeastern tropical advanced remote sensing . 
`` There 's a hell of a lot coming out , '' he said . 
The estimate that 5,000 barrels are leaking daily comes from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and has frequently been cited by BP and the US Coast Guard . 
Some scientists have said that , based on an analysis of BP 's video of the leak , the flow rate is much higher but others have concluded the video is too grainy to draw any such conclusions . 
