The Crash : What Went Wrong ? 
How did the most dynamic and sophisticated financial markets in the world come to the brink of collapse ? 
The Washington Post examines how Wall Street innovation outpaced Washington regulation . 
November : Congress passes law to dismantle Depression-era Glass-Steagall law , which had separated commercial and investment banking . 
The law does not give the Securities and Exchange Commission authority to regulate investment bank holding companies , which were trading heavily in unregulated derivatives contracts . 
November : A President 's Working Group report on derivatives recommended no CFTC regulation , saying that it `` would otherwise perpetuate legal uncertainty or impose unnecessary regulatory burdens and constraints upon the development of these markets in the United States . '' 
June : Born leaves the CFTC , with no change in the regulation of derivatives . 
December : Commodity Futures Modernization Act passes . 
Championed by Sen. Phil Gramm -LRB- R-Tex . -RRB- 
, the law bars the Securities and Exchange Commission , as well as the Commodity Futures Trading Commission , from issuing new regulations on unregulated derivatives . 
April : The Securities and Exchange Commission creates a voluntary program of oversight for investment bank holding companies . 
It gives the SEC its first comprehensive look at the large trading positions the firms had in unregulated derivatives and mortgage-related securities . 
September : The Federal Reserve Bank of New York holds discussions with derivatives dealers on creating a voluntary clearinghouse for unregulated derivatives trades . 
September : Insurance giant AIG is seized by the federal government after it 's forced to scramble for cash to use as collateral for $ 440 billion in credit default swaps it sold . 
September : Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy protection after other financial firms demand cash to protect their positions . 
March : Bear Stearns is rescued by J.P. Morgan Chase and a $ 29 billion federal government loan after other financial firms question its stability and demand cash to protect their positions with the firm . 
Banking Regulator Played Advocate The Office of Thrift Supervision let lenders grow out of control , then fail , including IndyMac Bancorp , Washington Mutual and Downey Savings and Loan . 
The Frenzy When the housing market began to tank in 2005 , Wall Street ran through the yellow light of caution and created even riskier investments -- and Washington had no mechanism for finding out what was going on . 
Investigating AIG : The Beautiful Machine Greed on Wall Street and blindness in Washington certainly helped cause the financial system 's crash . 
But a deeper explanation begins 20 years ago with a bold experiment to master the variable that has defeated so many visionaries : Risk . 
Creating the Wave Low interest rates and easy credit allowed many Americans to live beyond their means . 
Riding the Crest Wall Street devised exotic securities to earn fees from the debt boom . 
Housing Values Overburdened by debt , a relatively small percentage of homeowners began missing mortgage payments , creating a domino effect that sent losses throughout financial markets . 
