Ongoing Boeing Strike Poses Threat to Industry Around 27,000 Boeing workers are on strike . 
The firm has halted production , a move that affects thousands of other industry workers . 
-LRB- By Ted S. Warren -- Associated Press -RRB- If ever there was a company built to withstand the global financial crisis , Boeing might be it . 
The aerospace and defense giant is well diversified . 
The world 's airlines are lining up with orders for the company 's latest commercial jets . 
But Boeing 's prospects appear cloudy as a machinist strike enters its seventh week . 
Analysts say the strike , if not resolved soon , could make it difficult for the world 's largest aircraft manufacturer to weather the recession , weakening a giant of industrial America . 
Last week , the Federal Reserve said the Boeing strike contributed to the 2.8 percent decrease in industrial production in September , the steepest drop in 34 years . 
Crunching the figures , economists estimate the strike could be shaving as much as one-tenth of a percentage point from the nation 's gross domestic product . 
Already , the strike , launched in early September by the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers , is affecting thousands of U.S. workers whose jobs are tied to Boeing 's production lines . 
`` My sense is that the impact is going to be much deeper than currently perceived , '' said Wolfgang Demisch , a veteran industry consultant . 
`` The world 's airlines are on a buying spree . 
All of this essentially relies on sustained global peace and prosperity . 
It also relies on the global availability of relatively inexpensive credit . '' 
Analysts estimate that Boeing has a six - or seven-year backlog of plane orders . 
The company 's newest model , the 787 or so-called Dreamliner , is the darling of the aviation world . 
American Airlines this week said it agreed to order as many as 100 new 787s over the next decade , which have a list price of $ 150 million to $ 200 million . 
But Boeing 's factories are shut down now due to the strike , and they are n't producing any new airplanes . 
Boeing is offering to boost salaries in current negotiations , but the company and the union have been unable to agree on outsourcing . 
The union wants to change contract provisions that allow Boeing to use outside companies to deliver parts inside plants . 
`` It 's a slippery slope , '' said Connie Kelliher , an IAM spokeswoman . 
`` If you allow employees from another company to do work that you 've traditionally done , people who bring in the engines will be asked to hang the engines . '' 
So far , it appears that both sides are digging in . 
Bargainers met last Sunday and Monday and adjourned without a new agreement . 
As of late yesterday , no talks were scheduled for this weekend . 
Analysts say the union has the upper hand as long as Boeing 's order books remain filled . 
Boeing spokesman Jim Proulx said that the company wants its employees back at work but that in these tough economic times , Boeing could not `` lock ourselves into any agreement that would n't allow us to conduct our business in the most efficient manner possible . '' 
About 27,000 IAM workers at Boeing are on strike . 
But the shutdown is affecting thousands of workers outside Boeing . 
In Wichita , Ernest Gonzales , a 52-year-old single father of two , works at Spirit AeroSystems , a Boeing contractor . 
Because of the strike , Gonzales and other workers have had their work schedules cut to three days a week . 
On Thursday , Gonzales joined other workers affected by the strike at a pro-union rally outside an IAM union lodge . 
Workers were being handed $ 25 and $ 50 food vouchers . 
At Spirit headquarters , workers say Boeing parts are piling up . 
Finished fuselages sit on railcars waiting for delivery to Boeing 's shuttered Pacific Northwest assembly hangars . 
Gonzales said Spirit workers are using sick days , vacation time and unemployment insurance to fill the gaps and assemble regular 40-hour paychecks . 
Jeff Turner , Spirit 's president and chief executive , sent out a memo Wednesday telling 10,500 workers that the company was preparing for an extended strike . 
A work stoppage beyond October could lead to broad shutdowns and temporary layoffs as early as mid-November , he wrote . 
`` We have to deal with that , '' Gonzales said . 
`` There 's concern about holiday pay and what type of Christmas we are going to have because most of us would be laid off out here . '' 
Demisch , the aerospace analyst , called the strike a `` tragedy '' that reflects years of poor labor relations at Boeing . 
He said if Boeing 's labor situation does n't improve , the American aerospace industry could go the way of the auto industry , with management and labor at loggerheads . 
`` It seems there is no learning taking place , '' Demisch said . 
