Search for new homes , condos , and other real estate in Washington , D.C. , Maryland and Virginia . 
With a presidential campaign in the middle of a financial crisis , it is not surprising that we are besieged with misinformation . 
Much of it is finger-pointing about responsibility for the absence of effective regulation that would have prevented or moderated the crisis . 
Who has political responsibility for inadequate regulation ? 
There are two financial sectors where more extensive regulation might have made a difference . 
These are the investment banks and the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
Both sectors were major players in the events leading up to the crisis . 
In 2004 , the Securities and Exchange Commission adopted a rule that pretty much allowed investment banks to regulate themselves . 
While a number of other factors were involved in this decision , the commission 's belief was that self-regulation would be more effective than SEC regulation . 
This was consistent with the free-market ideology of the Republican administration . 
In 2003 , Congress defeated efforts to bring Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac under tighter regulatory control . 
This was primarily the work of Democrats , who feared that tighter regulation would crimp the ability of the mortgage-market companies to meet affordable-housing goals . 
I call it a tie between the two parties . 
I hasten to add that had both financial sectors been subject to regulation , an only slightly less severe crisis would have occurred , for reasons explained below . 
Deregulation , meaning the scrapping of existing regulations , was not a factor in the crisis . 
The only significant financial deregulation in the past three decades applied to commercial banks . 
Restrictions on where they could have branches and on their involvement in investment banking were both removed . 
Most economists , including me , believe that these actions made the banks stronger than they would have been otherwise . 
Regulation in itself is a weak defense against financial crises . 
One major reason is that it tends to look backward , similar to generals fighting the last war . 
The savings-and-loan industry was subject to extensive regulation in the 1970s , but that did not prevent the subsequent crisis . 
The problem was that the wrong things were regulated . 
The regulatory system was geared to preventing S&Ls from taking on too much default risk because , historically , that had been the major problem . 
The exposure of S&Ls to interest rate risk was not controlled . 
The S&Ls were allowed , even encouraged , to make long-term , fixed-rate mortgages financed with short-term deposits . 
When market interest rates exploded in the early 1980s , the cost of deposits jumped , income from mortgages barely changed and the industry began to bleed red ink . 
The policy changes that were introduced after the S&L crisis were largely designed to prevent another crisis of that type . 
Among other things , associations were authorized -LRB- and encouraged -RRB- to write adjustable-rate mortgages . 
This would make S&Ls , as well as banks , less vulnerable to swings in market rates . 
However , ARMs carry more default risk than fixed-rate mortgages , and as the years passed , interest-only and payment-option ARMs evolved that carried substantially more default risk . 
As the system became increasingly secure against an interest rate shock , it became increasingly vulnerable to a default shock . 
Preventing a default shock through existing regulatory tools would be difficult . 
The core tool is capital requirements : The amount of capital including reserves that firms are required to have to cover the risk of losses from future defaults . 
The problem is that nobody knows how large any future default shocks will be . 
Regulators have no better foresight than do the firms they regulate . 
Both use statistical models based on experience . 
A change in the underlying structure of the economy can make such history irrelevant , which is exactly what has happened . 
Nobody anticipated the severity of the current crisis because , relative to the past , it is off the chart . 
But does n't that mean that regulators , who are not motivated by profit , should err on the side of caution ? 
To a degree , yes . 
If that were not the case , regulation would be pointless . 
But capital requirements that are higher than needed to meet potential shocks not only reduce profits but also impose social costs , to which regulators are sensitive . 
Larger capital requirements reduce loan volume and raise interest rates , a fact well understood by the congressmen who resisted tightening regulatory controls on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
Better regulatory tools are needed . 
We should take a hard look at applying the system used to regulate mortgage insurance companies to mortgage lenders . 
Under this system , lenders would be required to allocate a portion of every dollar they receive in interest above some base rate to a reserve account that would not be touchable for 10 years except in an emergency . 
The higher the interest rate , the larger the payment to the reserve account . 
Can we prevent this sort of problem from happening again ? 
Yes , but the next crisis will almost certainly be different . 
