Malaak 's home caught up in attack by pro-Gadhafi forces on her neighborhood A rocket struck the house and exploded , injuring Malaak and killing her brother and sister Nonprofit group , Global Medical Relief Fund , may now help her travel to the U.S. for artificial limb Misrata , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Five-year-old Malaak is having a bad day . 
People coming in and out of her room have interrupted her afternoon nap . 
`` What 's up with all these people ? 
It did not used to be that way , '' she said in a tone of voice laced with contempt . 
`` I used to be able to play and run around . 
Now these people disturb me . '' 
Malaak has every reason to be frustrated . 
For nearly a month she has been living , sleeping and eating in a hospital bed . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
her father asked , trying to soothe her . 
`` Dad , do not make me cry , '' she responded . 
`` I do not want to see anyone . 
I want to go home . 
I want to be able to play and run and do whatever I want . 
I do not want to feel any pain and want to leave . 
That 's it . '' 
Then she just stopped talking and drifted into one of her silent spells . 
NATO 's Rasmussen on Libyan endgame Clinton on Libya : ` Time is on our side ' Her mother said her mood swings have become more and more pronounced after what happened to her , her three-year-old brother Mohamed and one-year-old sister Rodayna in the safety of their own home in Misrata , Libya . 
On May 13 the three siblings had just lay down for an afternoon nap in their mother 's room . 
Suddenly their neighborhood -- controlled by rebels opposing Libya 's government -- came under attack by forces loyal to Moammar Gadhafi . 
`` They all were lying in bed and I was next to them on the same bed but I left to clean up the house , '' the children 's mother , Saffiya Abdullah , explained . 
`` Less than a minute after that I heard the first Grad rocket falling and it seemed very close to our house so I ran back to hug them , pick them up and take them to safety , '' she added . 
Instead more missiles rained down and before she got to her room there was a deafening blast . 
The door to the room came crashing down on her as she struggled to find her children . 
A Grad rocket , which looks like an over-grown bullet about nine-feet long and 15 inches around , had slammed into her bedroom wall and exploded . 
It left a hole wide enough for two adults to push through at the same time . 
`` My clothes were burnt . 
A big part of the house was damaged and even my uncle 's house next door was damaged , '' Malaak said , without mentioning the worst of it . 
Malaak 's right leg was nearly torn off . 
Her left leg was broken , as was her arm . 
Her mother stood there in shock . 
Her younger son and daughter were n't breathing . 
`` I lifted them up one after the other , '' she said . 
`` I kept praying ; God make me patient . 
God make me patient . 
And I found Malaak alive but Mohamed and Rodayna looked dead . 
The two youngest children were dead . 
I want to travel to America and get a new leg then get right back here . 
`` A mother would want to die rather than see her babies die . '' 
Malaak was rushed to the hospital . 
Doctors said there was no question about what had to be done . 
`` It was gross . 
It was nearly totally amputated . 
It was just the skin and some muscles keeping the limb attached to the body , '' Dr. Ahmad Radwan said . 
Radwan , an Egyptian national who came to Libya as a volunteer with the Arab League , made the call . 
Malaak 's leg had to be amputated . 
He knew what it would mean to someone who had so much more life to live to wake up and find her leg gone . 
He also knew there were no prosthesis that would fit a child and she would be confined to a wheelchair . 
It was too much for him to bear . 
`` I could n't do it . 
I did it for young guys and for rebels at the frontlines but I could n't do it to Malaak , '' he said . 
He asked other doctors to take over . 
But Radwan has n't stopped fighting for her since the day he saw her being carried into the hospital . 
He called his fianc who knew someone at the nonprofit group Global Medical Relief Fund . 
The group 's mission is to aid children who are missing or have lost the use of limbs or eyes . 
In Malaak 's case that will likely mean she needs to travel to the United States to find help : a new leg to give her a better life . 
We visited Malaak in the hospital a second time . 
It was Tuesday afternoon and she was in a great mood , smiling , laughing and offering everyone chocolates . 
She is celebrating with her family , nurses and doctors . 
She has been told she must visit the hospital for more treatment but for the first time she can sleep at home . 
It is a relief , a wish come true . 
When her father asked what she wanted now , she replied : `` I want to travel to America and get a new leg then get right back here . 
That 's it . '' 
