Thu May 6 , 2010 1:40 pm EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - A 98-ton steel containment chamber , or cofferdam , reached the site of a massive oil leak 50 miles south of the Louisiana coastline on Thursday . 
The device is intended to corral leaking oil almost a mile under the water 's surface and channel it through a pipe to a ship above . 
Such containment efforts have been tried before in shallow water depths , including after Hurricane Katrina , but the technology is untested in the high pressures and low temperatures 5,000 feet below the water 's surface . 
The chamber is BP 's best hope so far of corralling the oil until a relief well is drilled within two to three months . 
The leak began after a blowout preventer at the seabed failed on April 20 , allowing Transocean 's Deepwater Horizon rig to explode and later sink . 
Below are some details on the chamber and how it is intended to work , from BP and the Deepwater Horizon response team : \* At the leak site , the device will be lowered by cable to the site of the leak . 
Once at the seafloor , underwater robots will place it on top of the larger of two remaining leaks . 
\* The chamber , 40 feet tall , 24 feet wide and 14 feet deep has steel shelf-like `` mud flaps '' on the side to ensure it does n't sink more than 15 feet into the mud . 
\* The funnel-like top of the chamber will be connected to a drill pipe inside a larger pipe , or riser . 
That mechanism will then be connected to Transocean 's Deepwater Enterprise drillship , which is capable of processing 15,000 barrels of oil per day . 
\* The dual-pipe mechanism will allow warm water and a chemical , methanol , to be pumped into the space between the drill pipe and larger pipe . 
That is intended to counteract the possibility of ice - or sludge-like plugs in the larger pipe that could hinder or stop the flow of oil to the ship . 
Such plugs can form from natural gas , 3,000 cubic feet of which is in each leaking barrel of oil . 
\* When the fluids reach the drillship , they will go to a closed processing system designed for normal well testing . 
There , the oil , gas and water will be separated . 
\* The oil will be stored in a tank that can hold up to 139,000 barrels of oil ; the gas will be flared ; and the water will be dumped back into the sea . 
\* The oil collected aboard the drillship can be later offloaded onto a standby vessel , with the capacity to store 137,000 barrels of oil , to take to BP 's 455,790 barrel-per-day -LRB- bpd -RRB- Texas City , Texas refinery to process . 
\* The larger leak is estimated to be releasing about 85 percent of the gushing oil from a riser that broke when the rig sank . 
A second leak stems from a bent pipe connected to the failed blowout preventer at the seabed . 
\* A second containment chamber is being built at Wild Well Control in Port Fourchon , Louisiana , to later be placed atop the second leak . 
In the meantime , underwater robots will continue trying to manipulate valves on the blowout preventer to stop both leaks at the main source . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It seems that Obama is to be at fault for this oil spill , the high cost of medical care , illegal immigrants , the financial meltdown , the loss of jobs , the Nukes in Iran , the bad sandwich I had for lunch , and probably the volcano at Eyjafjallajokull . 
The last several US administrations were likely heading up another country at the time . 
Anyone who thinks Obama is n't a radical is just plain ignorant . 
My advice is to listen to talk radio -LRB- Sean Hannity , Bill OReilly , Michael Savage , Laura Ingram , Rush Limbaugh , Rick Roberts , Glenn Beck , Michael Medved , Ann Coulter or Mark Levine . 
Watch TV -- Glenn Beck always points out Obama 's extremism by his presidential associations to well-known communists such as Van Jones , George Soros , Ron Bloom , Jeremiah Wright , Jim Wallis , etc. . 
Your problem is you get your information from the Obama-media and are ignorant of what is NOT being reported . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
