Steffen Andersch , who has jumped to his death at the age of 21 , was a singer , guitarist , activist in the fight against fascism in his German homeland and a passionate photographer of the underside of London . 
The youngest son in a family with a communist background , he was often seriously ill as a child , but always struggled back using his musical skills to overcome difficulties . 
Together with his older brother Nils , he was a driving figure in the youth ANTIFA in his home town of Essen , organising numerous rallies against neo-Nazis and trying to protect asylum seekers from deportation . 
He was arrested for his activities but acquitted of public order offences . 
He also joined the anti-Iraq war rallies in London and Amsterdam as a peace activist . 
In 2004 , together with friends , my son turned an unoccupied house in Essen into an arts and events center . 
They invited locals to meet and interact with painters , sculptors , musicians and street artists . 
Their initiative led to negotiations between the city council and the young artists that resulted in the establishment earlier this year of a permanent center , providing studios for artists to work , a performance space , cafe and art lessons for local children . 
While a cultural studies student at Duisburg University , Steffen was a restless singer , songwriter and composer , playing and performing with three bands . 
A CD recorded by one group , known as Snow for Society , is about to be released in Germany . 
After numerous visits to London with his parents , starting during his childhood , Steffen began in his teens to photograph the city -LRB- mainly Brixton and Southwark -RRB- and the tube system . 
His London photographs were selected for several exhibitions in Germany . 
His last photo session , on August 7 , shows Giancarlo Neri 's sculpture , The Writer , at sunrise on Hampstead Heath . 
Steffen planned to exhibit this series in music sessions in Germany and in a book . 
Most of his music compositions and his extensive photographic work about London await publication . 
He is survived by his girlfriend Alice , his mother Annette , brother Nils and sister Kerstin in Germany , and by myself in London . 
Has someone you know died since August who should feature in Other Lives ? 
Send contributions to : Other Lives , Obituaries , The Guardian , 119 Farringdon Road , London EC1R 3ER , email other.lives@guardian.co.uk Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article appeared on p37 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 00.02 GMT on Wednesday 9 November 2005 
