From Surrey to Basra , abuse is a fact of British army life Officers who blame ' a few bad apples ' ignore a culture of brutalisation Saturday 26 February 2005 02.13 GMT Stanley Kubrick 's film Full Metal Jacket must rank as one of the grimmest portrayals of the Vietnam war . 
A leading character , dubbed `` Joker '' , is asked why he volunteered ; he replies : '' -LRB- I -RRB- wanted to meet interesting , stimulating people from an ancient land ... and kill them . '' 
Confronted with the harrowing photographic evidence of abuse by British soldiers in Iraq , it is tempting to add the phrase `` humiliate , sexually abuse , and torture '' to this admission . 
We seem to have moved a long way from the promise of restoring democracy to the Iraqi people . 
Part of the war has been conducted at a court martial in the ancient German city of Osnabruck , where two soldiers of the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers have been found guilty of abusing civilian prisoners . 
A third soldier had already pleaded guilty to assault , after he was photographed standing on an Iraqi prisoner . 
It is not only these men who stood trial , but the British army itself . 
And for many people around the world , the British people also bear some responsibility . 
Even before these convictions , the militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi , who has been linked to al-Qaida , claimed that suicide attacks were `` in response to the harm inflicted by British occupation forces on our brothers in prison '' . 
Given our army 's record of abuse and torture in Malaya , Kenya , Aden , Cyprus , and Northern Ireland -LRB- to name just a few -RRB- , is it any wonder that many people might react cynically to claims that justice has been done ? 
The evidence of abuse on British army premises in Iraq that was revealed during the trial indicates that something is seriously wrong with our armed forces . 
Rituals involving physical and psychological humiliation , as well as sexual abuse , are not confined to overseas operations , but are also present `` at home '' . 
A survey carried out by the Ministry of Defense in 2002 found that more than 40 % of British soldiers believed the army had a problem with bullying , sexual discrimination and harassment . 
More recently , an official study claims that almost half the women serving in the RAF have been sexually harassed at some point in their career . 
And only yesterday , the Sun published photographs of members of the Queen 's Guard apparently ritually humiliating a new recruit by tying him naked to a fence and pouring what appears to be manure over his head . 
In addition , the claims of ritual humiliation and sexual abuse at Deepcut training camp , in Surrey , are profoundly disturbing . 
A police report into the barracks contained more than 100 allegations of serious abuse . 
The fact that the army was aware of the repeated violent , predatory behavior of men such as Lance Corporal Leslie Skinner -LRB- convicted in 2004 of a series of sexual attacks on young recruits -RRB- and Lance Corporal David Atkinson -LRB- who murdered Cambridge student Sally Geeson on New Year 's Day -RRB- , is another indictment of the institution . 
The army insists that these are aberrations - a few `` bad apples '' . 
But it is plausible to assume that bullying and abuse are more widespread than senior officers wish to admit . 
Within the barracks , a culture of silence prevails . 
Leslie Skinner 's victims , for instance , said nothing for years . 
The reason for their reticence was that Skinner was `` rank '' and in the army `` you do what you are told '' . 
Unquestioning obedience is inculcated into every recruit . 
Basic training , from the donning of a uniform to being subjected to a relentless series of drills and chants , induces a lessening of self-awareness . 
Such a process of de-individuation can lead to the weakening of restraints against prohibited forms of behavior . 
This is coupled with the fact that positive military values include aggression , dominance and overt displays of physical prowess . 
Sensitivity , understanding and compassion are routinely derided . 
The `` macho '' culture in training barracks is shared by female soldiers too , many of whom become obsessed with the need to trounce the boys . 
And despite their enthusiasm , `` GI Janes '' often become targets of abuse . 
During the Gulf war , much was made of the fact that two US servicewomen taken prisoner had been raped . 
What was less publicised was that 24 US servicewomen reported being raped or sexually assaulted by colleagues during the withdrawal of forces . 
Similarly , 29 % of American women who served in Vietnam were victims of actual or attempted sexual assault . 
Clearly , ethical and moral codes change in the conditions of military life . 
These altered standards , together with isolation from family and civilian networks , favor brutalisation . 
So , too , does the general ambience of preparing for war . 
In the Falklands war of 1982 , for instance , British soldiers on troop ships were shown violent pornographic films as a way of stimulating their aggression prior to battle . 
Young male recruits in particular were terrified of being derided as `` queer '' and `` chicken '' . 
Those who refused to participate in `` raggings '' or group abuse were regarded as lacking loyalty . 
Ostracism was dreaded : it denied recruits what little comfort could be grasped in an often alienating environment . 
As one soldier put it , it was `` dangerous enough just fighting the acknowledged enemy '' . 
In the front line , of course , both abuse and fear of reporting abuse increase exponentially . 
The British army prides itself on its professionalism and its discipline . 
Its adherence to codes of honorable behavior in battle is central to the way the British army markets itself , particularly in opposition to other fighting forces -LRB- such as the Germans during the two world wars , and the Americans in the current conflict -RRB- . 
But this image may be exploded as a result of the war in Iraq . 
In all armies , the horror of battle can reduce inhibitions to atrocious behavior . 
But this seems to be more likely on some battlefields than others . 
During the second world war , for example , British and American servicemen were significantly more likely to act in atrocious ways in the Pacific theater of war compared with the European one . 
The guerrilla nature of warfare in the Pacific partly explained the greater willingness of soldiers to hit out blindly against enemy combatants and civilians alike . 
But racism also played a significant part . 
As drill instructors told recruits : `` You 're not going to Europe , you 're going to the Pacific . 
Do n't hesitate to fight the Japs dirty . '' 
Classifying the Japanese as inhuman meant they all became fair game . 
In Iraq , too , it is hard to avoid the conclusion that racial and religious differences are fuelling much of the abuse being carried out by the occupying forces . 
Refusing to participate in abuses , as well as reporting maltreatment , becomes extremely difficult in such contexts . 
Although servicemen and women are only required to obey lawful orders , immediate and total obedience is deeply ingrained . 
As one sergeant recalled after witnessing an atrocity in Vietnam : `` There was no chance of ever having anything done , and I ... did n't want to get hassled or thrown into the brig ... I just tucked it away in some dead space ... and went on functioning . '' 
The ethos promoted by army life and that accepted within civilian societies will always differ . 
What we have been seeing in Iraq , however , is the complete divorce between the two . 
Joanna Bourke is professor of history at Birkbeck College , London , and the author of Fear : A Cultural History Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Joanna Bourke : From Surrey to Basra , abuse is a fact of British army life This article was published on guardian . 
