AMMAN , July 19 | Tue Jul 19 , 2011 7:01 pm EDT AMMAN , July 19 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian troops and militiamen loyal to President Bashar al-Assad killed 16 people in attacks in the city of Homs on Tuesday , residents said , an escalation of a crackdown against a focal point for pro-democracy protests . 
Among those killed were 10 mourners at a funeral for another 10 people who were killed by security forces on Monday , the Local Coordinations Committee , an activists group , said . 
Syrian authorities have expelled most foreign journalists , making it hard to verify activist accounts or official statements . 
`` We could not bury the martyrs at the city 's main cemetery so we opted for a smaller cemetery near the mosque , when the militiamen began firing at us from their cars , '' one mourner , who gave his name as Abdallah , told Reuters by telephone . 
He said the bodies had been taken to Khaled Ibn al-Walid mosque in the eastern Khalidiya district of the city . 
`` Khalidiya is totally besieged by the military . 
We are cut off from the rest of Homs as if we are a separate country . '' 
Homs has been a major center of protests against Assad 's rule and tension has run high between the majority Sunni inhabitants and members of the Alawite minority , the same sect as Assad . 
Khalidiya is inhabited by members of Sunni tribes from rural Homs while the nearby Nozha neighborhood is home to most of the country 's security forces and militiamen , from the Alawite sect . 
The 16 deaths reported in Homs ' Khalidiya and Bab Amr neighborhoods on Tuesday brought the total death count since the weekend to at least 33 , activists and residents said . 
Another resident said : `` There are troops and armored vehicles in every neighborhood . 
The irregular forces with them are death squads . 
They have been firing indiscriminately since dawn with rifles and machineguns . 
No one can leave their homes . '' 
Troops and tanks first entered Homs , 165 km -LRB- 100 miles -RRB- north of Damascus , two months ago and occupied the main square after large protests demanding political freedoms . 
Homs , the hometown of Assad 's Sunni wife Asma , has seen an influx of Alawites in the last 20 years as the community tightened its grip on security and public jobs . 
The Syrian National Human Rights Organization said seven people were killed over the weekend in attacks by security forces . 
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the bodies of 30 people were found in Homs over the weekend , and that some were mutilated . 
`` After failing to ignite a sectarian civil war , the regime is expanding military operations to subdue the mass protests in Homs , '' Observatory director Rami Abdel Rahman told Reuters . 
Human rights organizations say troops , security forces and militiamen killed at least 1,400 civilians in Syria , adding that more than 12,000 Syrians and security personnel who refused to fire at civilians had been shot dead . 
Syrian authorities blame `` armed terrorist groups '' with Islamist links for the violence and say at least 500 policemen and soldiers have been killed since March . 
Assad had described the uprising as a foreign conspiracy to sow sectarian strife . 
His opponents argue that the president has been playing on sectarian fears to maintain Alawite support and keep power for his family , which has ruled Syria for 41 years . 
Once courted by the West as a possible moderate in the region , Assad is becoming increasingly isolated internationally , with Iran 's Shi'ite clerical rulers maintaining their support , to the disquiet of Syria 's majority Sunnis . 
Diplomatic pressure mounted on Assad on Monday after Qatar , previously a major supporter , shut its embassy in Damascus and the European Union said it was considering tougher sanctions . 
Qatar was a major backer of Syria until protests broke out in March , but relations deteriorated when Sunni Muslims began to be killed by Assad 's security forces , whose leaders , like the president , belong to the minority Alawite sect . 
In the tribal province of Deir al-Zor in eastern Syria , residents of Albu Kamal , on the border with Iraq , said security had eased its grip after holding talks with the troops . 
Notables from the region want to avoid an assault after defections among security forces who had tried to quell street demonstrations . 
Thousands of people took to the streets of Albu Kamal in a night demonstration on Wednesday demanding Assad 's removal , activists said . 
They added that large protests also continued across Deir al-Zor , in the Qaboun district of Damascus and in other towns and cities across the country . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
