CAIRO | Tue Jul 19 , 2011 4:04 pm BST CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Arab League head Nabil Elaraby said on Tuesday he has visited Syria to discuss the `` necessity of reform , '' but declined to give details of a meeting with President Bashar al-Assad , whose forces have used force to try to crush months of protests . 
Elaraby met Assad as part of a regional tour last week and was quoted by media as saying the League did not accept `` outside interference in the internal affairs of the Arab countries , '' even as diplomatic pressure mounts on Damascus . 
The League has kept a low profile in discussing the Syrian protests and Elaraby 's predecessor only voiced `` worry , '' signalling division in the 22-member body over how to proceed . 
`` I met with President Bashar al-Assad ... I spoke to him about the necessity of reform and I received a promise from him that he will work on that , '' Elaraby , named as the League 's new Secretary General in May , said at its Cairo-based headquarters . 
`` This is all I will say and I can not clarify more on that . '' 
Diplomatic pressure mounted on Assad on Monday after Qatar , previously a supporter , shut its embassy in Damascus and the European Union said it was considering tougher sanctions . 
Assad has described the uprising as a foreign conspiracy to sow sectarian strife . 
His troops and security forces have killed over 1,400 civilians and arrested more than 12,000 , according to rights groups . 
Analysts say the Arab League 's reticence may be a reflection of fears of what the Middle East may look like without Bashar , whose family has ruled Syria for 41 years . 
`` I found that , given the changing conditions in the region , I should start with a tour to know the leaders and their visions for what the Arab League could do in current conditions , '' said Elaraby , previously Egypt 's foreign minister . 
`` I have been careful to emphasise the importance of listening and fulfilling the demands of the Arab peoples , '' he added , but declined to say what he was seeking to do in Syria . 
That reserve contrasts with the role the League played in paving the way for NATO military strikes on Libya when it asked the U.N. Security Council to impose a no-fly zone to protect civilians in a rebellion against Muammar Gaddafi . 
`` On Syria ... it has to be clear that the Arab League ... is a diplomatic institution , '' he said . 
`` Not all that is being said inside closed rooms could be discussed with the media . '' 
The Arab League plans to ask the United Nations to upgrade the Palestinians to full member status . 
Elaraby defended the plan , which has gained momentum with the lack of progress in Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations . 
`` The Palestinian people are the only people unable to determine their destiny , '' he said . 
`` This is like a declaration from Palestine and the Arab states that they want an end to this dispute . '' 
Elaraby reiterated the League 's calls for a political solution to Libya 's civil war . 
`` As the head of the Arab League , I welcome and I am ready to go and meet any leader ... or any other group part of a struggle whether in Libya or Yemen or anywhere else , '' Elaraby said . 
