Prime Minister , David Cameron , speaks on the BBC 's Andrew Marr Show , in London May 1 , 2011 . 
LONDON | Tue May 3 , 2011 12:48 am BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Prime Minister David Cameron said on Monday that Britain must remain vigilant against potential reprisals following the killing of al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden in Pakistan by U.S. forces . 
British embassies have been asked to review their security measures , but the formal threat level at home was unchanged . 
Cameron , who will make a statement to parliament on Tuesday , said in a televised reaction from his official country residence Chequers that bin Laden 's death would be `` welcomed right across our country . '' 
`` Of course , it does not mark the end of the threat we face from extremist terror . 
Indeed , we will have to be particularly vigilant in the weeks ahead . 
But it is , I believe , a massive step forward , '' he said . 
A government crisis committee met late on Monday to discuss bin Laden 's death . 
`` The group welcomed -LRB- President Obama 's -RRB- announcement and agreed it was an important step forward in the fight against terror , '' a spokeswoman for Cameron 's office said in a statement . 
`` They agreed to continue to make every effort to counter terrorism and extremism . '' 
The group , known as `` Cobra , '' convenes in emergencies and brings together officials from various departments . 
Separately , in phone calls with the leaders of Afghanistan and Pakistan , Cameron said Britain would work `` extremely closely '' with both countries `` to tackle the terrorist threat from Al Qaeda and from the Taliban , '' Cameron 's office said in a statement . 
Foreign Secretary William Hague said he expected heightened vigilance at posts abroad for `` some time to come . '' 
`` There may be parts of al Qaeda that will try to show that they are still in business in the coming weeks as indeed some of them are , '' Hague told BBC Radio 4 , during a trip to Cairo . 
The Foreign Office advised Britons overseas to avoid large crowds and public events , and Defense Secretary Liam Fox said he had directed his department to `` maintain a high level of vigilance in all UK defense facilities at home and abroad . '' 
Britain remains at its second-highest threat level of severe , meaning a militant attack is considered highly likely . 
Cameron said bin Laden , who was killed on Monday in a firefight with U.S. forces in Pakistan , had been responsible for ordering the death of many British citizens both at home and in other parts of the world . 
In July 2005 , four young British Islamists inspired by al Qaeda killed 52 commuters in suicide bomb attacks on the capital 's transport network . 
Sixty-six Britons died in the attacks of September 11 , 2001 , on New York and Washington . 
`` Above all today we should think of the victims of the poisonous extremism that this man has been responsible for , '' Cameron said . 
Former Prime Minister Tony Blair , in power at the time of the 2005 and September 11 attacks , said in a statement : `` The operation shows those who commit acts of terror against the innocent will be brought to justice , however long it takes . '' 
Obama phoned Cameron early on Monday , a Downing Street spokeswoman said . 
Bin Laden was killed in a compound in Abbottabad , north of Islamabad , despite the general assumption that he had been in the mountainous region between Afghanistan and Pakistan . 
Fox said it was important Pakistan was fully committed to the battle against international terrorism and he hoped the killing would see a renewed commitment because `` the threat from al Qaeda will not go away with the death of one man . '' 
`` In Pakistan , it is essential that they have a battle against both the Pakistan Taliban and the Afghan Taliban , it is not sufficient to choose just one or the other . '' 
Hague said Britain 's work in Afghanistan , where it has 9,500 troops , would remain `` phenomenally difficult and must go on . '' 
