VANCOUVER | Tue May 3 , 2011 6:15 am BST VANCOUVER -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Prime Minister Stephen Harper scored a goal on Monday that had long eluded him , leading the Conservatives to the majority government he had failed to obtain in the last three elections . 
Using a campaign strategy that reflected his governing style and personality , Harper 's message to voters was that Canada needed a stable Conservative government to ensure economic recovery and low taxes . 
After losing the 2004 election to the Liberals , Harper led the Conservatives to victory in 2006 and 2008 , but emerged from those wins with minority governments that needed the support of at least one opposition party to stay in power . 
Harper , who turned 52 during the campaign and is an economist by training , is the third-longest serving Conservative prime minister since World War Two . 
He is not required to call another election until 2015 . 
He maintains strict control over his government to try to avoid negative press , and he is known to have an aloof public personality . 
His five-week campaign tour around Canada seemed a reflection of this . 
The Conservatives ' campaign allowed only limited media access and audience members had to register in advance to attend rallies . 
The campaign protected front-runner Harper from the gaffes of the past elections that fuelled voter fears he had a hidden right-wing social agenda that he would enact with a majority government . 
He rejected criticism late in the campaign that he had ignored the surprise surge of New Democratic Party , who are traditionally election also-rans but ended up eclipsing the Liberals to emerge as a serious election foe . 
Harper faces a Parliament far different than before the campaign . 
The left-of-centre NDP is now the official opposition , the centrist Liberals reduced to an historic low and Bloc Quebecois , which advocates independent for Quebec , all but eliminated . 
Harper has an instinctive distrust of big government and red ink . 
During the 2008 election campaign he scoffed at the idea of a big economic crash or recession . 
But he turned with other world leaders to Keynesian economics to dig out of the recession , running the biggest budget deficit , in absolute dollar terms , in Canadian history . 
Harper cut his political teeth in the Western province of Alberta , which long felt excluded from the traditional power centres in the east . 
He rose to prominence in the 1990s as a legislator for the right-of-centre Reform Party , which campaigned under the slogan `` The West wants in . '' 
Harper quickly became frustrated and returned to Alberta , where he urged that the province erect a firewall to prevent interference from the federal government . 
In 1997 , he said Canada was a `` welfare state in the worst sense of the term . '' 
Yet he was soon back on the national stage , winning the leadership of the Canadian Alliance -- the successor to Reform -- in 2002 and then pushing through a merger with the Progressive Conservatives to form the new Conservative Party . 
Largely thanks to that merger , the Conservatives took power in 2006 , when the forces on the centre-left were divided . 
Harper is married with two young children and is writing a book about ice hockey , Canada 's passion and its national winter sport . 
His wife Laureen , once an eager motorcycle rider , generally keeps a low profile . 
-LRB- With additional reporting by Randall Palmer ; editing by Will Dunham -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
