Christopher Cox , the embattled chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission , is defending his restrained approach to the financial crisis , saying he has provided steady leadership as Wall Street 's main regulator at a time when other federal regulators have responded precipitously to upheaval in the markets . 
During his tenure , the SEC has watched as all the investment banks it oversaw collapsed , were swallowed up or got out of their traditional line of business . 
The agency , meanwhile , was on the sidelines while the Treasury Department and Federal Reserve worked to bail out the financial sector . 
And the SEC , by its own admission , failed to detect an alleged $ 50 billion fraud by Bernard L. Madoff that may be the largest Ponzi scheme in history . 
But in his first interview since the Madoff scandal broke , Cox said he was not responsible for the agency 's failure to detect the alleged fraud and that he had responded properly to the broader financial crisis given the information he had . 
Confronted with a barrage of criticism from lawmakers , former officials and even some of his staff , Cox said he took pride in his measured response to the market turmoil . 
`` What we have done in this current turmoil is stay calm , which has been our greatest contribution -- not being impulsive , not changing the rules willy-nilly , but going through a very professional and orderly process that takes into account unintended consequences and gives ample notice to market participants , '' Cox said . 
This caution , he added , `` has really been a signal achievement for the SEC . '' 
Taking a swipe at the shifting response of the Treasury and Fed in addressing the financial crisis , he said : `` When these gale-force winds hit our markets , there were panicked cries to change any and every rule of the marketplace : ` Let 's try this . 
Let 's try that . ' 
What was needed was a steady hand . '' 
Cox said the biggest mistake of his tenure was agreeing in September to an extraordinary three-week ban on short selling of financial company stocks . 
But in publicly acknowledging for the first time that this ban was not productive , Cox said he had been under intense pressure from Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. and Fed Chairman Ben S. Bernanke to take this action and did so reluctantly . 
They `` were of the view that if we did not act and act at that instant , these financial institutions could fail as a result and there would be nothing left to save , '' Cox said . 
Although Cox speaks of staying calm in the face of financial turmoil , lawmakers across the political spectrum counter that this is actually another way of saying that his agency remained passive during the worst global financial crisis in decades . 
And they say that Cox 's stewardship before this year -- focusing on deregulation as the agency 's staff shrank -- laid the groundwork for the meltdown . 
`` The commission in recent years has handcuffed the inspection and enforcement division , '' said Arthur Levitt , SEC chairman during the Clinton administration . 
`` The environment was not conducive to proactive enforcement activity . '' 
Cox , 56 , a former Republican congressman from California , became chairman in mid-2005 and plans to step down early next year before his full five-year term expires . 
President-elect Barack Obama has nominated Mary L. Schapiro , a former SEC commissioner , to replace him . 
In a 90-minute conversation in his 10th-floor corner office last week , Cox said the SEC 's emphasis on enforcement is as strong as ever . 
`` We 've done everything we can during the last several years in the agency to make sure that people understand there 's a strong market cop on the beat , '' he said . 
`` That 's why Madoff is such a big asterisk , '' he added . 
`` The case is very troubling for that reason . 
It 's what the SEC 's good at . 
And it 's inexplicable . '' 
Cox argued that the agency has carefully defined responsibilities and that it was unfair to blame it for every problem on Wall Street . 
