When New York Gov. Franklin Delano Roosevelt delivered a commencement address at Oglethorpe University in May 1932 , the economic crisis that had befallen the United States three years earlier had already morphed into the Great Depression : One in four Americans was out of work , banks were failing at a rate of 10 per week and the gross national product was at half its pre-crash level . 
FDR called on the federal government to `` correct , by drastic means if necessary , the faults in our economic system . '' 
The times called for `` bold , persistent experimentation , '' he declared . 
Strictly by the numbers , today 's economic crisis is , fortunately , not as severe as the Great Depression was . 
But that 's cold comfort to the millions of Americans who have lost their jobs , homes , health care and retirement savings . 
We are living through the toughest times since the 1930s . 
People reasonably expect government to act boldly . 
I 've spoken at length about the current economic crisis with other governors , including Deval Patrick -LRB- Mass. -RRB- , David Paterson -LRB- N.Y. -RRB- , Jim Doyle -LRB- Wis. -RRB- , Jennifer Granholm -LRB- Mich. -RRB- and Ted Strickland -LRB- Ohio -RRB- . 
We agree that our states -- however diverse they may be -- have similar needs and problems that should be addressed by the economic recovery package being developed in Washington . 
That can best be achieved if Congress and the new administration keep in mind the following principles : First , the states , local governments and the federal government must be full partners in the recovery process . 
Working with counties and municipalities , states have mechanisms in place to pump stimulus funds into the economy quickly and responsibly . 
But we do n't have the federal government 's financial capacity or borrowing authority . 
Any recovery effort should reflect our mutual strengths . 
Second , the package should be large . 
Some estimates put the cost of the economic crisis next year at $ 700 billion , or about 4 percent of gross domestic product . 
To offset this , the cumulative value of the stimulus plan should be $ 1 trillion over two years . 
This is a large sum , but if the spending is executed effectively , it should be a significant investment in our country 's physical and human resources that will pay long-term dividends while also creating and saving jobs . 
The stimulus should be roughly divided into five categories : infrastructure , countercyclical programs , housing , education block grants and middle-class tax cuts . 
For every billion dollars we spend on infrastructure , we can put upwards of 20,000 people back to work . 
On one hand , we 've learned painful lessons about the need to modernize our bridges and levees . 
On the other hand , we must think broadly about the idea of infrastructure : How many hours do people waste circling airports because our air-traffic control systems are outdated ? 
We must commit to improving our transportation system , energy grid , Internet technology , ports , public housing and school facilities . 
Unless we also help states shore up their safety-net social programs , the economic impact of the federal stimulus will be negated . 
Most states are constitutionally required to balance their budgets . 
Given the sharp decline in state revenue , we are not able to support , let alone increase , spending to meet growing demands for basic needs such as unemployment insurance , food assistance programs and health care -- including mental-health services to those with developmental disabilities . 
Most states are facing cuts to these essential services , reductions that will exact an enormous toll on our most vulnerable citizens and remove money and jobs from the economy just when we need to promote growth . 
Put another way , even if the federal government dedicates a large sum to infrastructure , cutbacks in state and local safety-net programs would cancel out much of the effect of the stimulus . 
Over two years , the federal government should boost its countercyclical spending by at least $ 250 billion . 
It can do so by increasing the Federal Medical Assistance Percentages ; the federal share of Medicaid costs ; and other health-care-related programs such as reimbursement to hospitals for treating the uninsured , Temporary Assistance for Needy Families and child-care grants . 
Many state unemployment trust funds are already depleted . 
Rising unemployment rates and reduced revenue over the next few months are likely to trigger major payroll tax increases in 2009 . 
This harm could be partly mitigated by doubling proposed federal funding for state unemployment trust funds under the Unemployment Insurance Modernization Act , which would provide incentives to cover vulnerable low-wage and part-time workers who are often denied benefits . 
Unless we strike at the cause of the meltdown -- the collapse of the housing market -- our economy will continue spiraling downward . 
The federal recovery package should include funding for state housing mortgage authorities and for programs that help people restructure their mortgages , stay in their homes and find new shelter if evicted . 
If we are to pursue relief and recovery , it 's essential that we continue developing a workforce that is able to meet the demands of the 21st-century economy . 
At least $ 250 billion in preschool-through-college education block grants would help states meet their school budget obligations ; more important , such grants would enable greater strides toward universal early childhood education and fully funded programs for special-needs students -- improving the situation today and laying the foundation for a better tomorrow . 
A sizable middle-class tax cut is key . 
Over the past decade , median family income has failed to keep pace with inflation , especially given the sharply rising costs of health care and education . 
Most Americans have lost ground . 
Relief for the middle class would help our families weather the storm and also boost economic demand . 
In 1932 , Roosevelt warned against being of `` faint heart , fearful of change , sitting tightly on the rooftops in the flood . '' 
His words are still prescient today . 
We must be bold -- $ 1 trillion bold . 
America has abundant resources and a generous , ambitious spirit . 
If we work together , we 'll emerge stronger and more prosperous than ever . 
The writer , a Democrat , is governor of New Jersey . 
