The Economy 's Latest Hurdle for Retailers : Shoplifting The Mall in Columbia upgraded its video surveillance system a few years ago . 
There are more than 100 cameras in the mall that can zoom in almost enough to make out a price tag . 
-LRB- The Mall In Columbia -RRB- Retailers have blamed the global financial crisis for a litany of ills over the past year : slumping sales , mass layoffs and bankruptcy filings . 
Now , they are looking to the economy to explain recent spikes in shoplifting from their stores . 
Though individual retailers do not publicly report crime data , a survey of 52 national chain stores released this month by the Retail Industry Leaders Association -LRB- RILA -RRB- , a trade group , showed that 84 percent reported an increase in shoplifting since the recession began . 
About 80 percent said organized retail crime had also jumped , and more than half said robberies and burglaries have risen , as well . 
`` Bad guys are smart . 
People do not give them credit , '' said Brad Brekke , vice president of assets protection at Target . 
`` They understand odds are either for or against them , and if they see the odds swing in their favor , they will take advantage of it . '' 
In the Washington area , Alexandria police said there have been more shoplifting reports nearly every month this year compared with last year , though they expect December to slacken . 
In Tysons Corner , Lt. Josh Laitinen said his officers arrested 40 people over the past three weeks on shoplifting charges . 
And in Montgomery County , Detective David Hill , who oversees the county 's retail crime division , said many stores have told him that crime is up . 
`` I 'm sure it 's a major concern for all of them , '' Hill said . 
`` No one wants to just give anything away . '' 
Retail crime typically increases during the holiday season as customers flood stores staffed with temporary -- and often untested -- employees . 
Doorbuster holiday discounts and aggressive merchandising , such as stocking more products near entryways , also provide ne'er - do-wells with more opportunities . 
But retailers and law enforcement officials say the economic downturn is resulting in more frequent and more aggressive crimes . 
Fighting these trends is an expensive proposition for retailers . 
According to the Center for Retail Research , a British organization that did a global survey , U.S. stores spent about $ 12 billion last year to combat retail crime . 
Many employ security officers to monitor surveillance cameras throughout the store . 
Some companies are testing new technology that can detect when a shelf is cleared of merchandise and then alert employees , according to Lee Pernice , director of retail marketing for security firm ADT . 
Target is looking at so-called `` benefit denial '' technology that requires popular products to be activated at checkout in order to work , Brekke said , similar to the process used for gift cards . 
It also has begun using spiderwrap -- cables with a built-in sensor -- on hot items . 
But many retailers are relying on standards such as beefing up security during the holiday season and training employees to spot suspicious behavior . 
Pernice said companies face a tough choice as they watch sales and revenue slump : Does it cost more to be a victim of crime or to fight it ? 
Retailers lost an average of nearly $ 35 billion , or about 1.4 percent of their inventory , to theft last year , according to an annual survey conducted by the University of Florida . 
During the most recent recession in 2001 , so-called shrinkage rates averaged 1.8 percent . 
Results for this year will not be available until 2009 . 
Economic downturns can lead to increased retail crime as law enforcement organizations cut costs and personnel . 
Retailers face declining sales , and some are choosing to reduce security staff , according to retail and loss prevention experts . 
Hundreds of stores across the country are being shut down , and several retailers have filed for bankruptcy protection , scenarios that tend to lure more crooks . 
The financial crisis has drained many consumers ' wallets as layoffs mount and 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s continue their freefall . 
That has contributed to an increase in so-called `` opportunistic '' theft from shoppers stealing for personal use or consumption . 
The items stolen can span a cost range , from drugstore cosmetics to pricey electronics . 
Hill said many of the retail thefts he has seen over the past year were committed by first-time offenders . 
`` Some people are being forced to make bad decisions , '' said Joe LaRocca , vice president of loss prevention for the National Retail Federation , a trade group . 
`` There is no right reason to steal from retailers . '' 
More troubling to the industry is the growth in organized retail crime , sophisticated operations that target popular items such as baby formula or diabetic strips for resale . 
According to the RILA survey , 89 percent of grocery and drug stores said such crimes had risen in recent months , the most of any category of retailer . 
Paul Jones , vice president of asset protection for RILA , said the increased demand for low-priced goods during these turbulent economic times is providing retail crime gangs with a larger market for stolen items . 
They typically sell their products through online auction sites for less than market price , a process known as e-fencing . 
Consumers often do not know -- and sometimes do not care -- about the origin of those goods . 
Jones said several organized retail crimes have been tied to gangs and even the mob . 
Earlier this year , a high-ranking member of a crime family in New Jersey was accused of using fake bar codes to buy merchandise at Lowe 's for pennies and then reselling it . 
`` People think it 's a victimless crime , that you 're stealing from a corporation , '' Pernice said . 
But `` it translates into higher prices for you and me and every other American out there . '' 
