BP oil spill : The sums just do n't add up for Kevin Costner 's clean machine We could be waiting millions of years before the Hollywood star 's ` clean machines ' wash BP 's oil from the Gulf of Mexico Kevin Costner 's ` clean machine ' may take millions of years to clean up the oil spill . 
Photograph : Bryan Bedder\/Getty Images A Hollywood superstar riding in to save the day ? 
Who could resist a storyline like that ? 
So it has come to pass with the news that the Oscar-winning actor Kevin Costner has just signed a deal to help beleaguered BP clean up its oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The oil giant has signed a letter of intent to purchase some of Costner 's oil-cleaning machines , which he introduced with much fanfare to the world 's media last month . 
After investing $ 20m -LRB- # 13.5 m -RRB- of his own money in an effort to develop the technology , Costner says the machines will now be dragged out into the Gulf of Mexico on barges and set to work on the oil slick as soon as possible . 
Here 's what the machines , which are built by Ocean Therapy Solutions , are said to be able to do : The machines are taken out into the spill area via barges , where they can separate the oil and water . 
The machines come in different sizes , the largest of which , the V20 , can clean water at a rate of 200 gallons per minute . 
Depending on the oil to water ratio , the machine has the ability to extract 2,000 barrels of oil a day from the Gulf . 
Once separation has occurred , the oil is stored in tanks . 
The water is then more than 99 % clean of crude . 
Hats off to Costner and his colleagues at Ocean Therapy Solutions for investing so much money and effort in developing these machine , but before we all get too carried away by the good news let 's also invest in a much-needed reality check . 
The machine can clean 200 gallons of water a minute , says the manufacturer . 
That sounds impressive , but just how much water is there in the Gulf of Mexico ? 
According to the US Environmental Protection Agency , the volume of water in the gulf the ninth largest body of water in the world is 643 quadrillion gallons . 
We do n't get to deal with quadrillions too often in our everyday lives , so let 's put it another way . 
We 're talking about 643,000,000,000,000,000 gallons of water . 
So let 's do the maths . 
Just how long would it take Costner 's machine to rid the Gulf of Mexico of its oil ? 
Well , if we accept that there are 60 minutes in an hour , 24 hours in a day , and 365 days in a year , then we arrive at the conclusion that it will take the V20 give or take - 6.1 BILLION years to clean up the Gulf of Mexico . 
Just in guess you are seeking some context : the age of the Earth is estimated to be 4.54 billion years . 
Ok , I accept that 's being a little unfair . 
Not all the Gulf of Mexico has -LRB- yet -RRB- been affected by the oil spill . 
Let 's be generous and say that only one hundredth of the volume of water in the gulf has somehow been tarnished with oil . 
But that 's still a clean-up time of 60 million years . 
-LRB- Remember that the current legal limit for oily discharge from a ship is 15 parts of oil to one million parts of water - or 15 parts per million so let 's assume any concentration of oil to water worse than this is unacceptable and requires some form of cleaning . -RRB- 
Costner says that he will be supplying not one but 32 of his machines to BP . 
Again , every little helps , but we 're talking about a leak that some experts now say has a flow rate as high as 2.5 million gallons of oil a day . 
Costner says his machine can get water 99 % free of crude oil . 
That 's the equivalent of 10,000 parts per million . 
No matter how you look at it , the sums just do n't seem to add up . 
These machines appear to be a tokenistic effort at best , a distraction at worst . 
They might have their uses in , say , lagoons where the water is contained to some extent , but I fail to see how they can have a meaningful impact in the open sea , unless dispatched in their tens of thousands . 
And that then leads to another interesting question : how much oil would you need to power them all ? 
