How the Gulf oil spill deal with BP was done President gets tough with BP bosses within hours of failing to assert control of oil spill crisis in his first Oval Office address President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden meet with BP executives in the Roosevelt Room of the White House , June 16 , 2010 , to discuss the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Pete Souza\/White House Press office Fifty-eight days into an environmental disaster which has so far spewed the equivalent in crude oil of 14 Exxon Valdez tankers , and amid rhetorical blunders about `` kicking ass '' , Barack Obama took charge of the oil spill crisis yesterday . 
The decisive moment arrived behind closed doors and after four hours of negotiations when the US president wrung an agreement from BP executives to put $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.6 bn -RRB- into an independently managed compensation fund . 
It came hours after one of the lowest points in his presidency , when administration officials admitted the flow of leaking oil could now be 60,000 barrels a day , and commentators savaged his first Oval Office address for lacking specifics . 
The broad outline of the deal including the figure of $ 20bn had been worked out in advance , but it took hard bargaining before BP would agree to not put a cap on the fund , and to set aside an additional $ 100m for rig workers made unemployed by the pause in offshore drilling . 
`` There were sticking points , '' Carol Browner , the White House energy adviser said and with the developments yesterday , the suggestion was that it took Obama himself to get them unstuck . 
She refused to elaborate . 
Obama was joined in the negotiations by the vice-president , Joe Biden , and five cabinet secretaries , including the homeland security secretary , Janet Napolitano , the interior secretary , Ken Salazar , and the energy secretary , Steven Chu . 
The White House chief of staff , Rahm Emanuel , was in attendance , as were legal advisers . 
The BP delegation was led by the chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg , with the chief executive , Tony Hayward , relegated to a secondary role . 
The oil company also brought a Clinton-era justice department official , Jamie Gorelick . 
The president was initially scheduled to attend only the first 20 minutes of the meeting in the Roosevelt Room . 
But he held a private 25-minute conversation with Svanberg in the Oval Office . 
Obama , who has been criticised for seeming emotionally detached from the crisis , told reporters he had asked Svanberg to keep in mind that many in Louisiana were still struggling to recover from Hurricane Katrina . 
`` For the small business owners , for the fishermen , for the shrimpers , this is not just a matter of dollars and cents ; a lot of these folks do n't have a cushion , '' Obama said . 
Svanberg apparently told the president he would keep those people in mind when speaking to the board of BP . 
Browner also insisted that the deal did not win BP immunity from fines or other punitive measures . 
`` Nothing was taken off the table with respect to enforcement of the laws , '' she said . 
The deal brought the first real praise for Obama for his handling of the crisis . 
Tuesday saw one of the low points for the president after he was accused of failing to rise to the occasion in devoting his first Oval Office address to the spill . 
`` He looked awkward and robotic , '' said Lynn Sweet , a writer for the Chicago Sun Times who has chronicled Obama 's rise . 
`` Obama said the right things for the situation but deeds and accomplishments matter , not words . 
For starters , the underwater gusher is either contained , or it is not . 
And right now it is not . '' 
Some suggested that the White House may have inadvertently set Obama up for the negative response by relentlessly promoting the speech and his swing through Gulf states as a turning point . 
After all that buildup , he failed to offer any new solutions to the spill . 
Republicans said Obama had missed his last chance to show true leadership in a crisis . 
`` An Oval Office address is a terrible thing to waste and I think he wasted it , '' said Ari Fleischer , a White House press secretary for George W Bush . 
Even some fellow Democrats said Obama had failed to rise to the occasion , and there was disappointment from environmentalists at his failure to push proposals on energy and climate change legislation that have stalled in the Senate . 
But Republicans still accused him of trying to exploit the crisis to advance his energy agenda . 
`` Somehow he thinks he can use the tragedy in the Gulf as a reason to pass cap-and-trade , '' said James Inhofe , the Oklahoma senator who has dismissed global warming as a hoax . 
