HOUSTON | Thu Jul 1 , 2010 7:46 pm EDT HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Tropical storm Alex slowed oil spill clean-up and containment work in the Gulf of Mexico and drove more petroleum into fragile Gulf wetlands and beaches on Thursday , with any permanent fix to BP Plc 's ruptured deep-sea well still several weeks away . 
More than 10 weeks into the crisis , oil continued spewing into the Gulf , clean-up success remained limited and a proposal by the Obama administration to halt all deep-water drilling for the next six months remained in limbo . 
Washington 's attention has also been distracted by the recent firing of U.S. Army General Stanley McChrystal as commander of NATO forces in Afghanistan and the fate of a huge financial reform bill . 
This week nature added to the problems as Alex crossed the Gulf . 
The storm made landfall as a hurricane over northeastern Mexico well to the west of the spill site , but its high winds and rough seas thwarted plans by BP to expand the volume of oil it is siphoning from the well . 
The bad weather also pushed more oil-polluted water onto the shoreline of the U.S. Gulf Coast and forced the halt of skimming , spraying of dispersant chemicals and controlled burns of oil on the ocean surface . 
`` It has brought in oil , unfortunately , from the panhandle of Florida to Louisiana , right now , at a higher rate than it has been over the last few days , '' Robert Dudley , chief of BP 's Gulf Coast restoration efforts , said of the storm 's effect in a live PBS online interview . 
He said the storm had spawned waves of 8 to 12 feet in some parts of the Gulf . 
The worst oil spill in U.S. history , entering its 73rd day on Thursday , has unleashed an environmental and economic disaster of epic proportions along the Gulf Coast , idling much of the region 's fishing and tourism industries , soiling its beaches and marshlands and killing wildlife . 
Millions of barrels of crude oil have gushed nonstop from the floor of the Gulf , about 50 miles off Louisiana , since an April 20 explosion that demolished the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig and killed 11 crewmen . 
BP says the target date for two relief wells to intercept and plug the blown-out well remains early to mid-August . 
The British energy giant drew harsh criticism earlier in the crisis , but some of the political heat has cooled since President Barack Obama pressured the company to set up a $ 20 billion fund for damages and lawmakers hammered BP executives at congressional hearings . 
In Washington on Thursday , the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill to give families of those killed in the oil rig explosion greater latitude to sue for damages . 
And the House Transportation Committee met to negotiate proposed legislation to hold vessels and facilities more accountable for oil spills . 
The White House , meanwhile , said it expected to release details of a revised offshore oil drilling moratorium in the next few days . 
A federal court order last week blocked the government 's initial ban on drilling exploratory and development wells in waters more than 500 feet deep , and a revised plan could still face legal challenges . 
In an interview with Reuters , International Energy Agency head Nobuo Tanaka said a moratorium `` makes sense '' while a presidential commission investigates the spill 's cause . 
But he said the world still relied on oil and gas , and that rigs idled in the Gulf should leave to search for resources elsewhere . 
BP 's market capitalization has shrunk by about $ 100 billion and its shares have lost more than half their value since the spill began . 
But shares have shown signs of stabilizing . 
They closed nearly 2 percent higher in New York on Thursday , after ending the day up almost 3 percent in London . 
Pacific Investment Management Co. -LRB- PIMCO -RRB- , which manages the world 's biggest bond fund , said on Thursday it is buying more debt of some of the companies involved in the oil spill disaster , though it did not cite specific corporations . 
Separately , Mark Kiesel , head of the PIMCO corporate bond portfolio management group , wrote in an article that BP had hefty amounts of cash on hand , strong operating cash flow and could sell assets to raise money if needed . 
In the Gulf of Mexico , seas were still too rough on Thursday to allow skimming to resume , and Coast Guard officials said they doubted it would be calm enough on Friday , either . 
`` The weather today , unfortunately , looks much the same as yesterday . 
Operations will likely be curtailed , '' Coast Guard Commander Charles Diorio said on a conference call . 
`` We expect the seas to start to calm down as we get into Friday and further into the weekend , '' Diorio said . 
In bays and estuaries , work crews were replacing boom dislodged or damaged by the storm , but the Coast Guard had no estimate on the extent of damage . 
The storm surge from Alex also pushed oil more toward the northwest , in the direction of Mississippi and Louisiana , after a week in which the slick had crept mainly toward the northeast , washing up on Florida Panhandle beaches . 
The weather delayed BP plans to boost containment capacity at the undersea well , but relief well drilling continued . 
A government spokeswoman said on Thursday a massive ship converted into a `` super skimmer '' had arrived in the Gulf to assist with the cleanup . 
The 1,100-foot -LRB- 335 meter -RRB- vessel , dubbed the `` A Whale , '' was provided by its owner , TMT Shipping of Taiwan , officials said . 
Government officials estimate 35,000 barrels -LRB- 1.47 million gallons\/5 .56 million liters -RRB- to 60,000 barrels -LRB- 2.5 million gallons\/9 .5 million liters -RRB- of oil pour from the ruptured wellhead each day . 
BP 's containment systems can handle up to 28,000 barrels daily and its planned addition could raise that to 53,000 . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Does someone you know have a story to tell that BP is trying to cover up ? 
Help us tell the truth of what is really happening in the Gulf . 
Secret nightly boat missions without explanation , use of toxic dispersants -- America needs to know the truth ! 
Tell your friends to visit our new site www.bprumormill.com so they can share their story under the protection of anonymity . 
Let 's take a stand for the truth ! 
As we enter one of the most aggressive hurricane seasons on record , I can not even imagine what a hurricane would do with oil in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Dealing with oil on the beach is one thing , but what if we had to deal with it in our streets , in our businesses , in our homes ? 
What if we had to rescue humans covered in oil ? 
What if this is no longer isolated to just the Gulf Coast but found its way up the great rivers to our inner cities ? 
Now imagine if you will , the dispersants mixed with oil which could possibly cause untold diseases and catastrophic health hazards of a biblical proportion . 
It staggers the imagination , or is it prophetic ? 
What if we are dealing with the wrath of God ? 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
