MIAMI -- BP PLC and the other companies involved in the Gulf of Mexico oil spill are faced with fast-multiplying lawsuits that will provoke one of the most drawn-out and costliest legal battles in U.S. history , one that could easily consume the $ 20 billion set aside by BP to pay for the disaster , according to legal experts and attorneys nationwide . 
One veteran complex litigation attorney estimated that unless there is a quick settlement that satisfies all sides , it will be 2015 before any trials begin and at least 2028 before appeals and other legal issues are fully resolved . 
The attorney , Lela Hollabaugh of Nashville , Tenn. , pointed out that it took 20 years to complete all claims from the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil disaster in Alaska . 
`` When you 're looking at an incident like this , which has so many different parties in different states , you just simply ca n't get through the litigation quickly , '' Hollabaugh said . 
`` It just takes a long time to move through the process . '' 
So far , at least 300 federal lawsuits have been filed in 12 states against BP and the other three main companies involved in the April 20 explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon drill rig , which triggered the nation 's worst-ever offshore oil spill . 
Virtually every lawsuit names as defendants BP , rig owner Transocean Ltd. , well contractor Halliburton Co. and Cameron International , maker of the well 's failed blowout preventer . 
The plaintiffs make up the entire mosaic of the Gulf Coast : shrimpers and oystermen , charter boat captains , beach resort and condo owners , restaurants and bars , seafood suppliers , bait and tackle shops , even tourist attractions like Key West 's Ripley 's Believe It or Not museum . 
Most of the parties claim severe economic losses from the oil spill , ranging from the fish they can no longer catch to tourists who never arrived to rent rooms . 
There are also a few wrongful death and injury lawsuits filed , mainly in state courts , by workers who survived the Deepwater Horizon explosion and relatives of some of the 11 men who died . 
And some BP investors also have sued , claiming the company 's mistakes led to a sharp drop in its stock price . 
A federal judicial panel is meeting Thursday in Boise , Idaho , to consider whether to consolidate some or all of the lawsuits for pretrial decisions before a single judge , a development that most observers say is a foregone conclusion . 
BP and the other companies favor federal court in Houston -- near their major U.S. operations -- while a majority of plaintiffs ' attorneys have suggested New Orleans , closer to the broken well and to many of the hardest-hit victims . 
Courts in Florida , Mississippi and Alabama also are being suggested as venues . 
It 's difficult to estimate potential damages that BP could be forced to pay , or what shape a settlement might take . 
But legal experts say BP alone is looking at some $ 2 billion in costs just to defend itself , with the $ 20 billion fund set aside to pay oil spill claims and cleanup costs potentially not enough to foot the entire bill . 
`` There 's no way it 's going to be enough , '' said Victor Diaz , a Miami attorney experienced in similar large-scale cases such as those involving faulty Chinese drywall . 
`` We still do n't know what will happen later , what the second and third wave of damages might be . 
What happens if six months later , some fish species is wiped out ? '' 
One example of post-spill lawsuits : the owners of a Louisiana shrimp boat claim in a new lawsuit they are suffering health problems including headaches , nausea and shortness of breath after working for BP in the collecting and burning of oil in the Gulf . 
BP 's liability is already larger than the Exxon Valdez case , which ultimately led to a $ 500 million payout to affected fishermen and residents . 
Other large `` mass tort '' cases include drug maker Merck & Co. 's agreement in 2008 to a $ 4.85 billion settlement of some 50,000 cases stemming from its withdrawn painkiller Vioxx . 
Also , Pharmaceutical company Wyeth initially settled claims over its diet drug fen-phen for $ 3.75 billion in 1999 , but that soared to more than $ 21 billion by 2004 as more claims were filed . 
Asbestos , which has caused widespread lung disease and other ailments , is the longest-running mass lawsuit case in U.S. history , costing a variety of companies more than $ 70 billion and involving more than 730,000 claims since the 1970s , according to an analysis by the nonprofit Rand Corp. . 
And tobacco companies have been slapped with thousands of lawsuits over the dangers of cigarette smoking . 
They won most of them until the major companies agreed in 1998 to a 25-year , $ 206 billion settlement with 46 states who sued over the costs to their health programs . 
The BP case will differ in many ways from those involving drug companies , automakers and asbestos manufacturers , where people died or suffered illnesses directly caused by the product . 
In an oil spill , oystermen whose beds were choked off by oil might have relatively easy claims to prove , but what about a beachfront hotelier whose business fell off , or a property owner whose house may suddenly be worth much less ? 
`` People who have those indirect claims are going to have a difficult time under any situation , '' Hollabaugh said . 
`` Where does it end ? 
You could say the oil spill has harmed our whole country . '' 
Many of the lawsuits are proposed class actions , in which a plaintiff such as a commercial fisherman or a property owner seeks to represent everyone else in the same situation . 
One task for the judge appointed to preside over the consolidated cases is sorting out which of those overlap , and which should be deemed class actions . 
One wild card is the claims process created by BP and President Barack Obama 's administration . 
That process , administered by attorney Kenneth Feinberg , promises oil spill victims quicker access to money for what BP calls `` legitimate '' claims than the traditional legal process . 
Feinberg is touting the plan as a generous alternative to a lawsuit , telling one audience in Washington that although legal action remains an option , `` You 're crazy to do so . '' 
Feinberg made similar arguments in convincing most survivors and victims ' families to join the federal 9\/11 compensation fund rather than sue airlines or other companies individually over the terror attacks . 
Some plaintiffs ' attorneys have raised questions about how the claims process can guarantee a fair result . 
But Howard Erichson , a law professor at Fordham University , said people also are taking their chances with the court system . 
`` Litigation is expensive , it 's time-consuming , it is unpredictable , '' Erichson said . 
`` The results often vary in unpredictable ways . 
Plaintiffs in mass tort litigation end up losing a lot of the money to legal fees and expenses . 
If the compensation fund is fair , I 'm all for it . '' 
Another unknown is whether BP and the other Deepwater Horizon companies will work together to defend themselves or sue each other . 
Much depends on the outcome of a Justice Department criminal investigation that could point the finger more heavily at one or the other ; Transocean is already asking a federal judge in Houston to limit its liability to $ 27 million under a century-old law meant to cut losses for shipping companies when vessels like the floating Deepwater Horizon rig are sunk . 
Somewhat forgotten in all the economic litigation are the rig victims and their families . 
Michelle Jones , the wife of lost rig worker Gordon Jones , wants to keep her lawsuit separate so it does not get lost in the shuffle . 
`` While the damages incurred by the fishermen and property owners is significant , the stakes in Jones ' case involves everyday living expenses and the education costs for her two children , '' Michelle Jones ' attorney wrote in a federal court filing . 
`` After losing her husband , and her sons losing their father , she may have to wait years . '' 
