Administration Seeks an Out on Bailout Rules for Firms Rep. Edolphus Towns favors enforcing the restrictions on participating firms . 
-LRB- By Chip Somodevilla -- Getty Images -RRB- The Obama administration is engineering its new bailout initiatives in a way that it believes will allow firms benefiting from the programs to avoid restrictions imposed by Congress , including limits on lavish executive pay , according to government officials . 
Administration officials have concluded that this approach is vital for persuading firms to participate in programs funded by the $ 700 billion financial rescue package . 
The administration believes it can sidestep the rules because , in many cases , it has decided not to provide federal aid directly to financial companies , the sources said . 
Instead , the government has set up special entities that act as middlemen , channeling the bailout funds to the firms and , via this two-step process , stripping away the requirement that the restrictions be imposed , according to officials . 
Although some experts are questioning the legality of this strategy , the officials said it gives them latitude to determine whether firms should be subject to the congressional restrictions , which would require recipients to turn over ownership stakes to the government , as well as curb executive pay . 
The administration has decided that the conditions should not apply in at least three of the five initiatives funded by the rescue package . 
This strategy has so far attracted little scrutiny on Capitol Hill , and even some senior congressional aides dealing with the financial crisis said they were unaware of the administration 's efforts . 
Just two weeks ago , Congress erupted in outrage over bonuses being paid at American International Group , with some lawmakers faulting the administration for failing to do more to safeguard taxpayers ' interests . 
Rep. Edolphus Towns -LRB- D-N.Y. -RRB- , chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee , said the congressional conditions should apply to any firm benefiting from bailout funds . 
He said he planned to review the administration 's decisions and might seek to undo them . 
`` We have to make certain that if they are using government money in any sort of way , there should be restrictions , '' he said . 
A Treasury spokesman defended the approach . 
`` These programs are designed to both comply with the law and ensure taxpayers ' funds are used most effectively to bring about economic recovery , '' spokesman Andrew Williams said . 
In one program , designed to restart small-business lending , President Obama 's officials are planning to set up a middleman called a special-purpose vehicle -- a term made notorious during the Enron scandal -- or another type of entity to evade the congressional mandates , sources familiar with the matter said . 
In another program , which seeks to restart consumer lending , a special entity was created largely for the separate purpose of getting around legal limits on the Federal Reserve , which is helping fund this initiative . 
The Fed does not ordinarily provide support for the markets that finance credit cards , auto loans and student loans but could channel the funds through a middleman . 
At first , when the initiative was being developed last year , the Bush administration decided to apply executive-pay limits to firms participating in this program . 
But Obama officials reversed that decision days before it was unveiled on March 3 and lifted the curbs , according to sources who spoke on condition of anonymity because the discussions were private . 
Obama 's team is also planning to exempt financial firms that participate in a program designed to find private investors to buy the distressed assets on the books of banks . 
But Treasury officials are still examining the legal basis for doing so . 
Congress has exempted the Treasury from applying the restrictions in a fourth program , which aids lenders who modify mortgages for struggling homeowners . 
