A year ago , the International Monetary Fund was in a funk . 
Its handling of past financial crises had made it deeply unpopular . 
Its finances were shaky . 
A fifth of the staff was looking to leave . 
Without new crises to address , doubts about its relevance grew even among insiders . 
As one veteran staffer put it , `` It was a period of introspection . '' 
The second-guessing ended in September as the global economic crisis took hold and countries again turned to the fund for advice and financial support . 
Its comeback became official this week when world leaders meeting in London pledged to quadruple its resources and strengthen its mandate . 
`` The IMF has suffered a slow deterioration in morale , '' said Simon Johnson , a former IMF chief economist . 
`` The Asian crisis was traumatic ... they lost a lot of confidence . '' 
Staff reductions last year added to the humiliation and embarrassment , he said . 
`` Now it 's night and day . '' 
The mood in the hallways `` is one of invigoration , '' said a senior-level IMF official , who declined to be identified because he was not authorized to speak . 
`` People are pretty busy and they are happy to be helping ... so they feel validated . '' 
The Fund , which has 2,370 employees , most based in Washington , has repositioned itself periodically since its creation after World War II . 
Its initial focus was to oversee the exchange rate system established under the Bretton Woods agreements . 
That role ended in the 1970s . 
In the 1980s , it emerged as the manager of the Latin American debt crisis . 
In the 1990s , it stepped in to deal with the Mexican and East Asian financial crises . 
During this crisis , the IMF regained its stature partly by default . 
In the months leading up to this week 's meeting of the Group of 20 industrialized and developing nations in London , British Prime Minister Gordon Brown talked of creating new international institutions . 
But in the end , the G-20 chose not to go through the trouble and chose to work with existing organizations . 
Former and current IMF officials say the fund 's leadership also deserves credit for actively seeking a more central role and for making changes that helped overcome some of the potential objections . 
Last month , the IMF revamped its lending practices to make it easier for countries with strong economic policies to borrow more , faster and with fewer strings attached . 
The centerpiece is a new flexible line of credit designed to be used as a preventive measure . 
IMF officials said the fund was trying to respond to long-standing criticism that the organization imposes conditions on developing nations that are too harsh and even harmful to their economies . 
The flexible credit line replaces a credit line created last fall that had no takers because countries said it offered too little money and too rigid terms . 
In a small sign of success , Mexico recently said it would use the new credit line . 
But South Korea and Singapore still refuse to do so . 
