The Deepwater Horizon rig explosion led to the worst environmental catastrophe in US history BP shares have surged almost 6 % after reports that rival Royal Dutch Shell considered a takeover bid following the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
Speculation that BP may not need to tap all of its $ 20bn -LRB- # 13bn -RRB- compensation fund also helped to push the company 's shares up by 27 pence to 493p . 
The Daily Mail newspaper reported that Shell mulled a bid for BP when its shares slumped because of the spill . 
The share price rise comes despite a sharp fall in the price of oil . 
US light crude fell by $ 2.17 , or 2.4 % , to $ 89.38 a barrel in Tuesday trading , while London Brent dropped by $ 1.31 to $ 93.53 a barrel . 
Oil prices have hit two-year highs in recent days , partly because of increased demand due to the cold weather in the US and Europe and continuing optimism about the global recovery . 
The Mail reported that Shell decided against a bid for BP as it was unwilling to risk taking responsibility for the potentially unlimited liabilities from the spill . 
However , Shell management did agree to bid for BP if another oil giant , such as the US 's Exxon Mobil , launched a takeover attempt , the report said . 
Reports also suggest that Kenneth Feinberg , the US lawyer responsible for BP 's compensation fund , suggested that $ 10bn might be enough to pay the victims of the spill . 
`` These reports may give investors reason to believe that a dividend could be brought back sooner rather than later , and that could have quite a positive impact on the share price , '' said David Hart at Westhouse Securities . 
BP was forced to suspend dividend payments last year following pressure from the US government . 
The Deepwater Horizon drilling rig explosion in the Gulf in April killed 11 workers and spilled millions of barrels of oil over several months . 
The oil leak became the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
