WASHINGTON -- It 's all so familiar . 
A technological disaster , then a presidential commission examining what went wrong . 
And ultimately a discovery that while technology marches on , concern for safety lags . 
Technology is n't as foolproof as it seemed . 
An offshore oil rig explodes , creating the biggest offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
The common thread -- which the new presidential oil spill commission will be looking for -- often is technological arrogance and hubris . 
It 's the belief by those in charge that they 're the experts , that they know what they 're doing is safe . 
Add to that the human weaknesses of avoidance , greed and sloppiness , say academics who study disasters . 
Even before the oil spill commission holds its first meeting Monday in New Orleans , panel co-chairman William Reilly could n't help but point out something he 's already noticed . 
The technology to clean up after an oil spill `` is primitive , '' Reilly said . 
`` It 's wholly disproportionate to the tremendous technological advances that have allowed deepwater drilling to go forward . 
It just has n't kept pace . '' 
Then he added that government regulation also has n't kept pace . 
And something else has n't kept up either , Reilly said : how the oil industry assesses and works with the risk of catastrophic damage from spills . 
Cutting-edge technology often works flawlessly . 
At first , everyone worries about risk . 
Then people get lulled into complacency by success and they forget that they are operating on the edge , say experts who study disasters . 
Corners get cut , problems ignored . 
Technological disasters , like the BP oil spill , follow a well-worn `` trail of tears , '' said Bob Bea , a University of California Berkeley engineering professor who has studied 630 disasters of all types . 
Bea is also an expert on offshore drilling and is consulting with the presidential commission . 
Bea categorizes disasters into four groups . 
One such group is when an organization simply ignores warning signs through overconfidence and incompetence . 
He thinks the BP spill falls into that category . 
Bea pointed to congressional testimony that BP ignored problems with a dead battery , leaky cement job and loose hydraulic fittings . 
It 's that type of root cause -- not the equipment failure alone -- that the oil spill commission will focus on , including looking at the corporate and regulatory `` culture '' that led to bad decisions , Reilly said . 
Disasters do n't happen because of `` an evil empire , '' Bea said . 
`` It 's hubris , arrogance and indolence . '' 
And disasters will keep on happening . 
In the future , watch out for problems with the U.S. power grid , Sacramento levee failures , flood protection problems along coastal cities and even some of the newest high-tech airplanes , said Rutgers University professor Lee Clarke , author of the book `` Worst Cases . '' 
`` There 's nothing safe out there , '' said Yale University professor Charles Perrow , author of the book `` Normal Accidents . '' '' 
We like to pretend there is and argue afterward , ` That 's why we took the risks because it had n't failed before . ' '' 
Technological improvements have gradually led to more daring offshore drilling attempts . 
`` It kind of creeps up on you , '' Energy Secretary Steven Chu said in an interview with The Associated Press . 
Then suddenly you realize that now only robots can do what people used to do because the drilling is so deep , he said . 
Clarke put it this way : `` We 've been doing this every day , every year , week in , week out , so next week when we go to 5,000 feet , it will be like last week when we went to 300 feet , '' Clarke said . 
`` It 's just the arrogant presumption that you have got the thing under control , whatever the thing is . 
In this case , it 's drilling beyond your depth . '' 
Paul Fischbeck , a professor of decision sciences at Carnegie Mellon University , said the existence of a blowout preventer -- a final backup system which in this case did n't work -- often encourages people to take extra risks . 
But the oil industry was so confident in its safety that it used to brag when compared to another high-tech gold standard : NASA . 
`` They looked more successful than NASA , '' said Rice University oil industry scholar Amy Myers Jaffe . 
`` They had less mechanical failures . '' 
The oil rig explosion `` reminds me an awful lot of the NASA accidents , '' said Stanford physics professor Douglas Osheroff , who was on the commission that examined the causes of the space shuttle Columbia disaster in 2003 . 
`` Obviously none of these systems are fail-safe , '' Osheroff said . 
`` People do n't spend enough time thinking about what could go wrong . '' 
And because people are so sure of themselves , when they see something go wrong that they ca n't fix , they accept it , Osheroff said . 
The Columbia accident investigation board called it `` normalization of deviance . '' 
Pieces of foam insulation had broken off the shuttle external fuel tank six previous times before that problem proved fatal with Columbia when a piece of foam knocked a deadly hole in a shuttle wing . 
Hot gas had singed `` O '' rings in space shuttle boosters well before the problem led Challenger to explode at launch in 1986 . 
Yale 's Perrow pointed to NASA 's shuttles and another BP disaster -- the 2005 Texas City refinery explosion that killed 15 people -- as cases of simply ignoring `` heavy warnings '' from experts . 
When the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazards Investigation Board looked into the 2005 refinery fire it noted that BP had the same problems with `` safety culture '' that NASA had before Columbia . 
`` The Texas City disaster was caused by organizational and safety deficiencies at all levels of the BP Corporation , '' the board 's final report said . 
`` Warning signs of a possible disaster were present for several years , but company officials did not intervene effectively to prevent it . '' 
There have been times when warnings of disaster are heeded . 
The Y2K computer bug is noteworthy for prevention , Clarke said . 
Many people scoffed and criticized the government for making such a big deal of something that turned out to be a fizzle . 
But that 's because of all the effort to prevent the disaster , Clarke said . 
Unfortunately , safety costs money , so it 's usually not a priority , Clarke said . 
Most of the time `` you ca n't get anybody to listen , '' he said . 
`` We 're very reactive about disasters in the United States . '' 
People do n't think about them until afterward , he said , and then they say : `` You should have seen that coming . '' 
