The moment Wismond was pulled from the rubble Haitian Wismond Exantus Jean-Pierre , 24 , was found on Saturday after 12 days buried beneath the wreckage of a hotel and food store in the country 's capital , Port-au-Prince . 
His brother had heard him tapping beneath the rubble , and tapped back . 
Doctors expect him to make a full recovery . 
He told his story to the BBC 's Orla Guerin . 
I was in the fruit shop , on the ground floor . 
I felt that I had a very slim chance of being found . 
All those days I was down there knocking and yelling , and no-one heard me . 
As a stroke of luck from God , only yesterday my brother heard me knocking on the plywood and found me . 
I said , ` It 's me . 
I 'm under the store , ' and my brother and my friend went to get help . 
The rescuers came and brought tools and a saw , and that made me very happy . 
They were as tired as I was . 
They were shaking things to get me out . 
My mother loves me a lot , and if I had died she would have died right after me . 
I 'm very grateful to be alive . 
I pray to God to bless the rescuers . 
For all those days I was searching for my cellphone . 
I could n't move much . 
Then I found a case of cola , and potato chips . 
I stumbled across them and I said , ` OK , now I can live for one more day . ' 
If I 'm alive it 's because of those things . 
In my head I said to God , ` If you save me , I will be your servant . 
I will glorify your name ' . 
If I am alive , there are others alive . 
If they had given up on me , I would n't be here today . 
I did n't know how long I had been there . 
I did n't know if it was night or day . 
I thought I had been there for five or six days . 
Finally , I understood it had been 12 days . 
There were others trapped with me . 
There was the owner of the hotel , one of his sons and a cousin . 
There were two women on the first floor , one doing the cooking and the other doing the laundry . 
After the collapse I heard noise , but after a while it stopped . 
I was calling the people who were there , but none replied . 
I do n't know if they were alive . 
I hope that search operations will continue because a lot of people lost hope that I could survive after 12 days , and they found me . 
If I am alive , there are others alive . 
If they had given up on me , I would n't be here today . 
I would have been dead in two or three days . 
All the time I spent under the rubble , I had a splitting headache and I felt a bit stiff . 
The doctors gave me some pills for that , and now I feel great . 
