Thousands of US troops have now arrived in Haiti A senior Italian official has strongly criticised the Haiti earthquake relief operation , saying it could have been managed much better . 
Guido Bertolaso , the head of Italy 's civil protection service , said there was a lack of leadership in the international aid operation . 
He also criticised US forces in Haiti , saying troops had no training in running a civilian relief operation . 
It is believed the quake on 12 January killed as many as 200,000 people . 
An estimated 1.5 million people have been left homeless . 
Mr Bertolaso , who arrived in Haiti on Friday , described it as `` a terrible situation that could have been managed much better '' . 
`` When there is an emergency , it triggers a vanity parade . 
Lots of people go there anxious to show that their country is big and important , showing solidarity , '' he said . 
He told Italian TV channel RAI he hoped it was `` the last time the world acts in this way '' . 
Broadcasting on FM radio daily in Haitian Creole at 0910 local time -LRB- 1410 GMT -RRB- , for 20 minutes Giving up-to-date information about where to get basic services and aid Also available on satellite and online , and via social media `` We 're missing a leader , a co-ordination capacity that goes beyond military discipline , '' he said . 
`` It 's a truly powerful show of force , but it 's completely out of touch with reality . 
`` They do n't have close rapport with the territory , they certainly do n't have a rapport with the international organizations and aid groups . '' 
The US effort in Haiti has also drawn criticism from some Latin American leaders . 
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez criticised the US for sending too many soldiers but not enough medical supplies . 
John Caulfield , a US diplomat in Caracas , Venezuela , dismissed the allegations , saying Washington wanted to provide aid to the Haitian people `` and not be distracted by those political criticisms '' . 
Meanwhile , Haiti 's main creditors are due to meet on Monday in the Canadian city of Montreal to map out a plan for its reconstruction . 
UK-based charity Oxfam has urged donor countries and institutions to cancel Haiti 's foreign debts , put at about $ 900m -LRB- # 557m -RRB- . 
As the relief operation continues , aid workers have criticised Haitian government plans to relocate hundreds of thousands of people from the capital , Port-au-Prince , to large camps outside the city . 
Emmannuel Buso , 21 - rescued after 10 days Marie Carida , 84 - saved after 10 days Mendji Bahina Sanon , 11 - trapped for eight days Lozama Hotteline , 25 - pulled out after seven days Elisabeth Joassaint , 15 days - buried for seven days , half her life Ena Zizi , 69 - rescued after seven days They will be moved while rebuilding work is carried out . 
Caroline Gluck , from Oxfam , told the BBC the move could be dangerous for the survivors . 
`` In the past , experience has told us establishing some huge camps can cause all kinds of security problems , for example , robberies , rapes and kind of gang activities if the camps are kept too big , '' she said . 
Oxfam was pressing for the camps to be smaller , she added . 
Earlier , Haitian communications minister Marie-Laurence Jocelyn Lassegue said authorities were still far from knowing the total number of those killed . 
She said the confirmed death toll had risen above 150,000 in the Port-au-Prince area alone . 
Haitian-born rapper Wyclef Jean , who set up the charity foundation Yele Haiti , arrived in the capital on Sunday . 
He was among a number of high-profile artists to take part in a `` Hope for Haiti Now '' telethon in the US on Friday which raised more than $ 57m -LRB- # 35m -RRB- for the aid effort . 
The search for survivors officially ended on Saturday and the focus has shifted to aid . 
But hours after officials declared a formal end to the search , a 24-year-old man was pulled alive from the remains of a hotel after 11 days under the rubble . 
Rescuers described his survival as `` a miracle '' . 
