Hundreds of Haitians joined open-air church services in the capital The confirmed death toll from Haiti 's devastating earthquake has risen above 150,000 in the Port-au-Prince area alone , a government minister has said . 
Communications Minister Marie-Laurence Jocelyn Lassegue said the count was based on bodies collected in and around the capital by state company CNE . 
Many more bodies remain uncounted under rubble in the capital , including the towns of Jacmel and Leogane . 
The search for survivors has officially ended and the focus has shifted to aid . 
But there is disagreement about how well the aid operation is doing , with the head of Italy 's civil protection service making highly critical comments . 
Nobody knows how many bodies are buried in the rubble - 200,000 , 300,000 ? 
Guido Bertolaso , who is in Haiti to co-ordinate relief efforts , also criticised what he saw as the presence of too many American soldiers . 
He said they had no training in running a civilian relief operation . 
`` When there is an emergency , it triggers a vanity parade . 
Lots of people go there anxious to show that their country is big and important , showing solidarity '' , he said . 
He called on the United Nations to establish a procedure to follow when major natural disasters occur . 
As the death toll in Haiti has risen , it has become clear the 12 January quake is one of the worst natural disasters to have struck in recent years . 
Some say the 7.0-magnitude quake killed as many as 200,000 people , while an estimated 1.5 million people have been left homeless . 
Ms Lassegue said that the authorities were still far from knowing the total number of those killed . 
`` Nobody knows how many bodies are buried in the rubble - 200,000 , 300,000 ? 
Who knows the overall death toll ? '' 
the Associated Press quotes her as saying on Sunday . 
Speaking to reporters a day earlier , she said the general hospital had received about 10,000 corpses , which it had handed over to CNE for burial . 
At least 75,000 people have been buried in mass graves since the disaster . 
Relatives have also burnt the bodies of some of the victims . 
Thousands of people joined open-air church services in Port-au-Prince , Leogane - the epicentre of the earthquake - and elsewhere on Sunday . 
A day after the funeral of the capital 's Roman Catholic archbishop , Father Glanda Toussaint celebrated Mass at an altar improvised on a wooden table by the wrecked cathedral . 
Emmannuel Buso , 21 - rescued after 10 days Marie Carida , 84 - saved after 10 days Mendji Bahina Sanon , 11 - trapped for eight days Lozama Hotteline , 25 - pulled out after seven days Elisabeth Joassaint , 15 days - buried for seven days , half her life Ena Zizi , 69 - rescued after seven days He told his congregation : `` What we are going through is not finished , we must reconstruct the country and reconstruct our faith . 
As a Haitian , it hurts . '' 
Haitian-born rapper Wyclef Jean , who set up the charity foundation Yele Haiti , arrived in the capital on Sunday . 
He was expected to meet officials and help distribute aid to people left homeless . 
He was among a number of high-profile artists to take part in a `` Hope for Haiti Now '' telethon in the US on Friday which raised more than $ 57m -LRB- # 35m -RRB- for the aid effort . 
Meanwhile , BBC correspondents in Port-au-Prince report a few signs of normal life returning to the city , with street stalls starting to sell fruit and vegetables and some shops and banks re-opening . 
Queues to withdraw cash have been long , as prices for what is now on sale have increased dramatically and many Haitians have been without access to money for days . 
The UN says more than 130,000 people have now been relocated out of Port-au-Prince by the authorities , easing the pressure on overcrowded camps in the city . 
Others have left independently . 
Foreign ministers will discuss plans for reconstruction at an international donor conference to take place in the Canadian city of Montreal on Monday . 
Broadcasting on FM radio daily in Haitian Creole at 0910 local time -LRB- 1410 GMT -RRB- , for 20 minutes Giving up-to-date information about where to get basic services and aid Also available on satellite and online , and via social media Rescuers described his survival as `` a miracle '' . 
Onlookers cheered as Wismond Exantus - smiling and apparently in a good condition - emerged on a stretcher from what remains of the Napoli Inn Hotel . 
He later told reporters that soft drinks and snacks had kept him going . 
A French medic said he could expect to leave hospital within a day or two . 
The BBC 's Orla Guerin in Port-au-Prince says doctors believe he will make a full recovery . 
Speaking to the BBC , Mr Exantus appealed for search and rescue efforts to continue so that others could share his chance of rescue . 
