Nearly a fortnight after the earthquake , people living in Leogane in Haiti are still in a state of shock . 
The coastal town about 50km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of the capital Port-au-Prince was at the epicentre of the quake . 
In 45 seconds of shaking and rumbling , it was torn apart . 
The town 's large Catholic church was reduced to rubble Fewer than 20 % of buildings remain standing in the town ; power and telephone lines are strewn across the street , burst water mains have flooded parts of the town , and , at the center , the large Catholic church has crashed down in ruins . 
The bell which hung in the tower is lying half buried in bricks , and broken church pews and hymn books are scattered everywhere . 
The mayor , Alexis Santos , says he feels powerless to help his people . 
`` My hands are tied , the people are hungry , '' he says . 
`` There is food , but many are not getting any . '' 
He can not understand why food arrives on US Navy helicopters from the international donor operation , but little of it appears to have been given to people in the town . 
Leogane has a population of 200,000 ; few if any are sleeping under solid roofs . 
Thousands of people grabbed what possessions they could and moved to the largest open space in the town , the school football field . 
Here they have erected shelters . 
Ted Valcout had grabbed some house bricks and a dozen pieces of timber and was trying to reinforce the structure that he has built for the nine members of his family . 
`` We have some food , but we have to share it with these people , '' he said , gesturing to his neighbors in the makeshift camp . 
There had been one food distribution at the football ground since it became a camp for the displaced , he said . 
He is not sure where the food came from , and not everyone was able to get their hands on some , he said . 
`` People near the gate were OK , but those right at the back of the pitch did not get lined up in time and they missed out , '' he said . 
There is no apparent organization in the camp ; at one point a few days ago , registration forms were circulated and signed , but there has been no follow-up . 
Every open area in the town now has homeless people living on it , and families have put up shelters in the middle of many streets . 
Mr Santos says , even though it is very congested , people are better off in the stadium because they are more likely to get food and water . 
It is the only way we can exist , we have to borrow and rely on other people . 
We have nothing at all - nothing This is borne out by the experience of Francoise Casseus . 
She and her extended family have decided to shelter under a tree and a few sheets of cloth and plastic right next to their destroyed home . 
She does not want to move because the body of one of her daughters is still inside the building , and she fears that if they abandon the house , looters will come and take what they can from the rubble . 
Francoise and her relatives have got no food . 
They are surviving through the generosity of others and by spending what little money they had saved . 
`` It is the only way we can exist , we have to borrow and rely on other people . 
We have nothing at all - nothing . '' 
