British donations to Haiti earthquake appeal reach # 46m British funds have been used to provide relief aid for Haitian people Britons have donated a total of # 46m to the Haiti earthquake appeal fund after another # 4m was added over the weekend . 
As many as 200,000 people were killed and two million made homeless by the quake on 12 January . 
The UK 's Disasters Emergency Committee said relief agencies were working `` round the clock '' in Haiti . 
Meanwhile , Development Secretary Douglas Alexander will meet religious groups to discuss how to provide long-term help for victims of the disaster . 
Brendan Gormley , chief executive of the Disasters Emergency Committee , said : `` Thanks to the generosity of the British public , our member agency staff and partners are working round the clock to bring food , water , shelter and medical care to tens of thousands of Haitians . 
`` But the needs continue to remain huge . 
The aid effort will continue for many years to come , as we help people to rebuild their lives and livelihoods . 
In 20 years it 's probably been the most fulfilling rescue we 've had , the sense that when I left home on the Tuesday night she was underneath that building `` So if you have n't already given , I urge you dig deep . 
It 's not too late to help . '' 
A charity single is also being released to raise money for the appeal . 
The cover of REM 's Everybody Hurts features artists such as Leona Lewis , Rod Stewart and the band JLS . 
Meanwhile , Haiti 's Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive has said his government can lead efforts to rebuild the country . 
Mr Bellerive told a meeting of world officials in the Canadian city of Montreal that his country faced a `` colossal '' reconstruction effort . 
British firefighters , returning to the UK after the Haitian government declared the search-and-rescue operation for survivors of the earthquake over , have been speaking about their experiences . 
Rudy Parkes helped to rescue a two-year-old girl called Mia who had been trapped in the rubble of her nursery school for three days . 
He told BBC News : `` In 20 years it 's probably been the most fulfilling rescue we 've had , the sense that when I left home on the Tuesday night she was underneath that building . 
`` I think her crying and the lad that alerted us to her , who we could n't find later , probably saved her life along with the three teams that were there . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by telephoning 0370 60 60 900 `` When we initially got there we called for silence . 
I bent down and I could hear the little girl crying for her mother , her mother was on the scene during the whole four-hour operation and was quite calm and very useful to us . 
`` When she actually came out it was like she was being born again , if you like . 
`` Luckily for the two-year-old old she 'll never remember any of it hopefully , but we 'll never forget it . '' 
Mr Alexander will hold talks with religious organizations with links to aid agencies working in Haiti . 
He said : `` Faith groups are playing a crucial role in saving lives and helping Haiti rebuild itself . 
`` I will be working alongside , and listening to , faith leaders to hear how they think the people of Haiti can be helped . 
`` Uniting faith groups will help them have a stronger voice in the international effort . 
`` It is important that Haiti stays at the top of the international agenda in the weeks and months ahead , and this is one way to make sure this happens . '' 
Also , EU ministers have agreed that member states should provide 300-350 police to help maintain order in Haiti , mostly from an EU gendarmerie force established by France , Spain , Italy , Portugal , the Netherlands and Romania . 
A spokeswoman from the Foreign Office said the UK did not have such a force and would `` look to contribute to the international effort in other ways '' . 
