Wed May 4 , 2011 2:20 pm BST -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Western-backed Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas was in Cairo on Wednesday to endorse a unity deal with his Islamist rivals Hamas on ending a 4-year rift that has split the Palestinians ideologically and geographically . 
Here are some facts about Fatah and Hamas : \* Fatah is the mainstream Palestinian nationalist movement founded in 1965 by late leader Yasser Arafat . 
It is a secular party and the largest of the various factions that make up the Palestine Liberation Organisation . 
Hamas is not in the PLO . 
\* It originally backed armed struggle to create a Palestinian state but later led peacemaking efforts with Israel for a deal to create a state in the West Bank and Gaza , with East Jerusalem as capital -- lands Israel occupied in 1967 . 
\* Fatah chief Arafat signed the first peace interim peace deal with Israel in 1993 but despite repeated U.S.-brokered efforts , a full accord has always proved elusive , with Israelis and Palestinians blaming each other for repeated failures . 
The last round of direct talks broke down last September . 
\* Arafat died in 2004 and was replaced as Fatah head by Mahmoud Abbas in 2005 . 
He inherited a divided party that was losing its popular support and mired in corruption scandals . 
\* After decades of dominance , Fatah lost a 2006 parliamentary election to Hamas . 
A year later its forces were routed by Hamas in a civil war and ousted from the Gaza Strip . 
Its power in the West Bank has been reduced by persistent internal struggles and its influence has waned with the rise of the technocrat prime minister , Salam Fayyad . 
\* Hamas is the largest Palestinian militant Islamist group . 
It was founded in 1987 during the first Palestinian Intifada , or uprising . 
Originally it concentrated on armed struggle against Israel , led by its armed wing the Izz el-Deen al-Qassam Brigades , and on numerous social welfare programs . 
However , it soon got deeply involved in local politics . 
\* Hamas believes Palestinians must use force in their struggle with Israel and opposes negotiation . 
The group 's founding charter calls for the destruction of Israel . 
Hamas has since said it would accept the establishment of a Palestinian state next to Israel and a long-term truce as a `` transitional solution . '' 
It has also said it would `` respect the will of the people , '' suggesting it would accept a referendum endorsing a `` two-state '' deal with Israel . 
\* Due to its refusal to renounce violence and recognize Israel , many Western powers view the group as a terrorist organization . 
Hamas launched waves of suicide bombings against Israelis in the 1990s and during the second Intifada , which erupted in 2000 . 
\* Hamas is part of a regional alliance comprising Iran , Syria and the Shi'ite Islamist group Hezbollah in Lebanon , which all broadly oppose U.S. policy in the Middle East . 
Its main leader , Khaled Meshaal , lives in Damascus . 
\* Hamas rule in Gaza survived an Israeli military offensive in 2008-2009 , triggered by rocket attacks into Israel . 
About 1,400 Palestinians , including hundreds of civilians , and 13 Israelis died in the conflict . 
Analysts say support for Hamas in Gaza has shrunk after years of blockade and isolation . 
-LRB- Compiled by Nidal Al-Mughrabi and Mohammed Assadi ; editing by Crispian Balmer\/David Stamp -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
