Friday , July 23 , 2010 ; 11:01 PM KENNER , LA. -- Long before an eruption of gas turned the Deepwater Horizon oil rig into a fireball , an alarm system designed to automatically alert the crew and prevent combustible gases from reaching potential sources of ignition had been deliberately disabled , the former chief electronics technician on the rig testified Friday . 
Michael Williams , a former Marine who survived the April 20 inferno by jumping from the burning rig , told a federal panel probing the disaster that other critical systems had been functioning unreliably in the run-up to the blowout . 
Williams told the panel that he understood that the rig had been operating with the gas alarm system in `` inhibited '' mode for a year to prevent false alarms from disturbing the crew . 
Williams said that when he discovered that the alarm system was inhibited , he reported it to supervisors . 
He said they informed him that orders were to keep it that way . 
If the safety system was disabled , it would not have been unusual . 
Records of federal enforcement actions reviewed by The Washington Post show that , in case after case , rig operators paid fines for allegedly bypassing safety systems that could impede routine operations . 
The Deepwater Horizon was owned by Transocean , which employs Williams , and was operating under contract to BP . 
Transocean said in a statement that the rig 's general alarm system was controlled by a person on the bridge `` to prevent the general alarm from sounding unnecessarily . '' 
Transocean provided statements taken from crew members saying they heard alarms , and it also released part of an April inspection report that found `` no -LRB- gas -RRB- detectors either in fault or inhibited condition , other than units being serviced . '' 
Williams testified that a computer used to monitor and control drilling operations intermittently froze -- a problem that became known as `` the blue screen of death . '' 
Despite attempted repairs , the issue remained unresolved at the time of the blowout , he said . 
Earlier in the drilling operation , one of the panels that controlled the blowout preventer -- the last line of defense against a gusher -- had been placed in bypass mode to work around a malfunction , Williams said . 
He said a colleague told him that an inspection of the rig in the spring , shortly before the disaster , found extensive maintenance problems . 
The colleague said `` that we were going to be in the shipyard a lot longer than anticipated because the rig was in very bad condition , '' Williams testified . 
The Coast Guard and the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement , until recently called the Minerals Management Service , are conducting the hearing . 
Testimony continued before the panel Friday even as the leftovers of Tropical Storm Bonnie blew toward the spill site . 
Forecasters predicted that the storm , which had lessened to a tropical depression , would gain strength before it was over the site about midday Saturday . 
Retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen said two control ships monitoring the newly capped well would try to ride out the storm . 
All other vessels connected to the spill effort have headed for shelter . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
