BEIJING -- Hundreds of firefighters and civilian volunteers used bare hands , chopsticks and plastic garbage bags Thursday to wage a low-tech battle against a giant oil slick spreading off China 's northeastern coast . 
The slick , near the oil port of Dalian , in Liaoning province , was caused when two pipelines exploded last Friday as crude was being unloaded from a Libyan tanker . 
Government officials said the accident released about 1,500 tons -- or 400,000 gallons -- of oil into the Yellow Sea , where the slick now covers up to 170 square miles , according to news reports , making it China 's largest recorded spill . 
The BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is estimated in the tens of millions of gallons . 
`` I used small wood planks to scoop up the oil and put it into big plastic garbage bags , '' said Liu Jia , a worker at the Dalian beach resort . 
`` Some of my colleagues used chopsticks ... It works , because the oil is quite sticky . 
Sometimes , we just used our hands to pick up the sand that is covered with oil . '' 
Liu described the methods being used as `` quite primitive , quite time-consuming . '' 
China National Petroleum Corp. said Thursday that no more oil was leaking from the damaged pipelines , but the port at Dalian remained closed as the black oil continued to wash up onshore . 
Fishing has been banned in the vicinity at least through August , and several nearby beaches were also declared off-limits at the height of the summer tourist season . 
`` It should be the best season for the beach right now , '' said Bao Wulan , head of public relations for the Dalian Golden Beach Tourism Group . 
She said that 70,000 to 80,000 visitors would normally be in the area this time of year -- `` but now , no tourists . '' 
She added : `` I do n't know how our business can go back to normal . 
Our beach is almost all polluted . '' 
The environmental group Greenpeace China said it has found oil in bays six miles from Dalian , and Jinshitan Golden Beach , more than 20 miles away , was also reportedly affected . 
Workers were laying straw mats at Jinshitan on Thursday in a bid to suck up the crude . 
Greenpeace said 10,000 shellfish farms have been contaminated . 
The battle against the spreading oil slick has claimed the life of one worker , a firefighter who drowned Tuesday . 
Although hundreds of civilian volunteers have been mobilized to help with the cleanup , the lack of equipment has hindered the ad hoc effort . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
