ATLANTA | Wed Jun 3 , 2009 12:22 pm EDT ATLANTA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Global airlines , still reeling from the recent flu-virus scare , have stepped up efforts to protect passengers from health risks on international flights . 
In Asia , carriers spooked by the memory of SARS have stepped up cabin cleaning , installed state-of-the-art air filters and allowed in-flight staff to wear face masks . 
For example , Cathay Pacific now replaces used pillows , blankets , headset covers and headrest covers , spokeswoman Carolyn Leung said . 
China Southern Airlines has been disinfecting the cabins of all aircraft . 
China Eastern Airlines flight attendants are required to wear disposable facial masks , gloves and hats and even disposable overcoats during flights to select destinations . 
Mexicana Airlines uses high-efficiency filters that can trap small particles that would normally recirculate back into the air , spokesman Adolfo Crespo said . 
The H1N1 flu virus has been confirmed in 20,000 people in 68 countries , killing at least 126 , according to the World Health Organization . 
Although it appears mild , experts worry that the disease , which formerly was called `` swine flu , '' could change into a more dangerous form . 
In the wake of the spread , some countries have intensified health precautions . 
Singapore saw its first case of the H1N1 flu in late May , after a native student flew from New York to the city-state on a Singapore Airlines flight . 
Singapore has been thermal-screening everyone coming into the country . 
The method , which identifies travelers with a fever , did not help authorities spot the sick student , as she had not yet developed a fever . 
The government quarantined the passenger and about 60 other people on the same flight who were sitting within three rows . 
`` This wo n't be the last case in Singapore unless we could stop people from traveling , '' Singapore 's Health Minister Khaw Boon Wan said . 
Singapore Airlines Ltd , the world 's biggest by market value , is giving passengers traveling to the United States health kits that include a thermometer , masks and antiseptic towels . 
Its cabin and flight crews are getting mandatory temperature checks before flights . 
In contrast to the measures taken by Asian airlines , U.S. carriers have simply continued safety standards already in place , relying on the advice of authorities such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 
Atlanta-based CDC has not recommended that airline crews wear face masks or disposable overcoats . 
`` The issue with H1N1 and airlines is an issue of translocation , not necessarily on-board transmission , '' Shelly Sikes Diaz , a CDC spokeswoman , said in an email . 
She added that people were no more likely to catch the flu on a two-hour plane flight than they were sitting next to someone for a two-hour movie . 
`` Therefore , at this time , recommended on-board infection control measures would be similar to community infection control measures '' such as frequent hand-washing , Diaz added . 
David Castelveter , a spokesman with the Air Transport Association trade group , said U.S. airlines for the most part have made no major changes in the wake of swine flu , but continued standing practices that include looking for passengers with symptoms of flu , measles or other infections . 
He added that in-flight air filters ensure that aircraft are sanitized . 
`` We take our guidance from the professionals -LRB- such as the CDC -RRB- who tell us the precautions that are needed to prevent the spread , '' Castelveter said . 
`` We 're not taking the type of precautions that are unnecessary . '' 
While Castelveter said media coverage of the flu has boosted awareness of airline safety procedures , Mexicana 's Crespo stressed that carriers still have work to do to change public perceptions that air quality on planes is bad . 
`` Inside , our aircraft is cleaner than in a hospital , '' Crespo said . 
Julian Tang , a consultant for the microbiology division at National University Hospital in Singapore , also said hygiene practices such as covering the nose and mouth when sneezing or coughing in confined areas may be the best way to limit infection . 
He said safety measures such as costly air filters may be of limited use for carriers . 
`` This is because most of the transmission between passengers probably mostly occurs just after the sneeze\/cough in the immediate vicinity of the passenger rather than after it flows through the ventilation\/circulation system and back out again , '' he said . 
