Page last updated at 05:32 GMT , Tuesday , 6 September 2011 06:32 UK -LRB- an error occurred while processing this directive -RRB- Members of Michael Jackson 's family are to team up with producer David Gest in a touring tribute to the late musician . 
The singer 's brother Tito and sister Rebbie will play a series of dates in the UK and Europe next year . 
The proposed tour would also feature Jackson family friend Deniece Williams and a Q&A session with the audience . 
David Gest said : `` The majority of the show will be reminiscences and stories about Michael that the public has never heard . '' 
The tour announcement comes ahead of next month 's Michael Forever concert in Cardiff which will feature Christina Aguilera , Leona Lewis and Cee Lo Green . 
The organiser of the Michael Jackson tribute concert defended the event to Newsbeat saying that they have the `` overwhelming majority '' of his family behind them . 
It comes after opposition from Jermaine and Randy Jackson , who say the concert should n't go ahead because it will clash with Conrad Murray 's trial . 
Michael Jackson was preparing for a series of UK gigs when he died in 2009 Michael Jackson died in June 2009 aged 50 while rehearsing for his This Is It UK tour . 
His former doctor is accused of involuntary manslaughter . 
`` There 's nothing in this . 
It 's not something to get excited about , '' said Chris Hunt from Global Live Events . 
`` The notion that an event which reminds people just how fantastic Michael Jackson was , what a loss he was to the world , what a great singer , a great performer he was , should be inappropriate - it does n't compute , it does n't make sense . '' 
Jermaine and Randy Jackson also say Global Live has `` mishandled '' the booking as well as `` misjudging '' the event 's timing . 
Rock band Kiss were also dropped from the bill after over comments made by Gene Simmons about Michael Jackson . 
The A Jackson Named Michael : Remembering A Legend tour will launch in 2012 with dates and venues to be confirmed . 
