Swine flu ` shows drug resistance ' The drug has been offered to those with close contact to swine flu Experts have reported the first case of swine flu that is resistant to tamiflu - the main drug being used to fight the pandemic . 
Roche Holding AG confirmed a patient with H1N1 influenza in Denmark showed resistance to the antiviral drug . 
David Reddy , company executive , said it was not unexpected given that common seasonal flu could do the same . 
The news comes as a nine-year-old girl has become the third to die in the UK with swine flu . 
It is understood from her doctors at Birmingham Children 's Hospital that she had underlying health conditions . 
It is not yet known whether swine flu contributed to her death . 
Meanwhile , the Department of Health has announced a big jump in the number of patients in England confirmed with swine flu - up 1,604 since Friday , taking the UK total so far to 5,937 . 
Routine sampling in the UK has shown that there is currently no resistance to oseltamivir or zanamivir A Health Protection Agency spokeswoman Experts have been using tamiflu , also known as oseltamivir , in a bid to stop the H1N1 spreading in communities . 
If taken early , it ensures that symptoms are mild and reduces the chance of a victim giving the illness to someone else . 
This first reported case of resistance developed in a swine flu patient taking Tamiflu . 
Mr Reddy stressed that there were no signs of a tamiflu-resistant strain of H1N1 circulating in the community . 
This is in contrast to seasonal H1N1 flu where a Tamiflu resistant strain emerged last year and is now widely circulating . 
Experts fear if this were to happen , it could render tamiflu ineffective . 
Another antiviral drug , called zanamivir or Relenza , made by GlaxoSmithKline , is also effective against swine flu . 
The UK government has been stockpiling these antiviral drugs and currently has enough to treat half of the population , with a contract to bring that up to 80 % as soon as possible . 
Supplies of flu vaccine have also been ordered and the first doses could be administered in the autumn . 
A spokeswoman for the Health Protection Agency said : `` The Health Protection Agency continues to watch for antiviral resistance and will be carrying out regular sample testing throughout this outbreak . 
`` We have been monitoring antiviral drug resistance since the beginning of this outbreak . 
Routine sampling in the UK has shown that there is currently no resistance to oseltamivir or zanamivir . '' 
Virologist Professor John Oxford said : `` I 'm not surprised about this finding . 
The question is whether it is going to spread . 
We will soon know the answer . '' 
