Amy Raphael visits an American in Cornwall Tori Amos has never been one to approach things in a half-hearted way . 
On stage she can look like a woman possessed , sitting at the piano with a halo of blazing orange hair , letting her voice carry her where it will , unafraid to experiment or make herself vulnerable . 
She has written candid songs about rape , miscarriage , the Iraq war and , most recently , orange knickers . 
As someone prone to apparently random behavior , it should come as no surprise that when she decided to move to England , Tori chose not London but a field in the south west . ' 
I followed love to Cornwall , ' she says softly , a smile sneaking across her face . 
` In 1997 , my husband had just proposed and we could n't agree on north or south London . 
I said , what about America ? 
He said , `` Bite your tongue ! '' 
He used to go to Cornwall as a boy , I 'd traveled around with friends ... so , for love , I said OK . ' 
Mark Hawley , the recording engineer who became Tori 's husband , found an old cottage near Bude . 
The couple stripped and modernized it , draping fairy lights everywhere for a warm glow . 
It is surprisingly modest -- not because Tori is ostentatious but because rock stars tend to be show-offs . ' 
I like cosy , intimate houses , ' she says , shrugging . 
` And Mark really picked it for the barn , which is now a recording studio . 
People say they feel really welcome when they come here and that 's all we hoped for . ' 
It is certainly a sociable house . 
Each day more than half a dozen people turn up for lunch , most of whom are working in their studio , Martian Engineering . 
Not that 41-year-old Tori ever cooks ; she laughs at the idea . 
` Are you kidding ? ' 
For the past six years , most of the food Tori has eaten has been made by Duncan Pickford , a chef who worked with Boyzone and Robbie Williams before moving to Cornwall to work exclusively in the Amos-Hawley household . 
Duncan explains that he knew how to feed Tori pretty much as soon as they met . 
` We developed a low-carb , low-fat regime with a lot of very clean protein , a lot of fish -- but she 's allowed to cheat , too . 
Knowing her as I do , I can almost tell at a glance what sort of space she 's in and what she needs , ' he says , laughing . 
` She eats more comfort food in the studio because she knows she has time to work a few pounds off , but on the road it 's all about stamina . ' 
It can be quite tough finding quality produce in the south west so he 's got an organic vegetable field down the road and , of course , the local fresh fish is sublime . 
The lobster he serves for lunch is simple but succulent -- cooked with garlic , olive oil , butter and oregano -- and a perfect antidote to the luxurious lentil and chicken soup starter . 
Another favorite of fried catfish with tomato relish -- ` yum yum , ' says Tori -- is often accompanied by a fine bottle of wine in the evening . 
` We take a wine cellar on the road , ' she explains , ` but we never indulge till after the show . 
I only drink good wine ; if not , I 'd rather drink water . ' 
Tori clearly trusts Duncan and sees him more as a friend than an employee . 
He eats with her if he can and looked after her during her pregnancy -- no simple matter given that she had suffered a series of miscarriages and thought she was destined not to be a mother . 
` It was difficult , ' she says . ' 
I became a mom at 37 and having a child has been an emancipation for me . 
Tash is four now and makes me feel young . ' 
Tori smiles ; she seems calm when she talks about her daughter . 
` When I leave home to go on tour , she 's started saying : `` Tell Tori Amos not to take my mommy away . '' 
I have to respond : `` Tori Amos buys the dollies , be nice to her . 
She does n't mean to take mommy away . '' 
Yeah , she does listen to my music : she likes ` Ribbons Undone ' , her own song on my new album , and ` The Power of Orange Knickers ' , which Damien Rice sings on , too . ' 
The Beekeeper is Tori 's ninth album and , with 19 songs , it 's a bit of a concept album . 
There 's a religious theme , with Tori going back to her upbringing as the daughter of a Methodist minister in North Carolina for inspiration , but it sounds more like a wild Kate Bush than an evangelising eccentric . 
Tori has always been a rebel of sorts -- she was expelled from Baltimore 's prestigious Peabody Conservatory at 11 and the press often have n't known how to deal with her . 
As Bjrk is always an Icelandic elf , so Tori Amos is always kooky , and her playfulness can be hard to read . 
On the cover of her 1996 album Boys For Pele , she was photographed suckling a piglet . 
` If I were a journalist , there were 70 ways of looking at it , but I do n't think kooky is one of them . ' 
Tori is not sure , however , that she really cares what anyone thinks any more . 
Having a child has taught her to be less obsessive about work and recent experience has made her focus on the positive . 
But nothing will stop her from revealing the sort of things other rock stars do n't mention . 
Towards the end of our conversation , we go back to food and to Tori 's favorite London restaurants -- E&O , Tamarind and Le Caprice . ' 
I went to Le Caprice the night before I got married with some of my closest friends , including two who are no longer . 
My brother died in a car crash in November . 
It was a shock . ' 
` And Kevin Aucoin , the make-up artist , died a couple of years ago . 
Whenever I go to Le Caprice , it 's for the food for sure , but it 's also because I can look across the room and see those two wonderful men smiling and laughing that night without knowing ... what was to come . ' 
She pauses again , then smiles , a smile as hopeful and bright as her hair . 
` It has made me value my family life . 
It is to be enjoyed . ' 
The Beekeeper -LRB- Epic -RRB- is out now The best of Tori 's Cornwall Where foodies eat and shop in the west New Yard Restaurant , Trelowarren , Mawgan , 01326 221595 A picturesque French restaurant set deep in a country estate . 
The kitchen uses Cornish produce and wild ingredients gathered from in and around the estate . 
St Petroc 's Bistro , New Street , Padstow , 01841 532700 Rick Stein 's unpretentious bistro , in a handsome building , is relaxed , delicious and fun . 
Black Pig Restaurant , Rock , Wadebridge , 01208 862622 Michelin star-winning food from one of Rick Stein 's breakaway chefs , served in tiny premises . 
Quayside Fish Centre , The Harbourside , Porthleven , 01326 562008 A great range fish caught only by day or inshore boats who do n't use nets . 
Halzephron Herb Farm ,62 Fore Street , St Ives , 01736 791891 An amazing selection of herbs to buy and plant , plus products to contain them . 
The Smokehouse , Islington Wharf , Penryn , 01326 376 244 Buy delicious cheese and fish smoked using apple , cherry and almond wood . 
Stingi Lulu 's , Next to the Royal Cornwall Museum , River Street , Truro , 01872 262300 Pacific rim-style food cooked in front of you . 
Tuck in and then visit the gallery . 
The Lugger , Portloe , Truro , 01872 501322 A pretty dining room and sunny terrace with a glorious view across the harbor . 
The fish is so fresh you can see it being landed from your table . 
The Cheese Shop , 29 Ferris Town , Truro , 01872 270742 Most incredible selection of cheese presided over by the knowledgable proprietor , Dr Stephen Gunn . 
The Lizard Pasty Shop , Beacon Terrace , Lizard , Helston , 01326 290889 Ann Muller 's pasties with just the right balance of meat , veg and light pastry . 
Bangors Organic Tea Rooms , Poundstock , Bude , 01288 361297 Home-made cream teas served in a lovely Victorian house . 
Everything on the menu is Soil Association certified . 
Roskilly 's Ice Cream , The Croust House , St Keverne , The Lizard , 01326 280479 Made from organic milk , Roskilly 's makes the best ice cream in the county . 
