Influenza viruses are able to swap genetic material Preliminary analysis of the swine flu virus suggests it is a fairly mild strain , scientists say . 
It is believed that a further mutation would be needed in order for the H1N1 virus to cause the mass deaths that have been estimated by some . 
But at this point , it is impossible to predict with any accuracy how the virus will continue to evolve . 
UK experts at the National Institute for Medical Research outlined on Friday the work they are due to start on samples of the virus sent from the US . 
The research , being done at the World Influenza Centre in Mill Hill , will be vital for working out the structure of the virus , where it came from , how quickly it is capable of spreading and its potential to cause illness . 
Analysis done so far suggests what they are dealing with is a mild virus and nowhere near as dangerous as the H5N1 avian flu strain that has caused scientists so much concern over the past decade . 
Influenza A viruses are classified according to two proteins on the outer surface of the virus - hemagglutinin -LRB- H -RRB- and neuraminidase -LRB- N -RRB- . 
Less severe symptoms , but can be deadly Spreads easily between birds but human transmission rare The swine flu strain is a H1N1 virus , the same type as seasonal flu which circulates throughout the world every year , and kills roughly 0.1 % of those infected or higher in an epidemic year . 
Professor Wendy Barclay , chair in influenza virology at Imperial College London says initial indications suggest there is nothing about the genetic make-up of the new virus which is a cause for particular concern . 
The key to its potential lies largely in the H1 protein . 
`` There are two aspects - one is which receptors the virus tends to bind to and what we see is that it is binding to the upper respiratory tract rather than deep in the lungs . '' 
Attaches to receptors in the upper respiratory tract causing mild illness A pandemic is thought to be imminent When a flu virus binds to the upper respiratory tract , it tends to cause mild illness but can be easily spread as people cough and sneeze , Professor Barclay explains . 
If a virus binds further down in the lungs , it tends to cause much more severe illness , as in the case of the H5N1 avian flu virus which has caused concern in recent years . 
`` With the H1 gene we also look at the cleavage site , '' she adds . 
`` The virus has to be cut into two pieces to be active and it uses an enzyme in the host to do that . 
`` Most influenza viruses are restricted to the respiratory tract because they use enzymes in the lungs . 
`` But some , like H5 viruses can evolve to cut into two pieces outside the lungs , so they can replicate outside the respiratory tract . '' 
These initial indications are largely guesswork from looking at the genetic sequence of the virus and comparing that to what is known from work on other influenza viruses . 
It will take weeks and months of biological analysis to properly get a handle on the potential of the H1N1 virus . 
The team at Mill Hill , one of four World Health Organisation 's centres for influenza research will be working in close collaboration with the Health Protection Agency who are carrying out testing in the UK , and their findings will also feed into the development of a potential vaccine . 
What this outbreak does highlight is how difficult it is to predict new pandemic strains Professor Jonathan Ball , Nottingham University Soon , the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in Cambridge will begin the genetic sequencing of the virus and will also be monitoring any mutations or changes in how virulent it is . 
However , there is one other reassuring aspect about what is known so far . 
That is there seems to be nothing unusual as yet in another protein in the center of the virus , called NS1 , which is linked to the strength of the immune response the virus produces . 
In some more pathogenic viruses , it is this NS1 protein which initiates a `` cytokine storm '' , a particularly severe immune reaction that can be fatal in even healthy young people . 
Scientists have also played down concerns that the milder H1N1 virus , could combine with the more dangerous H5N1 avian flu virus , causing a super virus that has the ability to both spread easily between humans and cause severe illness . 
This is unlikely - or at least just as unlikely as it ever was and the H5N1 virus has been around for a decade without combining with normal seasonal flu . 
Professor Jonathan Ball , an expert in molecular virology at the University of Nottingham said : `` The chance of swine H1N1 combining with H5N1 is as likely as any other strain recombining . 
`` What this outbreak does highlight is how difficult it is to predict new pandemic strains . 
`` Many people suspected that H5N1 was the most likely candidate for the next pandemic strain , but now it appears that this was a mistake - but that 's not to say H5N1 or another reassortment containing parts of H5N1 may not happen in the future . 
`` That 's the trouble - you ca n't predict . '' 
