It 's the Magazine 's 7 days 7 questions weekly quiz - a chance to find out how much news from the past week you 've read , heard and watched ... and how much has stayed lodged in the old gray matter . 
Detail of Turner Prize-nominated bedsit filled with copper sulphate Swine flu virus , seen under a microscope Extremely rare blue diamond , on show in London The 7.03 carat diamond is expected to fetch at least # 3.9 m when it is auctioned by Sotheby 's . 
Click NEXT to continue . 
And this is Roger Hiorns ' artwork Seizure - he sealed a disused bedsit , filled it with 90,000 litres of liquid copper sulphate , and left it to set into blue crystals . 
Click NEXT to continue . 
The strain of swine flu spreading as far afield as the UK , Israel and New Zealand has never been detected in pigs . 
Nepalese soldiers who fought with the British army have won their fight for immigration rights to the UK . 
Is the correct spelling ... `` We want to rejuvenate our political class with cultivated , educated people who do n't smell bad . '' 
Boris Johnson , on the Tory MP gender imbalance during a Q&A to mark his first year as London mayor Silvio Berlusconi , after his wife objected to his roster of prospective MEPs - who are all beautiful women Nicolas Sarkozy , whose own cabinet is well-stocked with glamorous ministers Which is NOT a codename used in the development of Windows 7 , which is released in trial form next week ? 
It 's happy birthday this week to Darcey `` prima ballerina '' Bussell and Renee `` Bridget Jones '' Zellweger . 
Now , before you get your results , the Magazine has pleasure in announcing the Weekly Bonus Question . 
Each Friday we will give an answer and ask you to suggest what the question might have been . 
This week 's answer is `` DOUBLE-EDGED CHALICE '' . 
Make your suggestions using the link below the quiz . 
Marks are deducted for predictability . 
It 's the diamond , expected to set a world record price per carat when it is sold this month . 
Click NEXT to see it in full . 
H1N1 is a human variant , a hybrid of pig , bird and human flu . 
After the World Health Organization raised its pandemic risk level , on Thursday the UK started a public information campaign on how to prevent the disease spreading . 
Government plans to limit numbers allowed to settle in the UK suffered a surprise defeat in the House of Commons on Wednesday . 
Joanna Lumley backed the soldiers ' cause as a Gurkha once saved her father 's life . 
The missing word is `` Boyzone 's '' - singer Keith Duffy had an emergency operation to correct a double hernia , two days after completing the London Marathon . 
It was , unsurprisingly , Mr Berlusconi , who added that the `` poorly dressed '' were also not welcome - `` unlike certain people from other parties '' . 
Dorian was NOT used . 
Windows 7 started life codenamed Blackcomb - after the Whistler-Blackcomb ski resort - and then became Vienna . 
It 's Renee , by two whole days . 
She turned 40 on Saturday , and Darcey marked the big 4-0 on Monday . 
2 - 6 : Down With Love 7 - 7 : The Edge of Reason Click here to enter the Weekly Bonus question . 
For a complete archive of past quizzes and our weekly news quiz , 7 days 7 questions , visit the Magazine page and scroll down . 
You can also do this quiz on your mobile device . 
