WASHINGTON -- WASHINGTON -LRB- AP -RRB- -- Nobody led . 
Not the president of the United States . 
Not the chief executive of BP . 
Not Congress , federal agencies or local elected officials . 
From its fiery beginning , the Gulf oil spill has stood as a concentrated reminder of why , over four decades , Americans have lost faith in nearly every national institution . 
Like Hurricane Katrina , a natural disaster that caused voters to question then-President George W. Bush 's credibility , the poisonous geyser at the Gulf 's floor threatens to undermine Barack Obama 's presidency . 
More alarmingly , the spill exacerbates the worry that this nation founded on the principle of trust now faces a crisis of faith in its public and private institutions -- government and big business particularly . 
`` This spill , it 's another blow to the body politic , '' says John Baick , professor of history at Western New England College in Springfield , Mass. . 
It is , he says , another excuse to be cynical and uninvolved -- `` exactly the opposite of what has always been the American zeitgeist , a sense that we , collectively and through our institutions , can be something greater than ourselves . '' 
It 's hard to summon that rising-sun aspiration when the unemployment rate hovers near double digits . 
When wars in Afghanistan and Iraq continue unabated . 
When terrorists take aim from inside and outside U.S. borders . 
When the U.S. Treasury writes massive IOUs to China and public schools write off millions of poorly educated children . 
Then along comes the oil spill to remind people of why they do n't trust leaders -- and why so many Americans , looking for information and action , are turning instead to blogs , Twitter feeds and their friends . 
Consider this revealing scene : With reddish-brown oil globs washing ashore at Fort Morgan , Ala. , Faith Kaiser and Bertice McPherson decided to do what generations of Americans have done when government ca n't -- or wo n't -- tackle a big problem : They handled it themselves . 
Before paid cleanup crews started work , the volunteers pulled on rubber gloves and picked up the gooey mess . 
As they did so , Kaiser said this : `` Six months from now the government will lie to us and say everything is fine . '' 
At the 1787 Constitutional Convention , Benjamin Franklin famously observed that he had been trying to determine throughout the debate whether a sun painted on George Washington 's chair was rising or setting . 
`` But now at length , '' he said , `` I have the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting sun . '' 
And with that , the Founders created a nation upon the fundamental principle of trust . 
They had an untested belief in the ability of people to lead themselves -- to choose leaders from their own ranks and to hold those leaders accountable . 
Even our currency , once backed by the promise of precious metal , is today built upon a faith-based system called `` fiat '' -- a Latin term meaning `` let it be done . '' 
In a dictatorship , people can lose faith in institutions and the apparatus of state can step in . 
But democracy ca n't survive without faith in its institutions because the people , by definition , create and control them . 
While there were surely crises of faith during the Civil War , the Progressive Era and others times of tumult , the early 20th century was marked by a reflexive sense of trust in the nation 's institutions . 
Even as Franklin Roosevelt 's New Deal vastly expanded the government safety net , a new breed of private charities and social reformers did n't bother waiting on government to help the poor , infirm and abused . 
But things started to change in the mid-20th century , when polls showed a steady decline on the question of whether Americans trusted government in Washington to do what is right . 
From 1958 , when more than 70 percent said they trusted government most or all of the time , the trend line steadily drops until it hits the mid-20s in the post-Watergate era . 
The trust line creeps up for a few years -- without getting nowhere near the 1958 mark -- and plunges again in 1994 , the year President Bill Clinton 's political faltering caused Democrats to lose control of Congress after more than 40 years in power . 
Just two months ago , a Pew Research Center poll showed that only 22 percent of the public say they can trust the government in Washington always or most of the time , among the lowest measures in a half a century . 
`` This spill has just got to make matters worse , '' said Pew pollster Andy Kohut . 
`` People are asking , Who 's in charge ? 
Why ca n't they plug it ? 
What going on here ? '' 
Just 25 percent of the public has a favorable opinion of Congress . 
Favorability ratings also have fallen significantly for seven of 13 federal agencies included in the Pew survey , including the Environmental Protection Agency . 
Faith in institutions across the board has fallen since the 1970s , at least among the sample of institutions tracked by Gallup : churches , the U.S. Supreme Court , banks , public schools , newspapers , Congress and organized labor . 
One of the least-trusted institutions is big business , no surprise after corporate wrongdoing and lax government oversight combined to help create the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression . 
Sixteen percent of Americans said they had a `` great deal '' or `` quite a lot '' of confidence in big corporations in 2009 , compared to 32 percent 30 years prior . 
The only exception to this trend is the military , which has increased from a 54 percent favorability rating in the post-Vietnam era to 82 percent this year . 
Part of the problem : Americans today might expect too much of government and other institutions . 
Take the oil spill , for example . 
Accidents happen and , right or wrong , the government is not in the drilling or drill-capping business . 
`` I take responsibility . 
It is my job to make sure that everything is done to shut this down , '' Barack Obama declared a few days ago . 
In the same news conference , Obama also acknowledged his administration could have done better in dealing with the biggest oil spill in the nation 's history and misjudged the industry 's ability to cope with a worst-case scenario . 
It was a new twist for the U.S. presidency , an office normally filled by men who accept responsibility or admit fault only grudgingly . 
Obama may be recognizing that accountability breeds trust . 
Less than two years removed from an election victory built on his promise to fix Washington 's broken institutions , Obama now seems a captive of them . 
His administration 's regulators cozied up to the oil industry before the spill and moved slowly afterward to seize control . 
The president himself often seemed detached . 
Who else dropped the ball ? 
-- BP and its chief executive , Tony Hayward . 
As his company 's oil filled up the Gulf , he had the audacity to complain that `` I 'd like my life back . '' 
-- The Minerals Management Service , the regulatory agency that failed to clean up its act despite Obama 's promise during the campaign to end the `` cozy relationship '' between the oil industry and federal regulators . 
-- Even the Coast Guard -- the one agency that survived Katrina with its image enhanced -- is now being criticized for its lack of transparency and command . 
And the public stews . 
Listen to Billy Nugesser , president of the coastal Plaquemines Parish : `` We are dying a slow death here . '' 
The public 's unconditional faith in national institutions is dying , too . 
We ca n't buy a `` Shrek '' drinking glass at McDonald 's because it might be laced with cadmium . 
We ca n't talk about the Catholic church without wondering whether something untoward might be afoot . 
We ca n't watch a home run without wondering if our pro-ballplayer heroes are juiced . 
Which may be why an umpire 's blown call denying a rookie pitcher a historic `` perfect game '' became a viral story this week . 
Americans saw in the umpire 's apology and the pitcher 's gracious acceptance a sign that one of their institutions -- the made-by-America game of baseball -- still includes leaders who do the right thing even when the situation is less than perfect . 
From their government , Americans do n't expect perfection . 
But the system requires that people at least have faith in their political leaders to be competent and accountable . 
`` If people do n't believe , if people do n't give , if people do n't trust , they will pick the politicians who are the loudest rather than the most sincere , '' said Baick , the history professor . 
`` They will pick the rabble rouser rather than the technocrat who gets things done . '' 
EDITOR 'S NOTE -- Ron Fournier is Washington bureau chief for The Associated Press . 
Associated Press writer Jay Reeves in Gulf Shores , Ala. , and AP News Survey Specialist Dennis Junius from Washington , contributed to this report . 
