Wednesday 14 December 2005 18.17 GMT The US president , George Bush , today admitted much of the intelligence used as the basis for invading Iraq had been `` wrong '' - but defended his decision to go to war because it removed Saddam Hussein . 
In a speech at the Woodrow Wilson Centre , in Washington , Mr Bush also pledged that US troops would remain in Iraq until `` victory is achieved '' . 
The speech was the fourth and last in a series aimed at bolstering flagging support for the Iraqi conflict . 
`` It is true that much of the intelligence turned out to be wrong , '' Mr Bush said . 
`` As president , I am responsible for the decision to go into Iraq . '' 
However , he added : `` My decision to remove Saddam Hussein was the right decision . 
Saddam was a threat , and the American people and the world is better off because he is no longer in power . '' 
The intelligence Mr Bush could have been referring to may be the pre-war information gathered from Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi , a Libyan , who claimed al-Qaida was linked to Iraq . 
Mr Libi later said he made his most specific claims whilst in Egyptian custody in a bid to avoid `` harsh treatment '' . 
In a CIA report published in the New York Times last week , unnamed officials admitted that Mr Libi been subjected to rendition when he told his interrogators that Iraq had trained al-Qaida operatives . 
Before the Iraq war , the Bush administration frequently cited Mr Libi 's information as `` credible evidence '' . 
On the eve of Iraq 's first parliamentary elections , the US president pledged to solve the previous problems with his administration 's intelligence capabilities . 
He was adamant that US troops would remain in Iraq until a `` free and democratic '' country was in place . 
`` We can not and will not leave Iraq until victory is achieved , '' he said . 
Mr Bush reiterated his hopes that an Iraq with a functioning democracy and thriving economy would be a model for other nations in the Middle East . 
In the Senate , 40 Democrats and one independent signed a letter to Mr Bush in which they urged him to be more open with the Iraqi and US public . 
The letter urged the administration to `` tell the leaders of all groups and political parties in Iraq that they need to make the compromises necessary to achieve the broad-based and sustainable political settlement that is essential for defeating the insurgency in Iraq within the schedule they set for themselves '' . 
It adds that Mr Bush must also present `` a plan that identifies the remaining political , economic , and military benchmarks that must be met and a reasonable schedule to achieve them '' . 
The president responded by outlining what constituted victory in Iraq and when US troops could begin returning home . 
`` Victory will be achieved by meeting certain objectives : when the terrorists and Saddamists can no longer threaten Iraq 's democracy , when the Iraqi security forces can protect their own people , and when Iraq is not a safe haven for terrorists to plot attacks against our country , '' he said . 
`` These objectives , not timetables set by politicians in Washington , will drive our force levels in Iraq . '' 
Like a MacBook Pro '' says @Mister_Solomon : Westminster Dog Show - live ! 
