The sickness bequeathed by the west to the Muslim world The Iranian president 's support for Holocaust denial is a measure of how far the infection of Jew-hatred has spread There were few memorable moments in the election campaign of 2005 , but there 's one I wo n't forget . 
It came when I was interviewing a group of Muslim voters in Edinburgh , asking how the Iraq war had unsettled their political allegiances . 
One older man began telling me that he did not blame Tony Blair or even George Bush for the way things had turned out , because they were mere dupes of a more powerful force . 
The calamity of 9\/11 was not all it seemed : the authors of that event were not the 19 hijackers , but more shadowy players , unknown even to Bush . 
Later , as he gave me a lift to the station , I asked who these secret powers might be . 
The answer was `` rich Jewish people '' . 
I told him that just as there were plenty of lies told about Muslims , so there were lies told about Jews - and that neither of us should accept either . 
I put the comments to one side , dismissing them as the ramblings of one man . 
Again and again in recent years , I 've made the same move . 
I 've read the reports of sermons in the Arab world , denouncing Judaism and Jews , and tried to see a wider context . 
So I saw the vox pop on Saudi TV asking people on the street whether they would ever shake hands with a Jew - unanimous answer : no - and guessed that perhaps this was an exceptional item , hardly indicative . 
I read the transcript of an interview with Basmallah , a three-year-old girl , again aired on Saudi TV , who was introduced as a `` Muslim girl , a true Muslim '' . 
Here 's the exchange : Host : Basmallah , do you know the Jews ? 
Basmallah : Because they are apes and pigs . 
I shuddered to read such a thing . 
But it was translated and distributed by the Middle East Media Research Institute , and , like others , I wondered about the group 's motives : Memri was founded by a veteran of Israeli military intelligence . 
-LRB- On the other hand , few challenge the accuracy of Memri 's translations : unpalatable though they are , the texts Memri finds are all too real . -RRB- 
Such has been my standard operating procedure , constantly trying to see if there 's a way to contextualise these incidents , to see them in proportion . 
My motivation was not complicated : I prefer my Jewish identity to be positive , rather than defined by a perennial defense against anti-semitism . 
But everyone has their limits and last week I reached mine . 
On Thursday the president of Iran chose to stand with the cranks , neo-fascists and racists who deny the factual truth of the Holocaust . 
`` Some European countries insist on saying that Hitler killed millions of innocent Jews in furnaces , '' said Mahmoud Ahmadinejad . 
`` Although we do n't accept this claim ... '' Suddenly , the usual apologetics wo n't work . 
No one can say Iran 's president was really complaining about Israel or Zionism , rather than Jews . 
No one can say he was talking about the west 's colonial crimes . 
He was peddling , instead , one of the defining tropes of the racist hard right : Holocaust denial . 
It is a stance that seeks to deny Jews their history , their suffering , almost their very being . 
Like denying that African-Americans were ever slaves , it is a move made by those who wish only harm . 
In this light , Ahmadinejad 's previous musings look rather different . 
When , in October , he stood beneath a banner that promised `` A world without Zionism '' and called for Israel to be `` wiped off the map '' , many Jews felt a chill at what seemed an annihilationist fantasy . 
Cooler heads said no , this was merely the hyperbolic style of the region , deployed to press a robust anti-Zionist rather than anti-semitic case . 
What he wanted , they explained patiently , was a world without Zionism , not a world without Jews . 
Well , now I 'm done with the charitable explanations . 
A man who refuses to believe the historic truth is capable of anything . 
This is not an Arabic cable TV station or an obscure Egyptian newspaper . 
This is a head of government , the leader of a nation of 70 million - a country that aspires to lead the Muslim world . 
And , lest we forget , Iran has nuclear ambitions . 
So now it 's not paranoid to worry about a president with annihilationist dreams - it 's smart . 
Unfortunately , it does n't end with Ahmadinejad , a man with no experience outside Iran , a hick who , Iranian analyst Dr Ali Ansari concedes , is a `` monumental embarrassment '' . 
For he has given voice to a sentiment that runs deep in Iran and in the wider Muslim world . 
Just look at this week 's Iranian press . 
`` Many revisionist historians believe the story of the Holocaust is fake and have proved it by much evidence and documents , '' says the conservative paper Resalat . 
Hardline Siyasat-e Ruz applauds the leader for `` revealing the truth '' . 
It 's hardly a surprise . 
TV stations across the Muslim world have been running this garbage for ages , along with lurid anti-semitism . 
Jordanian TV 's Ramadan special this year was Al-Shatat , a Syrian-produced series that speaks of a `` global Jewish government '' and depicts the ancient blood libel : the accusation that Jews use the blood of Christian children in preparing food for Passover . 
That was a follow-up to Egyptian television 's Ramadan treat in 2002 : Horseman without a Horse , whose central theme was the Protocols of the Elders of Zion , the century-old forgery concocted by the Tsarist secret police which alleged a Jewish plot to take over the world . 
We can deny it no longer : the virus of anti-semitism has infected the Muslim world . 
And virus it is , for Jew-hatred on this scale , as Christian Europe can testify , is a kind of sickness . 
This is one of the grossest legacies bequeathed by the west : that Muslims have taken to heart a form of anti-semitism alien to their own lands , borrowing a language and iconography that was made in Christendom . 
Blood libels and the Protocols were dreamed up in Norwich , Mainz or Moscow - yet now they breathe anew in Cairo , Riyadh and Damascus . 
This represents a menace to Jews , of course , but also a tragedy for Muslims . 
Theirs is a tradition that historically valued learning , and when an ignoramus like Ahmadinejad denies the overwhelming weight of historical evidence he makes a mockery of that tradition . 
In a period Jews still look back on as a golden age , Muslims were the people of scholarship , of science , of tolerance and coexistence - a contrast with the Crusader barbarians . 
Yet now many lap up the myths and lies that were once fed to the peasants of Europe , lies which endured through to the last century - and which led all the way to Treblinka . 
Today 's Muslims should want no part of such ignorance or bigotry . 
So Azzam Tamimi of the Muslim Association of Britain is to be applauded for his implicit condemnation of Ahmadinejad at the Stop the War conference at the weekend , telling his audience that , whatever their views , they could not deny the fact of the Holocaust . 
Now the Muslim Council of Britain should follow his lead , and that of the Muslim Public Affairs Council in the US , which also condemned this preacher of hate . 
And those non-Muslim progressives who have made alliances with Islamists should do the same . 
It may mean some uncomfortable conversations - but the days of denial must end . 
