WASHINGTON | Wed Jun 24 , 2009 6:44 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - President Barack Obama on Wednesday signed into law a $ 106 billion measure to fulfill his plans to wind down the war in Iraq and ramp up operations in Afghanistan where fighting against militants is intensifying . 
The bill contains $ 79.9 billion to continue funding the two wars through September 30 . 
It was also loaded up with extras like $ 7.7 billion to address the H1N1 flu pandemic , and $ 1.4 billion in foreign aid for Pakistan , which is fighting Taliban militants spilling over the border from Afghanistan . 
The measure was nearly derailed by Obama 's request for money to close the controversial U.S. prison at Guantanamo Bay , Cuba , as well as for $ 108 billion in credit lines to back the International Monetary Fund as it helps countries weather the global economic downturn . 
The legislation did not include $ 80 million Obama wanted for closing Guantanamo and bans releasing any detainees into the United States through September 30 . 
But it allows detainees to be brought to U.S. soil for trial . 
Both Republican and Democratic lawmakers demanded the White House produce a detailed plan before closing the Guantanamo prison camp . 
Before the legislation passed , the administration rushed to release or transfer more than a dozen detainees . 
Despite fierce Republican opposition , Obama ultimately prevailed to include in the legislation provisions to extend a $ 100 billion credit line to the IMF and expand the U.S. contribution to the multilateral lender by $ 8 billion . 
The legislation also endorses the IMF 's plan to sell 400 tons -LRB- 12.97 million ounces -RRB- of its gold reserves . 
House Republicans had expressed concern the IMF would use the funds to lend to U.S. foes like Iran and Venezuela and argued that the matter should have been considered separately . 
With the bill becoming law , Obama can follow through on a commitment he made with other Group of 20 member nations to add $ 500 billion to an IMF emergency fund for countries needing financial aid to avoid bankruptcy . 
The legislation also will kick off a controversial $ 1 billion program to boost depressed U.S. car sales . 
The measure offers vouchers of up to $ 4,500 to consumers who trade in their less fuel-efficient vehicles for ones that get better mileage . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
