Wednesday 13 April 2005 01.03 BST The number of soldiers to desert the army or go absent without leave has more than doubled over the past year , the Ministry of Defense has revealed . 
There are now more than 500 soldiers whose whereabouts are unknown . 
The rise coincided with the invasion of Iraq and its aftermath . 
Independent sources said yesterday that the war was clearly a factor . 
However , the rising trend over four years suggests that other issues also played a part . 
The number of soldiers still illegally absent last year totalled 530 , compared with 205 in 2003 , 150 in 2002 , and 100 in 2001 . 
The figures show that soldiers went Awol more than 3,000 times last year , with only a third of that figure accounting for returns to base within 21 days . 
The largest number of soldiers going Awol came from the infantry , followed by the Royal Logistic Corps and the Royal Artillery , according to the MoD . 
The figures were released to Bob Russell , the Liberal Democrat MP for Colchester , a garrison town . 
Though he first asked for the information in January , the MoD did not respond until it was too late for him to pursue the matter . 
The response to his original question came more than two months later in a letter from the armed forces minister , Adam Ingram . 
`` The mere fact they took so long to answer the question is significant , '' Mr Russell said yesterday . 
He asked for the information after being told by a source that a growing number of soldiers disapproved of the government 's stand on Iraq . 
He still has not seen Mr Ingram 's letter , which was addressed to the Commons on the last full working day of parliament and gives no explanation for the rise . 
The MoD said yesterday that it was unable to comment . 
Gilbert Blades , a lawyer representing Awol soldiers , said Iraq was `` probably the biggest factor '' . 
But he said a growing number of young soldiers were also not prepared to `` suffer the indignities and discipline '' of army life . 
Justin Houston-Roberts , who also represents soldiers , said : `` There 's been a very noticeable increase of not only soldiers but airmen as well asking our advice on being absent without leave , '' he said . 
`` Some are subjected to horrific bullying and run away to save themselves ... There are huge amounts of reasons but the conflict in Iraq is significant . '' 
He added : `` When the conflict started we had a very noticeable increase in requests to assist soldiers who wanted to leave the services or had done so without permission . 
`` I think Iraq has had an impact . 
It 's not necessarily people who do n't want to fight but people who have found themselves in situations upon their return that they ca n't necessarily cope with . '' 
Mark McGhee , another solicitor , said : `` Certainly from my experience of dealing with soldiers returning from Iraq , I would be very concerned about the fact that there 's been a doubling up of the numbers going Awol . '' 
