Haiti recovery ` to take decades ' Aid agencies have called for an urgent airdrop of 200,000 tents to Haiti The acting head of the UN mission in Haiti has said reconstruction will take several decades , following the devastating earthquake two weeks ago . 
Edmond Mulet told the BBC the logistics of the relief effort were a nightmare , with Haiti 's inadequate infrastructure destroyed and a shortage of vehicles . 
Mr Mulet said reconstruction was not starting at zero , but `` below zero '' . 
As many as 200,000 people died in the earthquake on 12 January , while an estimated 1.5 million are now homeless . 
The UN has estimated that 75 % of the capital , Port Au Prince , will have to be rebuilt . 
Salvage crews have begun to clear the rubble . 
On Thursday , the UN held a memorial service in the Haitian capital , Port-au-Prince , to remember dozens of its staff who were killed . 
People hugged each other as the list of 85 confirmed UN fatalities , including mission head Hedi Annabi , was read out . 
Broadcasting on FM radio daily in Haitian Creole at 0910 local time -LRB- 1410 GMT -RRB- , for 20 minutes Giving up-to-date information about where to get basic services and aid Also available on satellite and online , and via social media At the service , a visibly emotional Mr Mulet read a message from UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon : `` To you I say : we are with you in spirit . 
To those no longer with us I say : we will never forget you . '' 
Later , Mr Mulet told the BBC that all of Haiti 's recent development had been undone . 
`` I think this is going to take many more decades than only 10 years and this is an enormous backwards step in Haiti 's development . 
We will not have to start from zero but from below zero , '' he said . 
The UN 's assistant secretary-general for peacekeeping operations , who is acting head of mission in Haiti , described the logistics of the relief operation as a `` nightmare '' , but said those involved were still managing to improve their capacity to provide the help needed . 
`` All this is coming together right now , '' he said . 
`` Every day you can see more and more Haitian national police on the ground , working with our troops and more and more water being distributed , so it 's a matter of time and putting all these elements together . '' 
He said areas around Port-au-Prince were being prepared for the creation of tented settlements for the homeless currently living in makeshift camps . 
Edmond Mulet said all of Haiti 's recent development had been undone The Inter-American Development Bank -LRB- IDB -RRB- was working with UN and Brazilian engineers at one site near Croix-des-Bouquets that would house around 30,000 people , and four other sites had been identified , he added . 
Mr Mulet said 200,000 heavy-duty tents had been ordered to cope with Haiti 's rainy season , which typically begins in May , and its hurricane season , which is expected to start around June . 
`` Of course , 200,000 family-sized tents - solid ones that can withstand a hurricane season - are not available in the market just like that , so they have to be made . 
It 's going to take a few days and weeks before they can arrive , but all this is coming , '' he added . 
Haitian President Rene Preval earlier this week called for the urgent airdrop of 200,000 more tents and 26 million ready-to-eat meals before the rainy season begins . 
Sky News Haiti Quake Survivors Face Threat Of Disease - 2 hrs ago Melbourne Age Haiti will take decades to recover , UN warns - 4 hrs ago News24 . 
com Disease spreads in Haiti - 6 hrs ago Guardian . 
