Page last updated at 11:51 GMT , Friday , 29 January 2010 -LRB- an error occurred while processing this directive -RRB- Wyclef Jean was born in Haiti but moved to America as a child Wyclef Jean says his former group Fugees should record a charity single to raise money for the victims of the earthquake in Haiti . 
The group , which featured Wyclef , his Haitian cousin Pras Michel and Lauryn Hill , split up in 1997 but could reform for a one-off release . 
He said : `` Everyone is doing different relief and when the time is right , the vibe is right , The Fugees should definitely contribute a single to go into Yele Haiti -LRB- Wyclef Jean 's charity -RRB- . 
I think it would raise a lot of money . '' 
Wyclef Jean revealed that he traveled to Haiti the day after the disaster to help move bodies to cemeteries . 
Around 200,000 people are thought to have died in the 12 January earthquake with 1.5 million Haitians now believed to be homeless . 
`` I was on the ground the day right after the earthquake , '' he said . 
`` I walked into bodies on the ground resulting in me picking up a lot of bodies , bringing them to the cemetery because the morgue was overpopulated . 
`` Women and children were dead on the streets and people were walking around with their limbs out , eyes gashed out but they were still trying to make it to wherever they could get aid . '' 
Haiti 's government called off the search for survivors last Friday -LRB- 22 January -RRB- and is now concentrating on getting aid to people who need it . 
Despite that , more than 130 people have been pulled alive from the rubble with one 16-year-old found on Wednesday in the capital Port-au-Prince , two weeks after the earthquake . 
Wyclef Jean told 1Xtra News he had to get involved in the aid operation and wants to make sure people 's donations get to the people who need help . 
He said : `` Here 's a chance where we can actually rebuild the country from ground zero . 
So I think we all should focus on that . 
`` My biggest fear is all of this money being raised . 
Who is the person that is monitoring that money to make sure that it 's actually being used on the ground properly ? '' 
The 40-year-old singer helped organise a charity telethon with Hollywood actor George Clooney last week which was watched by 83 million people across America . 
Wyclef Jean helped organise the Hope For Haiti Now telethon in America So far it 's raised $ 66m -LRB- # 40.6 m -RRB- with an album featuring performances from the night going straight to number one in the US chart . 
Wyclef Jean says he 's now planning another TV fundraiser featuring Black Eyed Peas on 5 February . 
`` That 's going to be big . 
I 've got a lot of people coming out to support that . 
Keep your eyes open and let 's try to help . '' 
Everybody Hurts , the UK single recorded to raise money for victims of the Haiti earthquake , will be released on 7 February . 
