Dozens of UN employees remain unaccounted for The United Nations has held a memorial service in Haiti 's capital , Port-au-Prince , to remember dozens of its workers killed in the earthquake . 
People hugged each other as the list of 85 confirmed UN fatalities , including mission head Hedi Annabi , was read out . 
Former UN mission chief Edmond Mulet told UN staff that their continuing work for Haiti was the best memorial to colleagues who died . 
As many as 200,000 people died in the 12 January earthquake . 
An estimated 1.5 million people have also been left homeless . 
Several hundred UN employees , local staff , peacekeepers and representatives of the diplomatic community and Haitian government on Thursday attended the memorial service within the UN compound in the Haitian capital . 
Broadcasting on FM radio daily in Haitian Creole at 0910 local time -LRB- 1410 GMT -RRB- , for 20 minutes Giving up-to-date information about where to get basic services and aid Also available on satellite and online , and via social media Eighty-five UN employees died in the 12 January earthquake , but dozens more remain unaccounted for . 
At the memorial , a visibly emotional Mr Mulet read a message from UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon . 
`` To you I say : we are with you in spirit . 
To those no longer with us I say : we will never forget you . '' 
Mr Mulet told UN workers that `` your efforts are the most sincere and eloquent memorial to those who gave their lives for this mission '' . 
Mr Mulet was Hedi Annabi 's predecessor and is now the acting head of mission . 
He later said the reconstruction effort would take several decades . 
He described the logistics of the relief work as a nightmare , with the two ports in the capital destroyed by the earthquake and long delays in the arrival of aid from neighbouring Dominican Republic due to a lack of UN vehicles . 
Mr Mulet told the BBC reconstruction was not starting at zero but below zero . 
Haitian President Rene Preval earlier this week called for the urgent airlift of 200,000 more tents and 26 million ready-to-eat meals before the rainy season begins in May . 
