Government and international officials in Haiti are drawing up a strategy to help rebuild the long-impoverished country , while continuing to provide emergency aid to the hundreds of thousands survivors left homeless . 
We look at the short and long-term priorities . 
The UN World Food Programme -LRB- WFP -RRB- has warned that while the relief effort in Haiti is beginning to gain its footing , providing food for more than two million people a day represents the most complex task it has ever faced . 
Relief agencies have tried to buy goods locally and regionally , but such efforts have been hampered because local markets affected by the earthquake have been slow to reopen , and Haiti 's subsistence farms have been unable to ramp up production . 
This has forced the WFP to use nearly all of its stores of high-energy biscuits and nutrient-rich meals which do not require water . 
Aid agencies will begin to distribute staple foods such as rice , beans , vegetable oil and salt - instead of just emergency ration packs - once cooking equipment has been distributed widely and safe water supplies have been established . 
There is an acute shortage of drinking water in areas affected by the earthquake . 
The water supply system , which before the disaster only provided 40 % of the population of Port-au-Prince with clean water , has effectively collapsed . 
Massive quantities of bottled water have had to be flown into Haiti Aid agencies are shipping in massive quantities of bottled water and distributing water purification tablets . 
Many people , however , have complained that they have received little , if any , of either . 
The rapid response phase is expected to last two months and will need to be followed by longer-term activities , such as providing reliable water supplies for rebuilt homes and new settlements . 
The main challenges are post-operative care and logistical support to the health facilities in terms of fuel and medical supplies , according to the UN humanitarian agency OCHA . 
Haiti 's ministry of health and the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- is revising its emergency response strategy and will gradually shift the focus from emergency surgical cases to primary health care . 
`` Priorities are changing , and there is more need for post-operative care and follow-up . 
But there is still little capacity to help patients who need that follow-up care , '' WHO Director Dr Mirta Roses said on 25 January . 
Among the most urgent needs are those of thousands of Haitians who had amputations as a result of injuries . 
`` These people will need physical rehabilitation as well as mental health services . 
That means more nursing and mental health personnel and more physical therapists , and of course the right equipment for these kinds of programs , '' said Dr Roses . 
Among the most urgent cases are the thousands of Haitians who lost limbs Doctors fear many amputees will languish or even die without proper rehabilitation . 
As the emergency phase of the disaster winds down , there is a pressing need for mobile and community-based clinics that can provide such services as maternity care , post-operative care , and treatment for chronic health problems including diabetes , heart disease , HIV , and tuberculosis , the WHO says . 
Forty-three of the 59 hospitals , are now functioning , but they are having difficulty meeting the demand for health services , especially as the emergency medical personnel who arrived after the earthquake head home . 
Also important is establishing surveillance networks to detect outbreaks of communicable diseases , a significant threat at the makeshift camps . 
The International Organisation for Migration -LRB- IOM -RRB- says work is under way to improve the living conditions of the estimated 692,000 people in makeshift shelters in 591 camps in Port-au-Prince , until more durable solutions are found . 
More than 235,000 people have taken advantage of the Haitian government 's offer of free transportation to cities in the north and south-west . 
The IOM estimates that 100,000 family-sized tents are needed urgently Although the IOM had 10,000 tents stored in Haiti before the earthquake and has a further 30,000 abroad that will arrive soon , it says `` the supply is unlikely to address the extensive shelter needs '' . 
The UN agency estimates that 100,000 family-sized tents are needed to house about 500,000 people , but the UN says up to one million require shelter . 
Meanwhile , work has begun at the sites identified by the Haitian government for the establishment of organised tented settlements . 
It is estimated that each settlement will accommodate up to 10,000 people . 
However , tents can not be set up and displaced people relocated at the sites until they have water and sanitation facilities . 
Tent settlements can only provide a short-term solution , officials say , particularly with the hurricane season expected to start around June . 
Haiti is likely to need billions of dollars to build new homes and government buildings in Port-au-Prince and the surrounding area , which were densely-populated before the earthquake . 
Many of the buildings that collapsed were poorly designed and built - mostly with concrete and often without steel reinforcement and foundations . 
There is a clear need for higher technical standards to be used during reconstruction . 
Many of the buildings that collapsed were poorly designed and built But Haiti 's government , along with many planning and architectural experts , have also called for a new strategy that will help Haiti build for the future , including reducing Port-au-Prince 's population density and replacing slums on unstable hillsides with homes that are safe , affordable and sustainable . 
A new comprehensive building code that complies with international construction standards will be a priority . 
Cletus Springer , the director of sustainable development at the Organisation of American States , said that for this to happen the authorities would have to work with the private sector and banks to help low-income families . 
`` Because of the poverty levels , not everybody 's going to be able to build to the exacting standards that a building code would require , '' he said . 
In the short-term , the United Nations Human Settlements Programme -LRB- UN-Habitat -RRB- is carrying out a rapid structural damage estimate of buildings in the affected area . 
Jean Yves Barcelo , the agency 's adviser in Haiti , hopes it will start planning for new settlements and at the neighborhood level within a week or two . 
Experts warn that desperate residents of the poorer areas of Port-au-Prince may begin informal and unregulated reconstruction before a long-term reconstruction plan can be instigated . 
The lack of investment in Haiti 's rural economy over the past three decades has led to an average of 75,000 people moving to the capital , Port-au-Prince , every year . 
Since 1982 , the city 's population has grown from 750,000 to more than 2.5 million . 
The rapid expansion was not planned and resulted in overcrowding , inadequate infrastructure , and the proliferation of slums containing scores of poorly-built homes , many of which were destroyed by the earthquake . 
Haiti 's ambassador to the US envisages a smaller , better-built Port-au-Prince Key official buildings - the presidential palace , parliament building , police headquarters and 13 of the government 's 15 ministries - were also destroyed . 
Many experts say that Port-au-Prince should be reduced in size when rebuilt , and Haiti 's economic and government activities decentralised . 
Some have even suggested relocating the capital altogether . 
Hundreds of thousands of people have already left the city for tented settlements or family homes in other parts of Haiti . 
Many say they should be persuaded to stay . 
Experts warn , however , that mass-relocation schemes after other disasters have usually failed because they isolate people from the jobs and economic opportunity that drew them to the city in the first place . 
While the main airport in Port-au-Prince was not put out of action by the disaster , it was not equipped to deal with the volume of flights required by the relief effort . 
The US military has taken over control of the airport To speed up the process , the US military took over control of the airport and 160 planes a day are currently able to land . 
Aid flights are also coming into and out of the Dominican Republic and several other regional airports in Haiti . 
Port-au-Prince 's main port was also badly damaged and other ports in the area could only accept smaller vessels . 
One of the two piers in the capital 's docks was recently reopened by the US Navy , allowing bulkier shipments to be delivered by sea . 
At present , 150 containers can be unloaded a day . 
The transportation of aid by road continues to be hampered by piles of rubble and the volume of people trying to move out of or around the capital . 
But the UN Development Programme -LRB- UNDP -RRB- has begun employing local people to clear roads . 
Telephones and internet connections were down in many areas of Haiti for some time . 
The situation has since improved , with emergency radios distributed and limited internet and phone capacity restored . 
Experts say large-scale capital investment , led by the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank , will be needed to bring the road , electricity , water and telephone systems up to standard , and rebuild Port-au-Prince 's seaport and airport . 
There has been concern about the security situation in Haiti , with fears that people not receiving aid would turn to violence . 
US troops have been tasked with some security responsibilities In a bid to boost security and assist the relief effort , the UN Security Council is increasing the UN stabilisation mission in Haiti -LRB- MINUSTAH -RRB- by 3,500 troops to 12,651 . 
Brazil plans to double its current contingent of 1,300 . 
The EU is also deploying 150 officers of its new European Gendarmerie Force to assist the 3,500-strong UN police force , UNPOL , and the Haitian Police Force -LRB- HNP -RRB- , which has , so far , managed to get half of its 8,000 officers back on the streets . 
Meanwhile , the US has dispatched more than 15,000 military personnel to Haiti . 
About 4,700 are deployed on the ground with the rest on ships off the coast . 
The UN and US military have also set up a Joint Operations Tasking Centre to co-ordinate security in and around Port-au-Prince . 
The US ambassador to Haiti , Ken Merten , says the rebuilding efforts have to focus on creating jobs and attracting investment to Haiti . 
Without it , those displaced will need income support or food aid to survive for the foreseeable future . 
The UN Development Programme has said that as part of the rebuilding strategy , it aims to temporarily employ 220,000 Haitians to work clearing debris and restoring basic infrastructure . 
A long-term economic strategy prepared by the UN in 2009 that remains valid aimed to create 150,000 jobs over two years by harnessing Haiti 's advantages in clothing manufacturing , tourism and agriculture . 
International investors had launched a number of big projects before the earthquake and will be encouraged to stay . 
Economists Paul Collier and Jean-Louis Warnholz , both of whom have experience in Haiti , say there is a need to relocate economic activity away from Port-au-Prince . 
They propose that the construction of new homes be linked to the generation of new economic opportunities , in areas less prone to natural disasters . 
This would require the expansion of secondary cities and agricultural modernisation . 
`` Done right , international intervention can deliver immediate jobs through construction , and longer-term jobs through new enterprises . 
Done wrong , it will only pour relief into Port-au-Prince , luring in rural migrants from the impoverished central plateau , and further diminishing local food production at a time when it is most needed , '' they wrote in the Financial Times . 
To guarantee effective management of the funding in a country where the government was overwhelmed before the earthquake , economists have proposed pooling money into a single `` Haiti Fund '' that can be used for development . 
`` It should receive emergency outlays from the United States and other donors ; organise a board that includes members appointed by Haitian President Rene Preval , the UN secretary general and donors ; and empower a management team to formulate and execute plans agreed to by the Haitian government , '' wrote Jeffrey Sachs , a leading development economist , in the Washington Post . 
Mr Sachs estimates that annual donations of $ 2bn to $ 3bn will be required over the next five years to cover urgent reconstruction costs and development financing . 
The head of the International Monetary Fund , Dominique Strauss-Khan , has even gone so far as to call for a new `` Marshall Plan '' , which helped rebuild Europe after World War II , and warned against `` a piecemeal approach '' in Haiti . 
One of the first steps in the transition from emergency relief into reconstruction and development is food security , and the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation -LRB- FAO -RRB- has warned that it is crucial that any damage to agricultural infrastructure must be repaired as soon as possible . 
FAO Director-General Jacques Diouf says famers must be given immediate support before the spring planting season begins in March . 
The season , which lasts until May , accounts for 60 % of Haiti 's national agricultural production . 
Over the past 20 years Haiti has become dependent on food imports , yet around 80 % of the population are involved in agriculture . 
In the long term , officials hope to develop a rural agricultural strategy that would enable Haiti to become more self-sufficient . 
At the recent donor conference in Montreal , the US and other nations made it clear that Haiti 's government had to lead the reconstruction effort . 
The international community also reiterated its support for Haiti 's President , Rene Preval , and its Prime Minister , Jean-Max Bellerive . 
Mr Preval , who was elected in 2006 with broad popular support , initiated reforms of the police and judiciary with some success , according to Mark Schneider of the International Crisis Group . 
His government was also able to forge a national consensus on a recovery plan following the devastating hurricanes of 2008 . 
Nevertheless , the destruction of its ministries and deaths of hundreds of civil servants has meant the government has struggled to take control of the relief effort . 
Survivors are growing increasingly frustrated by its perceived inaction . 
