The Financial Crisis and You Eve Applebaum and Scott Dominick wonder whether they should buy that perfect condo in Brooklyn . 
-LRB- Courtesty Of Eve Applebaum -RRB- When Cynthia Shank , 51 , looked at her individual retirement account summary last December , she had $ 448,000 . 
When she looked at it recently , she had $ 349,000 . 
`` I 'm afraid to look , '' she said . 
Shank , a Hagerstown resident , is not alone . 
More and more employers have stopped offering their employees pensions with fixed amounts and have instead moved them into defined-contribution plans that fluctuate with the stock market . 
Lately , there 's been a lot of fluctuating , and Americans are increasingly watching their retirement cushions lose much of their padding . 
Shank , who is single , is already stretching to meet her financial obligations . 
She has a mortgage , $ 9,000 in credit card debt and a $ 7,000 home-equity line of credit . 
Eventually , she will have student loans to pay off , as she is taking classes to get into library science , a career path that seems steadier than the one she is on now . 
She is a technical writer working on a $ 63,000 contract that may or may not be renewed next year . 
Even the cost of gasoline is taking a toll . 
She has a 50-mile round-trip commute each workday . 
`` That alone has been a killer , '' she said . 
As of last week , she had negative $ 25 in her checking account , which makes her wonder : How is she ever going to live comfortably in retirement when she ca n't even live comfortably with a full-time job ? 
And now , she has even less saved for retirement . 
Shank wrote to us seeking advice on rebuilding her retirement savings , or at least stopping it from dwindling away . 
Right now , she has it all in mutual funds , with about 80 percent in stocks and 20 percent in bonds . 
`` How should I reconfigure it now ? '' 
Should she move money into certificates of deposit , which tend to be safer ? 
But what is safe these days , she wonders . 
Money-market funds were considered safe until just a couple of weeks ago , when a major one foundered and the federal government had to promise to insure the rest . 
As for the money she has lost , `` Am I going to recover it ? '' 
Daniel P. Crimmins , founder and president of DPC Wealth Management in Ramsey , N.J. , urged her to remain calm . 
`` The timing of the stock market recovery is unknown , but investing in the equity markets requires a long-term perspective , '' he said . 
`` An asset allocation mix of 80 percent in equities requires this long-term perspective and would be acceptable at her age if this amount is truly for her retirement . '' 
That said , he did advise her to study her portfolio to make sure she has a diverse mix of stocks and bonds . 
`` Unless she had a sizeable amount in her IRA , a loss of $ 100,000 since December seems to be the result of a less-than-diversified portfolio , '' he said . 
Domenic DiPiero , president of Newport Capital Group in Red Bank , N.J. , said she might want to consider keeping 60 percent in stocks and 40 percent in bonds instead . 
As for the safety of bank CDs , the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. will cover $ 100,000 or less . 
Money-market funds owned before Sept. 19 of this year are now insured by the federal government for one year . 
