A Government Hand In the Economy Is as Old as the Republic . 
It has become fashionable to fret that the current crisis on Wall Street marks the end of American capitalism as we know it . 
`` This massive bailout is not the solution , '' Sen. Jim Bunning -LRB- R-Ky . -RRB- 
`` It is financial socialism , and it is un-American . '' 
The near-collapse of the U.S. financial system and Washington 's sudden and massive intervention to try to shore it up certainly mark a major turning point , but a bailout would represent a thoroughly American next step for our economic system -- and one that will probably lead to better times . 
Americans may assume that the basics of capitalism have been firmly established here since time immemorial , but historical cataclysms such as the Great Depression strongly suggest otherwise . 
Simply put , capitalism evolves . 
And we need to understand its trajectory if we are to bring our economic system into greater accord with the other great source of American strength : the best principles of our democracy . 
No , our economy is not a shining example of pure unfettered market forces . 
It never has been . 
In his farewell address back in 1796 , 20 years after the publication of Adam Smith 's `` The Wealth of Nations , '' George Washington defined the new republic 's own distinctive national economic sensibility : `` Our commercial policy should hold an equal and impartial hand ; neither seeking nor granting exclusive favors or preferences ; consulting the natural course of things ; diffusing and diversifying by gentle means the streams of commerce , but forcing nothing . '' 
From the outset , Washington envisioned some government involvement in the commercial system , even as he recognized that commerce should belong to the people . 
Capitalism is not really the best word to describe this arrangement . 
-LRB- The term was coined in the late 19th century as a way to describe the ideological opposite of communism . -RRB- 
Some decades later , people began to use a better term , `` the American system , '' in which the government involved itself in the economy primarily to develop what we would now call infrastructure -- highways , canals , railroads -- but otherwise let economic liberty prevail . 
I prefer to call this spectacularly successful arrangement `` financial democracy '' -- a largely free system in which the U.S. government 's role is to help citizens achieve their best potential , using all the economic weapons that our financial arsenal can provide . 
So is the government 's bailout a major departure ? 
Today 's federal involvement offers bailouts as a strictly temporary measure to prevent a system-wide financial calamity . 
This is entirely in keeping with our basic principles -- as long as the bailout promotes , rather than hinders , financial democracy . 
Which , so far , it seems to . 
Congressional critics may be right to demand more help for homeowners and more accountability for Wall Street blunders , but the core idea of the plan is sound : to protect the financial infrastructure . 
Remember , Fannie Mae used to be a government entity , and by taking it over , the federal government is merely returning to the status quo ante . 
The measures to take toxic debts off the hands of financial and insurance firms are intended only to deal with a crisis , not to transform our financial system . 
The proposals do not represent any landmark change in the American way of prosperity . 
Everyone should take a deep breath . 
Changing our thinking about finance does not mean abolishing capitalism , but it does raise questions about what the changes mean . 
Whenever the public endures a crisis , ordinary citizens start to wonder how -- and whether -- our institutions really work . 
We no longer take things for granted . 
It is only then that real change becomes possible . 
So the current crisis got me thinking back to 1990 , the year before the collapse of the Soviet Union , when I worked with two Soviet economists , Maxim Boycko and Vladimir Korobov , to try to understand the different belief systems in their country and mine . 
We carried out identical surveys in Moscow and New York , comparing answers about fundamental notions of capitalism , and published our results in the American Economic Review . 
We expected to find that the Muscovites possessed scant understanding of how capitalism really works . 
But we found that they actually understood free-market dynamics better than the New Yorkers . 
We concluded that the Muscovites had proved more savvy precisely because their system was in crisis -- something that encouraged them to rethink their most fundamental notions . 
We Americans are going through a similar change right now . 
We no longer think that our financial future will be determined by securities brokers or inhumanly large investment banks . 
The most important question is not , `` What form should these temporary bailouts take ? '' 
It is , `` What are we really learning from all this ? '' 
We should be learning a great deal . 
The current crisis offers us a singular opportunity to reevaluate fundamentally the safety and permanence of the master financial institutions that we have come to take for granted as part of the national economic landscape . 
Over these past few turbulent weeks , we have learned that the monolithic investment banks are mortal : They are mostly gone , or absorbed by other banks . 
We have learned that what we called `` cash '' and considered perfectly safe is not necessarily so secure . 
So we are groping around for something else to trust . 
We should be open to thinking about a new set of financial arrangements -- a better financial democracy -- that can restore the public 's faith in the economic principles espoused by Washington more than two centuries ago . 
Here are some key features : 1 . 
Handle moral hazard better . 
The term `` moral hazard '' refers to the pernicious tendency some people have of failing deliberately if they think it 's advantageous to do so . 
Moral hazard is used to justify teaching people a lesson for their failures -- the same logic that once justified `` debtors ' prisons . '' 
-LRB- Yes , we really did have them . -RRB- 
But over the course of the 19th century , Americans grew more realistic about laying blame for economic catastrophes and started eyeing other parties besides the hapless and the bankrupt . 
The demise of the debtors ' prisons reflected Americans ' changing ideas about the meaning of a contract . 
By rescuing Wall Street tycoons who succumbed to the lure of an irrationally exuberant housing bubble , the bailouts today do pose something of a moral-hazard problem . 
But we can more than repair it by defining a new generation of financial contracts , with a continuation of our evolving thinking about moral hazard , reflecting greater enlightenment , greater understanding of human psychology and the means to deal with financial failure . 
For example , I have proposed replacing the conventional mortgage with what I call the `` continuous-workout mortgage '' -- one that would spell out in advance the conditions under which borrowers would see their debt reduced in a rocky economy . 
These conditions would be designed to minimize moral hazard : The borrowers would not be able to make the debt reduction happen deliberately . 
To limit risks to the system , build better derivatives . 
Some of today 's derivatives -- the complex bundles of toxic real estate loans that helped drag Lehman Brothers down -- turned out to be `` financial weapons of mass destruction , '' as the legendary investor Warren E. Buffett warned back in 2003 . 
The problem is n't derivatives per se but a certain kind -- derivatives that spun a massive web of over-the-counter contracts , relying on the solvency of countless banks and other institutions , and ultimately endangered the entire financial system when they fell apart . 
Some kinds of derivatives , such as those maintained by futures exchanges using procedures that effectively eliminate the risk that the other party in the agreement will default , are more useful -- and far safer -- than others . 
It is high time to redesign derivatives to avoid what Buffett called `` mega-catastrophic '' risks . 
Trust markets , not Wall Street titans . 
If institutions can be said to have charisma , such giants as Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch certainly had it in spades . 
But these firms proved not to be the sole source of financial intelligence . 
They were merely meeting places for smart , financially savvy people -- and for some reckless folks besides . 
We need to learn to trust people and markets rather than institutions . 
This means developing better markets that will allow us to hedge against the kinds of risks that dragged us into this crisis , such as real estate gambles . 
Maybe next time , we will listen more closely to financial theorists who think in abstract , general terms . 
Consider the Long-Term Capital Management debacle in 1998 , when the Federal Reserve leaned on financial titans to rescue a massive hedge fund and stave off global fallout . 
Lots of people hold that the moral of the LCTM story was the failed thinking of two of the firm 's founders , Robert Merton and Myron Scholes , both of whom were Nobel Prize-winning financial theorists . 
In fact , the collapse of LTCM was largely due to the overconfidence of bond trader John Meriwether and some of his other LTCM colleagues , who were gambling in the markets . 
The disgraced Merton has been working for the last decade trying to build better risk-management systems , mostly to little avail . 
Maybe he will be heard now . 
People still seem to want to trust businessmen who have made bundles and have a huge investment bank behind them , rather than listen to experts who are thinking about the fundamentals of risk management . 
We would have been better off this month if we 'd been ignoring the former and listening to the latter . 
These and other improvements in the contemporary economy -- a better financial information infrastructure -LRB- so that people can gauge risks better -RRB- , broader markets -LRB- so that people can manage big risks , such as real estate loans -RRB- and better retail products -LRB- such as continuous-workout mortgages -RRB- -- will need to be discussed , debated and delivered in the days ahead . 
If we move smartly , Americans can have a better , more robust financial democracy along the lines of the system envisioned by our first president . 
The current crisis does not mean the end of American capitalism . 
But if we are lucky , it will mean an important step in its evolution . 
