TOKYO | Fri Sep 2 , 2011 5:51 am BST TOKYO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - New Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda picked a relatively lightweight lawmaker as finance minister on Friday , signaling the fiscally conservative leader intends to call the shots on key economic policies himself . 
Noda , a former finance minister elected this week as Japan 's sixth prime minister in five years , tapped the 49-year-old Jun Azumi , a former parliamentary affairs chief , for the finance portfolio after his first choice turned it down . 
`` If he were a veteran lawmaker , the new finance minister might have clashed with Noda on some issues . 
But that appears not to be the case and the choice is likely a sign Noda will pursue his own policies on economic and fiscal issues , '' said Koichi Haji , chief economist at NLI Research Institute . 
Noda , an unassuming conservative who has compared himself to the `` dojo '' loach , a bottom-feeding fish , faces a long list of challenges as the third premier since his Democratic Party of Japan -LRB- DPJ -RRB- took power in 2009 . 
Among them : dragging the world 's third-largest economy out of stagnation , forging a new energy policy while ending a radiation crisis at a crippled nuclear plant , rebuilding the tsunami-devastated northeast and finding funds to pay for that and the vast costs of social welfare in an aging society . 
He must also navigate a divided parliament where the opposition controls the upper house and can block bills , while trying to smooth over rifts within the DPJ , which has never delivered on promises to change how the country is governed . 
`` As with the ` loach ' , we will sweat , get covered with mud but get the work done and push politics forward , '' new Chief Cabinet Secretary Osamu Fujimura told a news conference after announcing the cabinet line-up . 
New Finance Minister Azumi , who hails from the tsunami-hit town of Ishinomaki in northeast Japan , led the Democrats ' campaign in an upper house election in 2010 that they lost badly , handing opposition parties a majority . 
The former NHK public TV announcer served previously as vice defense minister but little is known about his views on fiscal policy . 
His first task will be to oversee drafting of a third extra budget to fund reconstruction from the March disasters , the biggest rebuilding project since right after World War Two . 
The finance portfolio is probably the toughest cabinet job as the minister has to try to contain ballooning debt while seeking to stimulate growth . 
The turnover at the helm of the ministry has exceeded even that in the top government post and the new minister will be Japan 's ninth since 2006 . 
Some analysts questioned whether Azumi was up to the task . 
`` He 's too lightweight , '' said Katsuhiko Nakamura , executive director at the Asian Forum Japan think tank . 
Noda settled on Azumi after his first choice , former DPJ secretary general Katsuya Okada , declined . 
There were no standout appointments in the new cabinet , which -- like Noda 's earlier picks for party posts -- included a mix of lawmakers from various groups in the party , divided by policy gaps and personal feuds . 
That led some to critics to wonder whether Noda was putting too much stress on party unity over expertise . 
`` I do n't think this line-up is one that can pull up its socks and respond to the public 's hopes , '' Nakamura said . 
Others said bureaucrats were anyway likely to be playing a bigger role in policy than under Noda 's two DPJ predecessors . 
`` We need someone who can get from A to B to C in a very effective manner and bureaucrats are very good at that , '' said Jesper Koll , director of equities research at JPMorgan in Tokyo . 
As trade minister , Noda appointed Yoshio Hachiro , a former parliamentary affairs chief who once belonged to the leftist Social Democratic Party . 
He will play a key role as Japan works out a national energy policy in the wake of the world 's worst atomic crisis in 25 years at the tsunami-hit Fukushima plant . 
Noda has distanced himself from his predecessor Naoto Kan 's harsher anti-nuclear stance , but acknowledges that building new reactors will be impossible given public safety concerns . 
Motohisa Furukawa , 45 , a former deputy chief cabinet secretary , takes over as national strategy and economics minister while Koichiro Gemba , 47 , a former national strategy minister , becomes foreign minister . 
Gemba must work to tighten ties with security ally the United States , which frayed after the DPJ swept to power , while trying to maintain relations with China -- often strained by present rivalries and disputes over their wartime past . 
