WILMINGTON , Delaware | Mon May 24 , 2010 9:31 pm EDT WILMINGTON , Delaware -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Shareholders have sued the board of BP Plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- for failing to monitor safety and exposing the company to potentially enormous liability related to the Deepwater spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , according to court documents . 
A month ago a rig exploded in the Gulf of Mexico , killing 11 workers and sending heavy oil into fragile marshlands on the fringes of the Mississippi Delta . 
On Saturday , U.S. President Barack Obama blamed the massive Gulf of Mexico oil spill on `` a breakdown of responsibility '' at BP . 
`` The Deepwater disaster will cause financial consequences to BP and the BP subsidiaries , which will be tabulated in the billions of dollars , including liability for damage to property , commercial interests and wildlife , '' said the complaint . 
The complaint said the disaster has wiped about $ 40 billion from BP 's market value . 
The lawsuit was brought on behalf of shareholders by individual investor Robert Freedman and the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority , or SEPTA , which runs Philadelphia 's regional public transit and owns BP 's American Depository Shares . 
The plaintiffs are seeking damages as well as seeking to direct the board to take steps to improve corporate governance , such as limiting the number of inside directors and setting up an environmental exposure oversight committee . 
A BP spokesman said the company does not comment on active litigation . 
BP shares fell 2.7 percent in London trading to end at 493 pence . 
The case is Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority and Robert Freedman v Anthony B Hayward et al , Court of Chancery for the state of Delaware , No. 5511 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Hals ; editing by Andre Grenon and Carol Bishopric -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
