A blood sample is taken from a pig by Malaysia 's veterinary personnel during an inspection at a pig farm in an effort to prevent swine flu in Ipoh April 29 , 2009 . 
Credit : Reuters\/The New Straits Times Press\/Muhaizan Yahya \* Flu viruses can survive freezing , be present on thawed meat \* Blood of H1N1 infected pigs may contain virus \* Meat from sick pigs or pigs found dead must not be consumed \* WHO drawing up guidelines to protect workers handling pigs HONG KONG -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Meat from pigs infected with the new H1N1 virus should n't be used for human consumption , the World Health Organization cautioned on Wednesday , adding it was drawing up guidelines to protect workers handling pigs . 
The WHO comments appear more cautious than those from the Food and Agriculture Organization -LRB- FAO -RRB- and World Organization for Animal Health -LRB- OIE -RRB- , which said import bans are not required to safeguard public health because the disease is not food-borne and has not been identified in dead animal tissue . 
The WHO however said it was possible for flu viruses to survive the freezing process and be present in thawed meat , as well as in blood . 
`` Meat from sick pigs or pigs found dead should not be processed or used for human consumption under any circumstances , '' Jorgen Schlundt , director of WHO 's Department of Food Safety , Zoonoses and Foodborne Diseases . 
`` While it is possible for influenza viruses to survive the freezing process and be present on thawed meat , there are no data available on the survival of Influenza A\/H1N1 on meat nor any data on the infectious dose for people , '' he wrote in an email reply to questions from Reuters concerning the safety of pork , respiratory secretions and blood of H1N1-infected pigs . 
Schlundt warned people to be cautious with blood and meat-juices from H1N1-infected pigs . 
`` The likelihood of influenza viruses to be in the blood of an infected animal depends on the specific virus . 
Blood -LRB- and meat-juice -RRB- from influenza H1N1-infected pigs may potentially contain virus , but at present , this has not been established , '' Schlundt said . 
`` Nonetheless , in general , we recommend that persons involved in activities where they could come in contact with large amounts of blood and secretions , such as those slaughtering\/eviscerating pigs , wear appropriate protective equipment , '' he said . 
The new H1N1 swine flu virus is being transmitted from person to person , not from pigs to people . 
Its global spread has prompted many countries to limit pork imports , however . 
As many as 20 governments have imposed import bans on live pigs and meat from affected countries to prevent exposure to the virus . 
Such fears increased after Canadian authorities said on Saturday a herd of swine was infected by a farmer who had returned from Mexico . 
The WHO said 22 countries have officially reported 1,534 cases of the flu virus . 
While health officials say the outbreak appears to be slowing down in Mexico , authorities everywhere are asking how far the virus would spread and how serious it would be . 
U.S. officials confirmed that a Texas woman with the H1N1 swine flu virus died earlier this week , the second death outside Mexico . 
Last week , a Mexican toddler visiting Texas died . 
Mexican officials have reported 29 confirmed deaths . 
While the new virus is mainly spread from person to person through coughing and sneezing , experts do not know for sure how this virus came to be , which animal passed it to the first human patient and when that occurred . 
But the case of the farmer infecting the pigs in Canada fueled fears of the virus yet again jumping the species barrier -- this time from pig to human -- and possibly becoming more virulent in the process . 
Joseph Domenech , FAO chief veterinary officer , said on Tuesday : `` This new strain of influenza virus does not contaminate humans easily and has a very low pathogenicity for both humans and pigs , unlike the avian flu which killed millions of poultry . '' 
On Tuesday , Alex Thiermann , senior adviser to the OIE 's director-general , said there was no difference between raw and cooked meat in terms of H1N1 transmission risks . 
`` The OIE is very concerned that differences are being made between cooked and not cooked meat . 
All pork products are safe for consumption , '' Thiermann said . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
