Boost Natural Killer Cells to Prevent Swine Flu \* Reuters is not responsible for the content in this press release . 
Herbal and nutritional supplements can dramatically increase protection from swine flu by increasing levels of Natural Killer Cells , which destroy viruses , without attacking healthy body cells . 
Drastic measures including closing schools , canceling graduation ceremonies and airline flights are being used to slow spread of the H1N1 swine flu virus . 
Governmental authorities recommend increased hand washing and avoiding handshakes , which did not prevent previous influenza epidemics from killing millions of people , in 1918 . 
Rick Sponaugle , MD , Medical Director of Florida Detox and Wellness Institute , recommends increasing levels of Natural Killer Cell white blood cells , to prevent infection with swine flu and other viruses . 
Natural Killer Cells protect us from viruses , during new infections , while other white blood cells attempt to produce antibodies against new viruses . 
Research proves over the counter herbal and nutritional supplements can increase Natural Killer Cell levels . 
Dr. Sponaugle reported , `` We have measured 60 percent increases in Natural Killer Cells , using over the counter formulas containing naturally occurring inositol phosphates . 
The 60 percent Natural Killer Cell increase is consistent with results published in scientific studies . '' 
Since Inositol phosphates occur naturally in the body , there is essentially no risk of allergic reaction . 
AHCC , is an immune booster extracted from mushrooms which increased Natural Killer Cell levels , 200 to 300 percent , in published studies . 
Florida Detox and Wellness Institute increased Natural Killer Cell levels in one severely immune suppressed patient , from 3 per milliliter to 150 per milliliter . 
Natural Killer Cell levels tend to decrease with age . 
Patients with chronic fatigue syndrome , fibromyalgia , Lymes Disease , Babesia , or HIV are more likely to have lower Natural Killer Cell levels . 
Herpes Simplex , Human Herpes 6 , Epstein Barr and Cytomegalus viruses also suppress immunity . 
Dr. Sponaugle also recommends reducing sugar consumption , to increase immunity . 
Studies reveal consuming 100 grams of sugar reduced immunity for over five hours . 
Researchers measured activity of neutrophils , white blood cells which engulf and destroy bacteria and other harmful microorganisms . 
Neutrophil activity was reduced over 45 percent , two hours , after sugar consumption . 
, 30:613 , 1977 Am . 
, 26:180 , 1973 . 
Excessive sugar consumption causes chronic immune suppression , in many Americans . 
The average American consumes 125 grams of sucrose sugar daily , in addition to 50 grams of other refined sugars daily . 
A typical 12 ounce cola drink contains ten teaspoons or 41 grams of sugar . 
A Milky War candy bar contains 35 grams of sugar . 
Many herbal teas and energy drinks are sweetened with high fructose corn syrup , which is essentially a refined sugar . 
Estimates indicate twenty percent of Americans consume over 75 grams of high fructose corn syrup daily . 
Since different parts of the immune system work together , through chemical messenger systems , increasing neutrophil activity can enhance Natural Killer Cell activity . 
Florida Detox and Wellness Institute has perfected scientifically advanced , compassionate , detoxification techniques for alcohol , Xanax , Klonopin , methadone , Vicodin , Oxycontin , Percocet , Norco , Fentanyl , heroin and other opiate drugs . 
Florida Detox and Wellness Institute has treated over 5,000 patients for chemical dependency . 
We have proven patients self-medicate underactive and overactive brain regions with food , drugs and alcohol to feel more normal . 
When brain chemistry and hormonal imbalance is correctly diagnosed and treated , brain craving for excess food , drugs and alcohol stops . 
For more information see www.floridadetox.com or call Florida Detox at 1-888-775-2770 . 
SOURCE Florida Detox and Wellness Institute Rick Sponaugle , MD , Medical Director , Florida Detox and Wellness Center , +1 -888 -775 -2770 An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
