Protesters taking to the streets in Egypt on Wednesday felt the wrath of security forces , a day after an unparalleled display of public rage at the government and full-throated cries for the ouster of the longtime president . 
Police turned water cannons and tear gas on protesters in the early hours of Wednesday morning to try to break up anti-government demonstrations as the Interior Ministry warned it `` will not allow any provocative movement or a protest or rallies or demonstrations . '' 
In the heart of Cairo , people were being beaten with sticks and fists and demonstrators were being dragged away amid tear gas . 
Witnesses saw security forces harassing journalists and photographers . 
Demonstrations continued into the nighttime hours . 
Egypt 's official MENA news agency reported that at least 90 people were detained Wednesday while trying to demonstrate in downtown Cairo 's Tahrir Square . 
The country 's main opposition party , the Muslim Brotherhood , said Wednesday that 149 of its members were arrested during the protests . 
The state-run Nile News TV reported violent clashes Wednesday night between security forces and protesters in Suez , a port city east of Cairo on the Gulf of Suez . 
At least 27 people were wounded , Nile News said , most of them police officers . 
Quoting provincial officials , the station said most of the clashes took place in the Alarbeen neighborhood and that looters attacked some shops . 
The Muslim Brotherhood said 35 people were injured in Suez and that security forces in the city had implemented a curfew there Wednesday night . 
Egypt 's Interior Ministry denied claims of curfews in parts of the country , MENA reported . 
Dozens of Bedouins , meanwhile , gathered Wednesday in the Sheikh Zwayd area near Rafah -- close to Egypt 's border with Gaza -- and tried to stop traffic on the international road by setting tires on fire and throwing rocks at cars , MENA reported . 
The Interior Ministry urged `` citizens to renounce attempts to bid and trade their problems and not lose sight of the consequences of provocation for those who attempt to try to open the door to a state of chaos or portray the situation in the country this way . '' 
At least 10 journalists have been beaten by Egyptian security personnel during the demonstrations , the Committee to Protect Journalists said Wednesday . 
Lina Attalah , the managing editor of the English-language edition of the newspaper Al-Masry al-Youm , was attacked in downtown Cairo , CPJ reported . 
