2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Another winter blast to hit East Coast : A quick-hitting Northeast snowstorm that began coating the nation 's capital Wednesday has forced the cancellation of hundreds of flights for travelers in New England and the Eastern Seaboard . 
20 questions that could change your life : If you 're like most people , you became obsessed with questions around the age of two or three , and scientists now know that continuing to ask them can help keep your mind nimble however old you eventually become . 
Dead councilwoman faced possible sanctions : A Nevada city councilwoman who faced possible sanctions over a travel expense voucher and public comments was found dead with her husband Tuesday , hours before a City Council meeting with her issues on the agenda . 
Jimmy Buffett got stitches for cut from stage : Singer-songwriter Jimmy Buffett fell off a concert stage and was injured at the end of a show in Sydney , Australia , Wednesday night , according to his manager . 
Body identified as Texas baby sitter , 15 : A body found near Lubbock , Texas , has been identified as that of a baby sitter seen in a motel surveillance video with a longtime family friend charged in the case , police said . 
Giffords moves to rehabilitation hospital : U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords was making `` lightning speed '' progress for a brain injury and had the drain for brain fluid removed from her head , her doctors said . 
Are you ready for the cutest , most adorable faux sporting event of the year ? 
Animal Planet has announced the lineup for Puppy Bowl VII , the annual Super Bowl antidote pitting irresistible pups against each other and a slew of chew toys on the gridiron . 
The football-with-puppies game has aired the same day as its fellow venerated American tradition , the Super Bowl , for the past seven years . 
The 20-pup starting lineup was assembled from shelters and rescues across the country and as far as the U.S. Virgin Islands , all of whom will be vying for the title of MVP , or most valuable puppy -LRB- surely you knew that -RRB- . 
An American missionary was fatally shot in Mexico on Wednesday , police said . 
The preliminary investigation indicated that Nancy Davis , 59 , and her husband were traveling on a Mexican highway near the city of San Fernando , Mexico , when they were confronted by gunmen in a black pickup , the Pharr Police Department in Texas said in a statement . 
San Fernando is south of the border city of Reynosa in Tamaulipas state . 
`` The gunmen were attempting to stop them and the victims accelerated in efforts of getting away from them , '' the police statement said . 
`` At a certain point the gunmen discharged a weapon at the victim 's vehicle and a bullet struck the victim Nancy Shuman Davis on the head . '' 
Davis ' husband , identified as Sam Davis by family friends , drove their truck `` at high rate of speed '' to the Pharr International Bridge , which crosses the Rio Grande . 
Nancy Davis was taken to a hospital in nearby McAllen , where she was pronounced dead about 90 minutes later . 
A quick-hitting Northeast snowstorm that began coating the nation 's capital Wednesday has forced the cancellation of hundreds of flights for travelers in New England and the Eastern Seaboard , according to airline spokesmen . 
Winter storm warnings were in effect Wednesday from the southern Appalachian mountains to coastal Massachusetts and were expected to expire Thursday morning , said CNN meteorologist Sean Morris . 
Snow was falling about an inch an hour in Washington , D.C. , which was expected to receive 4 to 6 inches Wednesday evening , he said . 
Federal employees and most schools in Washington ended business early on Wednesday . 
New York is expected to receive 8 to 12 inches of snow starting about midnight , Morris said . 
Utah has a state flower , a state fossil , a state cooking pot and 21 other official symbols . 
It might soon add a state gun . 
The state House passed a measure Wednesday , by a 51-19 vote , that would make the Browning M1911 pistol - designed by Utah s John Moses Browning in the early 20th century - the state firearm . 
The bill now goes to the state Senate . 
The bill 's sponsor , Republican Rep. Carl Wimmer , has said the measure aims to honor Browning . 
His M1911 was used as a standard U.S. Army sidearm from 1911 to 1985 , according to the Browning manufacturing company 's website and Jane 's Infantry Weapons . 
Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg 's profile on the social networking site was hacked Tuesday . 
A roundup of today s CNNMoney news : 8 least evil banks : As banks take turns inventing new fees and hiking existing ones , you may think there 's no escaping your bank 's dirty tricks . 
But we found eight with zero ATM fees , free checking and high-yielding accounts . 
Hottest Web IPO sets the tone : The appetite for initial public offerings is heating up , starting with Demand Media - the biggest Web IPO since Google went public in 2004 . 
Mark Zuckerberg s Facebook page hacked : The Facebook founder s fan page was hacked Tuesday when a status update appeared on his profile that opened with `` Let the hacking begin . '' 
The status attracted more than 1,800 `` likes '' before it was removed from the page . 
A call for jobs from the Swiss Alps : Executives attending the World Economic Forum are optimistic about the job outlook for 2011 , but say we have a long way to go . 
Meanwhile , check out these Best Companies ' cool perks . 
What a Tea Party budget looks like : With Washington buzzing with proposals to cut the budget , Sen. Rand Paul and Rep. Michele Bachmann - two high-profile Tea Party members - have each released laundry lists of spending cuts . 
A federal jury has begun deliberating the case of three former Pennsylvania police officers accused of trying to cover up the beating death of an undocumented Mexican immigrant . 
A Wilkes-Barre jury began deliberations Wednesday morning in the trial of former Shenandoah Police Chief Matthew Nestor and former officers Jason Hayes and William Moyer . 
The three men are charged with conspiring to obstruct justice during the investigation into the fatal beating of Luis Ramirez in July 2008 . 
Moyer has also been charged with witness and evidence tampering , and with lying to the FBI . 
If convicted , the defendants face 20 years in prison on each of the obstruction charges and an additional five years in prison for conspiring to obstruct justice . 
Ramirez , a day laborer and father of two who was engaged to a woman from Shenandoah , died three days after he was beaten into a coma during a street fight with members of the high school football team . 
The incident divided the rural mining town along racial lines and became a flash point for racial tensions nationwide . 
Former Homeland Security Chief Tom Ridge unveils the color-coded U.S. threat advisory system in 2002 . 
The Department of Homeland Security is ending its color-coded terror threat level system in April , as expected , CNN 's National Security Contributor Fran Townsend has confirmed . 
The system was established in 2002 to inform the public of the current risk of terrorist acts through a five-level , color-coded `` Threat Condition '' indicator . 
Today 's terror threat level for the U.S. government is elevated , or yellow , and for all domestic and international flights , the U.S. threat level is high , or orange , according to DHS . 
In its place , DHS will move to a system that focuses on specific threats in geographical areas . 
It will be called the National Terror Advisory System . 
DHS Secretary Janet Napolitano will officially make the announcement tomorrow at a `` State of America 's Homeland Security '' speech at George Washington University . 
There will be no `` Rafa Slam , '' no showdown with Roger Federer and no happy ending for Rafael Nadal at the Australian Open . 
The world 's No. 1 tennis player suffered a shocking upset at the Aussie Open quarterfinals on Wednesday , falling 6-4 , 6-2 , 6-3 to fellow Spaniard David Ferrer . 
Nadal , who had won three Grand Slam tournaments in a row and was hoping to hold all four majors at once , came up short due to an apparent leg injury , which forced him to call a medical timeout in the third set and visibly hampered him against Ferrer . 
`` This is a difficult day for me , '' Nadal said after the match . 
`` Today , I ca n't do more than what I did . 
He played at a very high level . '' 
In a 2008 photo , a rescued tiger leaps into India 's Sundarikati River after being released from a cage on a boat . 
The wild tiger population in Asia could triple to more than 10,000 with thoughtful land management where they live and breed , a new paper from top conservation scientists says . 
If governments were to treat the many disconnected tiger reserves throughout Asia as a single `` landscape '' and provide safe corridors for the animals to roam among them , populations could flourish , the paper argues . 
`` In the midst of a crisis , it 's tempting to circle the wagons and only protect a limited number of core protected areas , but we can and should do better , '' said World Wildlife Fund chief scientist Dr. Eric Dinerstein , a co-author of the study . 
`` We absolutely need to stop the bleeding , the poaching of tigers and their prey in core breeding areas , but we need to go much further and secure larger tiger landscapes before it is too late . '' 
Editor 's note : Nancy Grace 's new show on HLN , `` Nancy Grace : America 's Missing , '' is dedicated to finding 50 people in 50 days . 
As part of the effort , which relies heavily on audience participation , CNN.com news blog `` This Just In '' will feature the stories of the missing . 
This is the eighth case , and it will air on HLN at 9 p.m. ET . 
The disappearance of Ray Gricar is a mystery that continues to haunt the town of Bellefonte , Pennsylvania . 
Just eight months away from retirement as a 20-year prosecutor , Gricar vanished after taking a day off from work to take a scenic drive . 
When he was not heard from for 12 hours , Gricar 's girlfriend reported him missing on April 15 , 2005 . 
The next day , his red and white MINI Cooper was found in an antique mall parking lot -- his cell phone still in the car , but his sunglasses and keys missing . 
There have been many false sightings over the last five-plus years , but nothing to fully draw police to any one of the three theories they 've had since day one of Ray 's disappearance : Either he walked away from his life , met with foul play , or committed suicide . 
Police turned water cannons and tear gas on protesters in the early hours of Wednesday morning to try to break up anti-government demonstrations as the Interior Ministry warned it `` will not allow any provocative movement or a protest or rallies or demonstrations . '' 
In the heart of Cairo , where people were being beaten with sticks and fists and demonstrators were being dragged away amid tear gas . 
Witnesses saw security forces harassing journalists and photographers . 
Twelve of Australia 's most prominent citizens say it 's time to take the Union Jack off Australia 's flag . 
In a statement released by Ausflag , a nonprofit organization seeking `` a truly Australian flag , '' the dozen recipients of the `` Australian of the Year '' award say the keeping the Union Jack , flag of former colonial ruler Great Britain , as part of Australia 's flag prevents Australia from truly establishing its own national identity . 
The Union Jack is seen in the upper left-hand corner of Australia 's flag , with a large , seven-pointed white star below and the stars of the Southern Cross in the field of blue . 
FULL POST Kelley Williams-Bolar is escorted through the Summit County , Ohio , jail . 
An Ohio mother is in jail after being convicted of tampering with records to enroll her children in a better school district . 
Kelley Williams-Bolar , 40 , of Akron , illegally registered her two daughters at her father 's address in suburban Copley Township to get them into the Copley-Fairlawn school district rather than the urban Akron district , a jury decided . 
The Akron City school district met only four of 26 standards on the latest Ohio Department of Education Report Card and had a 76 % graduation rate . 
Copley-Fairlawn City Schools met 26 of 26 standards and had a 97.5 % graduation rate . 
Giffords was moved to The Institute for Rehabilitation and Research Memorial Hermann , also known as TIRR Memorial Hermann , according to Rebecca Moran , spokeswoman for Memorial Hermann . 
Giffords was shot in the head at a public event in Tucson , Arizona , on January 8 . 
Her upgraded condition was announced late Tuesday after Giffords ' husband , Mark Kelly , said she had watched an hour of television from her hospital bed . 
A burglary suspect attempts to escape from a moving police car . 
Samantha , where are you ? 
Your soldier boyfriend , evidently deployed in Afghanistan , wants to marry you . 
He 's proposed , Samantha . 
But we know you did n't get his phone message , because Diane Potts , a 44-year-old mother of three did . 
And she 's certain she does n't have a beau in Afghanistan who wants to marry her . 
According to British media reports , Potts came home last Thursday in the northen English city of Gateshead , checked her answering machine and heard this : `` I love you so much , I love you with all my heart and I was going to ask you , don t answer , obviously you can t answer , but will you marry me ? '' 
`` I could tell he was speaking from a phone booth , the line was quite crackly . 
I was shocked , and had to listen to it again before the message sunk in , '' Potts told the Daily Mail . 
`` I think he probably dialed incorrectly , and that his girlfriend s number is similar to mine . '' 
Unless Samantha or the soldier come forth after reports of the call were splashed across the British press Wednesday , it could be awhile before the soldier can make his pitch again . 
`` He said he would not be able to ring for another month , and would not be home for another three months , '' Potts told the Daily Mail . 
In the 90-second message , the soldier also talks about losing a comrade in recent fighting . 
`` One of my guys has just been blown up , so I feel sad , I really feel sad , '' he says on the tape . 
Samantha is also apparently pregnant . 
`` I can t wait until you give birth to my baby , my little soldier , '' the soldier says . 
`` I will do everything in my heart and I will try my hardest to fight to protect you . '' 
Then he 's back to the fight . 
`` I 've got to go back out here now . 
I love you with all my heart , do n't ever forget that , I love you , all right Samantha , I love you , bye , bye , '' the phone message ends . 
Potts says she hopes Samantha and the soldier connect soon , according to reports . 
`` I e-mailed the media to see if anybody could pick it up and do something about , '' she told Sky News Online . 
`` He had a regional accent , but we 're not sure if he lives up here , so it 's great to get coverage and find her . 
`` We just really want to find her . '' 
Review of Obama 's speech -- If you missed President Barack Obama 's speech to the nation Tuesday night , here 's a full transcript and video . 
The president touched on many familiar themes , and CNN 's iReporters tried to sum up all his points in a single tweet . 
How about the `` economy '' ? 
Obama said it 's headed in the right direction but the country 's priorities should change , especially when it comes to spending . 
The president called for increasing investments in key areas such as education and clean energy , but he also wants to make reductions in spending to help get America 's deficit under control and proposed a five-year domestic spending freeze . 
During another portion of the speech , he highlighted a small-business owner , describing the man 's story as a symbol of the American dream . 
Obama also spoke of U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords , who is recovering from a gunshot wound to the head after a gunman 's rampage at a political meet-and-greet this month in Tucson , Arizona . 
The congresswoman 's name was met with applause . 
On Wednesday , the president will take his message on the road , discussing opportunities for job growth in clean energy during a stop in Wisconsin . 
She s called the queen of rockabilly , has secured a place in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , and at age 73 she s teamed up with rocker Jack White to release a new album . 
White , a founder of the White Stripes , produced and arranged Jackson s new album , The Party Ain t Over , a disc bringing Jackson s growling country-style vocals to rock tunes . 
But she says White s work quickly won her over . 
I realized he wasn t wanting to change my style of singing at all . 
He just wanted me to have new , fresher material . 
He just wanted more of Wanda than I was used to putting out , she says . 
Jackson belted out Funnel of Love , with White on guitar , and then Conan asked Jackson about what it was like to tour with the king of rock 'n' roll , Elvis Presley , 50 years ago . 
They did more than tour , White interjected . 
He could sure kiss good was all Jackson offered . 
This was the seventh case . 
It 's been two years since the disappearance of Adji Desir , but police have not given up hope to find the boy alive . 
Police marked the second anniversary on January 10 by knocking on doors and distributing updated fliers with the then 6-year-old 's smiling face . 
A large triangle image on the fliers highlights what police aim to do by building a triangle of trust between residents of the Immokalee village , Adji 's parents and law enforcement . 
Did someone see something when the developmentally disabled boy vanished while playing outside his grandmother 's home with friends ? 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
