Boom on the La Belle Idee corrals oil in Timbalier Bay , La. . 
Thursday , July 29 , 2010 The oil is then soaked up with absorbent boom and disposed . 
-LRB- AP Photo\/Matt Stamey , The Houma Courier -RRB- AP NEW ORLEANS -- On shore , BP , Halliburton and Transocean are engaging in a billion-dollar blame game over the blown-out oil well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
At sea , they 're depending on each other to finally plug up the environmental disaster . 
Workers say the companies ' adversarial relationship before Congress , in public statements and maybe one day in the courts is n't a distraction at the site of the April 20 rig explosion , where Transocean equipment rented by BP is drilling relief wells that Halliburton will pump cement through to permanently choke the oil well . 
`` Simply , we are all too professional to allow disagreements between BP and any other organization to affect our behaviors , '' Ryan Urik , a BP well safety adviser working on the Development Driller II , which is drilling a backup relief well , said in an e-mail last week . 
But at least one expert said government probes and potential for lawsuits ca n't help but chill communication between the companies . 
Urik 's rig was in a holding pattern Saturday , awaiting progress by its sister rig , the Development Driller III , which is drilling the primary relief well and ran into a minor snag while preparing for a procedure known as a static kill that will make it easier to stop the gusher for good . 
The DDIII is clearing out debris that fell in the bottom of the relief well when crews had to evacuate the site last week because of Tropical Storm Bonnie . 
Once the debris is cleared , engineers plan to start as early as Monday on the static kill , which involves pumping mud and possibly cement into the blown-out well through the temporary cap . 
If it works , it will take less time to complete another procedure known as a bottom kill , the last step to permanently sealing the well by pumping mud and then cement in from the bottom , which could happen by mid - to late August . 
Workers know all about the clashes among their respective employers , `` but the crews have done an excellent job of focusing on getting these relief wells finished safely , '' Dennis Barber , a Transocean senior toolpusher aboard the DDII , said last week in an e-mail from the rig . 
The roles of the three companies in the relief kill effort are much the same as they were on the Deepwater Horizon , the exploratory rig that blew up soon after a temporary cement cap was placed on its well , killing 11 workers . 
The conflicts began almost as soon as oil started flowing . 
`` Transocean 's blowout preventer failed to operate , '' BP executive Lamar McKay said in Senate testimony in May , referring to the massive safety device atop the well that was supposed to bottle up the oil in an emergency . 
Transocean CEO Steven Newman shifted blame in the same hearing , saying `` all offshore oil and gas production projects begin and end with the operator , in this case BP . '' 
He also noted that Halliburton was responsible for encasing the well in cement , while Halliburton executive Tim Probert said his company 's work was completed 20 hours before the rig went up in flames . 
President Obama called the finger-pointing testimony a `` ridiculous spectacle . '' 
The Justice Department has opened civil and criminal investigations into the spill . 
Attorney General Eric Holder has indicated that BP is n't the only company that could be held liable . 
Kenneth Green , a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research think tank , said the investigations may have stifled communications between the government and companies -- and between the companies themselves . 
`` The problem is you 've chilled communications with the very people you need to solve the problem , '' he said . 
`` Once the Justice Department got involved , the lawyers were basically immediately in charge of the show . '' 
BP is trying to move forward from the disaster that sent anywhere from 94 million to 184 million gallons of oil spewing into the Gulf , announcing once the cap was finally in place that its vilified chief executive , Tony Hayward , will be leaving in October . 
He will be replaced by American Bob Dudley , who told reporters in Biloxi , Miss. , on Friday that it 's `` not too soon for a scaleback '' in the cleanup , and in areas where there is no oil , `` you probably do n't need to see people in hazmat suits on the beach . '' 
State waters closed by the spill have slowly reopened to fishing , most recently in Florida , where regulators on Saturday reopened a 23-mile area off of Escambia County to harvest saltwater fish . 
The area was closed June 14 and remains closed to the shrimp and crab harvesting pending additional testing . 
Oysters , clams and mussels were never included in the closure . 
In Alabama , the Department of Public Health lifted all swimming advisories for the Gulf of Mexico . 
Relatively little oil remains on the surface of the Gulf , leaving less for thousands of oil skimmers to do , though Plaquemines Parish President Billy Nungesser on Saturday offered to prove to Dudley that there 's still plenty of oil off the coast of Louisiana . 
`` Let me take him water-skiing out here and see if he comes up black , '' Nungesser said as he took a small group of reporters on a boat tour of an inlet at St. Mary 's Point , about an hour south of New Orleans . 
Fresh globs of thick oil saturated the marshes and brownish tar balls were visible in the water . 
Even in areas where no oil was visible on the surface , workers were pulling up heavily stained boom that had been placed there in recent days . 
Hundreds of lawsuits already have been filed in the aftermath of the explosion and spill . 
Rig workers are suing their employers . 
Idled fishermen , coastal property owners and tourism-dependent businesses are suing the companies . 
Environmental lawyers are suing government regulators . 
So far , the companies have n't sued each other . 
Christopher Ruppel , an energy expert and managing director of capital markets for the Execution Noble investment banking group , said the companies are probably waiting to get a full tally for the cleanup costs and a better read on the government probes . 
Meanwhile , he added , the companies are acting like `` porcupines working together . '' 
Henry reported from Atlanta . 
Associated Press Writers Harry R. Weber in Port Sulphur , La. , and Greg Bluestein in New Orleans contributed to this report . 
