BERKELEY , Calif. -- BP 's catastrophic oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is fueling opposition to the University of California , Berkeley 's research partnership with the British company , with activists and professors on the famously liberal campus calling for a severing of ties . 
The oil giant gave UC Berkeley a $ 500 million grant in 2007 to create the Energy Biosciences Institute , which works to develop new sources of plant-based fuel . 
The 10-year deal , believed to be the largest-ever corporate sponsorship of university research , has outraged many students and professors who worry the global oil company will exert too much influence over academic research and damage the university 's reputation . 
Now , as the spill devastates the Gulf Coast , some local activists and faculty members say it 's time to end the partnership . 
`` Our bottom line is the public good , and their bottom line is profit , '' said Ignacio Chapela , a UC Berkeley professor of environmental science . 
`` There comes a point where those positions are irreconcilable , and I think that point is now . '' 
On Friday , a group of activists staged an anti-BP demonstration next to the construction site where the university is building a new facility to house the research institute . 
They poured chocolate syrup on the sidewalk -- to represent the oil spill -- and held signs the read `` Berkeley Petroleum '' and `` Do you want BP Pollution in Berkeley ? '' 
`` Now that we can see what BP is responsible for in the Gulf , we demand that the contract between UC and BP be re-looked at , '' activist Stephanie Tang said , speaking to onlookers through a megaphone . 
But UC Berkeley officials say the institute has nothing to do with the Gulf spill , and the university has no plans to end its research partnership with BP . 
`` The horrible events in the Gulf should only strengthen our commitment to find alternatives to fossil fuels , '' said Graham Fleming , UC Berkeley 's vice chancellor of research . 
`` Why would anyone 's interest be served by stopping this research ? '' 
BP officials also say the company remains committed to funding the Berkeley-based research institute , as well as its other alternative energy research programs . 
`` The spill has n't changed our commitment to investing in biofuels and wind and solar development , '' said BP spokesman Tom Mueller . 
The BP-Berkeley partnership has stirred debate about corporate funding of academic research at a time when UC is grappling with deep cuts in state funding that have led to faculty furloughs , course cutbacks and steep tuition hikes . 
Critics say corporate money steers university resources toward certain types of research , and widens the financial disparity between faculty members in science and engineering and those in the humanities and social sciences . 
`` It creates an apartheid within the university between the haves and have-nots , '' said Miguel Altieri , a UC Berkeley entomology professor who is concerned about the environmental impact of biofuels . 
He recently wrote a newspaper article urging UC Berkeley officials to terminate the research partnership . 
UC Berkeley receives research grants from other corporations , mostly in the technology sector , but none are as big as the BP grant . 
Partnering with private industry helps university researchers get their ideas and discoveries out of the laboratory and into the real world , said UC 's Fleming . 
The Energy Biosciences Institute funds nearly 70 projects involving about 350 researchers at UC Berkeley and its two partner institutions -- Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign . 
The academic researchers determine what research to pursue , their participation is completely voluntary and their home institutions own the patents on their discoveries , university officials said . 
