LONDON , Feb. 10 -- Fred , Tom , Andy , Dennis , Eric , John , Stephen , Antonio and Paul ran British banks that lost billions of dollars . 
So they have been called in for a grilling by Nick , Graham , Colin , Jim , Stephen , Michael , Andrew , George , Mark , Peter , three Johns -- and a single , solitary Sally . 
The interrogation of the lions of British banking , many of whom have lost their jobs , began on live television Tuesday before the financial overseers of Parliament 's Treasury Select Committee . 
And in line with the usual math of the financial world , 18 of the 19 key people in the room were men . 
`` Clearly , something needs to change , '' said Howard Archer , chief European and U.K. economist at IHS Global Insight in London . 
`` You can argue that the men have made a right mess of it , and now the ladies should have a go . '' 
As the global financial crisis deepens , the first rumblings of a gender revolution are underway in an industry long controlled by men . 
Banks , hedge funds and other financial organizations that have led the international economy 's downward spiral are overwhelmingly male-dominated . 
The regulators and legislators assigned to oversee the financiers are also mostly men . 
`` There are quite a lot of alpha males with testosterone steaming out their ears , '' said Stuart Fraser , one of London 's top financial sector officials . 
In Britain , women account for just 12 percent of corporate directorships of companies on the FTSE 100 stock exchange index , according to a group of major British business leaders who have called for `` urgent action '' to increase the number of women at the top levels of business . 
In the United States , women hold 17 percent of the corporate directorships -- and 2.5 percent of the CEO posts -- in the finance and insurance industries , according to Catalyst , a U.S.-based nonprofit group that promotes opportunities for women in business . 
`` Maybe if we had some more women in the boardrooms , we may not have seen as much risk-taking behavior , '' said Hazel Blears , one of two female members of Prime Minister Gordon Brown 's cabinet who weighed in on the gender debate here this week . 
Harriet Harman , the minister for women and equality , blasted the banking world for `` discrimination and harassment '' against women , including a culture of using lap-dancing clubs for corporate entertainment . 
Amid the debate about whether the financial crisis would have happened , or been as severe , if more women had been in charge , there are signs that more women will be taking part in the global rescue . 
Multimedia reports on the struggle for equality around the globe . 
