The blowout preventer is being slowly raised to the surface BP has replaced a damanged blowout preventer that failed to stop oil from leaking into the Gulf of Mexico when a drilling rig exploded in April . 
The 300-ton device will be examined as part of the inquiry into the leak of 206m gallons of oil into the Gulf . 
The company said it had spent $ 8bn -LRB- # 5.2 bn -RRB- in clean-up costs and compensation to Gulf residents . 
Meanwhile , BP have said a ban on offshore oil drilling may impede its ability to pay for the damage . 
Plans to seal the well permanently were progressing well , BP said . 
The final sealing of the well is now expected to be completed later this month . 
On Friday , retired Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen , the US government 's incident commander , said the damaged blowout preventer had been successfully replaced by a new one , and there had been `` no observable release of hydrocarbons from the well head '' during the operation . 
The damaged machinery is being raised to the surface slowly , so as not to damage it further . 
If we are unable to keep those fields going , that is going to have a substantial impact on our cash flow '' End Quote David Nagel BP America executive He said the operation was `` an important milestone '' towards permanently blocking the leaking well , which caused one of the worst environmental disasters in history . 
BP has pledged $ 20bn to compensate Gulf residents harmed by the spill , and has pledged millions more to study the spill 's environmental impact and to promote tourism in the Gulf Coast states affected by the spill . 
But company officials have said the moratorium on offshore oil drilling , put into place by the Obama administration , had harmed its cash flow . 
`` If we are unable to keep those fields going , that is going to have a substantial impact on our cash flow , '' David Nagel , executive vice-president for BP America , told the New York Times . 
The moratorium `` makes it harder for us to fund things , fund these programs . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
