The highest-ranking US general in Iraq authorised the use of interrogation techniques that included sleep manipulation , stress positions and the use of dogs to `` exploit Arab fears '' of them , it emerged today . 
A memo signed by Lieutenant General Ricardo Sanchez authorised 29 interrogation techniques , including 12 that exceeded limits in the army 's own field manual and four that it admitted risked falling foul of international law , the Geneva conventions or accepted standards on the humane treatment of prisoners . 
The memo , dated September 14 2003 , also stated that the Iraq interrogation policy was modelled on the one used at Guantnamo Bay `` but modified for applicability to a theater -LRB- sic -RRB- of war in which the Geneva conventions apply '' . 
On Friday , a US court ordered the papers ' release under the American Freedom of Information Act , following a request by the American Civil Liberties Union . 
`` The memo clearly establishes that Gen Sanchez authorised unlawful interrogation techniques for use in Iraq , and , in particular , these techniques violate the Geneva conventions and the army 's own field manual governing interrogations , '' ACLU lawyer Amrit Singh said in a statement . 
`` He and other high-ranking officials who bear responsibility for the widespread abuse of detainees must be held accountable . '' 
The memo also authorised techniques to alter the environment of prisoners , such as adjusting temperatures or introducing unpleasant smells , in the full knowledge that `` some nations may view application of this technique in certain circumstances to be inhumane '' . 
Another technique , called `` fear-up harsh '' , aimed at `` significantly increasing the fear level of a detainee '' , was also given the green light . 
Yelling , loud music and light control were also cleared `` to create fear , disorientate -LRB- the -RRB- detainee and prolong capture shock '' . 
The existence of the memo had been widely rumored in the wake of the Abu Ghraib prison scandal over the abuse of detainees by US guards . 
The US administration has maintained any abuse was the result of improper individual action and was not sanctioned by leaders . 
The memo also laid out guidance for when the controversial interrogation techniques could be used . 
It stated there should be `` a reasonable basis to believe that the detainee possesses critical intelligence '' . 
Dogs should be muzzled and under the control of a military dog handler `` to prevent contact with -LRB- the -RRB- detainee '' . 
Gen Sanchez ordered that his personal approval should be gained before the most controversial techniques were used . 
He has denied that he gave that permission . 
The ACLU has a lawsuit pending against Gen Sanchez alleging direct responsibility for the torture and abuse of detainees in US military custody . 
The Abu Ghraib scandal , in which US forces physically abused and sexually humiliated Iraqi prisoners at a jail on the outskirts of Baghdad , occurred on during Gen Sanchez 's command . 
Gen George Casey replaced him as top commander in Iraq nine months ago . 
The ACLU said the Pentagon initially refused to release the memo on national security grounds . 
Click here to read the memo . 
