The U.S. federal government began evacuating oil spill cleanup vessels from the Macondo well Thursday in advance of a storm hitting the Gulf of Mexico region . 
DEVELOPING : Specialized boats were being moved out of the path of a tropical storm system currently over the Bahamas `` to ensure that oil recovery operations can resume as soon as possible after a storm , '' according to a statement from the Obama administration 's command center in New Orleans . 
The storm has a 50 percent chance of becoming a tropical cyclone , and will likely move westward over the Gulf of Mexico , The National Hurricane Center said . 
Some on-land equipment is also being transported to higher-lying areas to prevent the risk of water damage in the event of flooding . 
`` There will be no reductions in effort , urgency or commitment even as we sustain the long-term relief effort , '' Rear Adm. Paul Zukunft said . 
BP 's Macondo well , currently plugged from gushing oil for the first time in three months , is located 50 miles off the coast of Louisiana . 
This is a developing story . 
Refresh page for updates . 
Last complete story appears below : MIAMI -- A tropical depression racing toward the Gulf of Mexico Thursday increased pressure on BP and the U.S. government to decide whether to evacuate dozens of ships at the site of the ruptured oil well . 
The National Hurricane Center in Miami said a cluster of thunderstorms in the Bahamas formed into a tropical depression Thursday morning . 
It could reach the spill site within two and a half days , said Lexion Avila , a senior hurricane specialist . 
She said they were awaiting an evacuation order for key vessels . 
Work on plugging the well is at a standstill just days before the expected completion of a relief tunnel to permanently throttle the free-flowing crude . 
Worse yet , the government 's spill chief said foul weather could require reopening the cap that has contained the oil for nearly a week , allowing oil to gush into the sea again for days while engineers wait out the storm . 
`` This is necessarily going to be a judgment call , '' said retired Coast Guard Adm. Thad Allen , who was waiting to see how the storm developed before deciding whether to order any of the ships to leave . 
BP spokesman Scott Dean said Thursday morning that no decisions had been made yet . 
Crews had planned to spend Wednesday and Thursday reinforcing with cement the last few feet of the relief tunnel that will be used to pump mud into the gusher and kill it once and for all . 
But BP put the task on hold and instead placed a temporary plug called a storm packer deep inside the tunnel , in case it has to be abandoned until the storm passes . 
`` What we did n't want to do is be in the middle of an operation and potentially put the relief well at some risk , '' BP vice president Kent Wells said . 
If the work crews are evacuated , it could be two weeks before they can resume the effort to kill the well . 
That would upset BP 's timetable , which called for finishing the relief tunnel by the end of July and plugging the blown-out well by early August . 
Scientists have been scrutinizing underwater video and pressure data for days , trying to determine if the capped well is holding tight or in danger of rupturing and causing an even bigger disaster . 
If the storm prevents BP from monitoring the well , the cap may simply be reopened , allowing oil to spill into the water , Allen said . 
BP and government scientists were meeting to discuss whether the cap could be monitored from shore . 
As the storm drew closer , boat captains hired by BP for skimming duty were sent home and told they would n't be going back out for five or six days , said Tom Ard , president of the Orange Beach Fishing Association in Alabama . 
In Florida , crews removed booms intended to protect waterways in the Panhandle from oil . 
High winds and storm surge could carry the booms into sensitive wetlands . 
Also , Shell Oil began evacuating empman for Transocean , the owner of the rig leased by BP , confirmed the existence of the reports to The Associated Press . 
`` As part of Transocean 's unwavering commitment to safety and rigorous maintenance discipline on all our rigs , we proactively commissioned the safety survey and the rig assessment review , '' Transocean spokesman Lou Colasuonno said in an e-mail early Thursday . 
`` A fair reading of those detailed third-party reviews indicates clearly that while certain areas could be enhanced , overall rig maintenance met or exceeded regulatory and industry standards and the Deepwater Horizon 's safety management was strong and a culture of safety was robust on board the rig . '' 
The `` Great Snowstorm '' came to an end . 
This storm produced the heaviest snowfall over the largest area of any storm studied by weather historian David Ludlum . 
Accumulations exceeded 10 inches from the Ohio Valley across much of the Atlantic coast north of Georgia . 
Washington , DC reported 13 inches with 18 inches at Baltimore , Maryland , 18 to 36 inches near Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , 15 to 20 inches at new York city , and 20 to 30 inches over southern New England . 
The second severe arctic outbreak of the year hit the United States . 
A vast anticyclone from British Columbia to Louisiana , was centered over Kansas at 30.50 inches . 
The zero line went into Texas with the temperature at Amarillo falling from 55 degrees to 1 degree below zero and Oklahoma city dropping from 62 degrees to 10 degrees . 
A winter storm produced 61 inches of snow at Rye , Colorado , and wind gusts to 100 mph in Utah . 
The storm then spread heavy snow from the Texas Panhandle to Indiana . 
Tulia , Texas received 16 inches of snow , and up to 14 inches blanketed western Oklahoma . 
A powerful Pacific storm battered the coast of southern California . 
Winds gusting to 65 mph uprooted trees in the San Diego area , while Los Angeles recorded a barometric pressure reading of 29.25 inches of mercury -- the lowest in 100 years of official record keeping . 
Heavy snow fell across the Prince Williams Sound area and the Susitna Valley of southern Alaska . 
Valdez was buried under 64.9 inches of snow in less than two days , including a record 47.5 inches in 24 hours . 
Up to 44 inches of snow was reported in the Susitna Valley . 
The heavy snow sank a half dozen vessels in the harbor . 
Bitterly cold air prevailed across the great lakes and the northeastern U.S. Alpena , Michigan dipped to 28 degrees below zero to tie its record low for January . 
Rochester , New York plunged to 17 degrees below zero for a new record low temperature for January . 
Boston , Massachusetts mean temperature for the day was only 2 degrees -- the city 's coldest day in 26 years . 
Watertown , New York was the cold spot in the nation , with a morning low of 43 degrees below zero . 
Williston , North Dakota recorded 12.6 inches of snow in 24 hour for its greatest 24 hour snowfall on record . 
The temperature plunged to 50 degrees below zero at Big Black River , Maine for the state 's coldest temperature on record . 
