July 20 : Jonathan Coddington , Associate Director for Research and Collections at the Museum of Natural History , looks through some of the invertebrate specimens at the Smithsonian Museum Support Center , in Suitland , Md. . 
The museum complex holds a complete set of the invertebrate species that live in the Gulf of Mexico . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- SUITLAND , Md. -- Scientists studying the massive BP oil spill are turning to a vast collection of preserved animals at the Smithsonian to see what kind of changes the oil spill may wreak among life forms in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The museum and research complex in Washington holds the most complete set of invertebrate species from the Gulf , offering scientists studying the spill 's effects a look at life before the gusher began . 
A researcher pulling a creature from the Gulf can use the Smithsonian 's collection to compare its size , body chemistry and other characteristics to a specimen collected before the catastrophe . 
Smithsonian scientists began putting their collection to use just days after the oil spill , creating a digital map showing where each specimen was collected in the Gulf . 
Information from the collection could help settle conflicts about how much damage the spill caused , said Jonathan Coddington , head of research and collections at the National Museum of Natural History . 
`` Shrimpers are going to say , ` We 're just not seeing any big shrimp any longer . ' 
Then we 'll go back to these collections and say the average size of shrimp prior to the spill was this , '' Coddington said , surrounded by thousands of jars containing worms and other Gulf creatures preserved in alcohol in a suburban Maryland warehouse . 
`` It will come out which ever way it comes out . 
Facts help everybody . '' 
Requests for loans of specimens and other information about the Gulf creatures have spiked since the April 20 explosion on a drilling rig leased by BP PLC unleashed the spill , said collections manager Cheryl Bright . 
It has also increased the urgency of efforts to catalog tens of thousands of specimens from the Gulf . 
The collection includes more than 333,000 cataloged containers of invertebrates collected in the Gulf by the U.S. Minerals Management Service over the past 30 years . 
Another 39,000 jars are partially inventoried , though as many as 120,000 more have n't been inventoried at all . 
The MMS , which recently changed its name to the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , Regulation and Enforcement , is considering transferring hundreds of thousands of dollars to the Smithsonian to help speed up the process , Coddington said . 
Last month , Coddington described the backlog to a House panel and told them it would cost $ 9 million to finish the inventory of all Gulf specimens . 
He said in an interview the government has a responsibility to pay for the work . 
`` It 's not a silver bullet for understanding the impact of the oil spill . 
But it 's a chunk of one , '' he said . 
The MMS conducted environmental surveys of the waters for years , specifically to help predict the impact of future gas and oil explorations . 
They began turning over the extensive collection to the Smithsonian for cataloging and safekeeping in 1979 . 
Biodiversity scientist Tom Shirley at Texas A&M 's Harte Research Institute for Gulf of Mexico Studies said the Smithsonian serves as a repository for the world 's ecosystems because its collection is so large . 
As research funding and projects ramp up , he said , many samples will be pulled from the Gulf that will be unfamiliar species . 
`` The big question will always be what 's the species of those animals , '' he said . 
`` Some things are obvious : You can identify them from books and publications . 
Other things you ca n't . 
The Smithsonian will come into play . '' 
Shirley said one of his former students , Peter Etnoyer , is on a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration cruise in the Gulf to study deep sea corals after the oil spill . 
Etnoyer 's research draws extensively on on the Smithsonian 's coral collection . 
Still , scientists ca n't rely on the Smithsonian alone for a picture of the Gulf before the spill , said Monty Graham of the Dauphin Island Sea Lab in Alabama . 
Marine centers in the region also have vast data on variations in plankton and other sea life from the days and years before the spill , for example . 
`` I think everybody needs to be asked what they have to contribute to painting this picture , '' Graham said . 
`` It 's a huge blank canvas . '' 
