Apr. 21 : Fire boat crews battle the blazing remnants of the offshore oil rig Deepwater Horizon . 
Coast Guard via AP NEW YORK -- Oil companies are trying to assure Washington it 's prepared for the next big spill . 
ExxonMobil , Chevron Corp. , Conoco Phillips and Shell Oil said Wednesday they 've agreed to pool $ 1 billion to form a new company that would respond to offshore oil spills at up to 10,000 feet underwater . 
The system would deploy equipment that could arrive at a spill within days and be fully operational within weeks , the companies said . 
Members of Congress investigating the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig have criticized the oil industry for being ill-prepared for a major oil spill , and regulators want the industry to develop a thorough spill containment plan . 
Meanwhile , the White House has imposed a moratorium on deepwater drilling , and oil company share prices have plunged . 
Stricter regulations are also likely on the way for offshore drillers . 
Michael Bromwich , director of the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management , the federal agency that oversees offshore drilling , said the announcement was encouraging . 
`` Ultimately we are exploring the changes and reforms that need to be made in deepwater safety standards , spill response and containment , '' Bromwich said in a statement . 
`` But steps like these move in the right direction . '' 
BP , whose blown-out well has leaked as much as 180 million gallons of oil into the Gulf , was informed of the venture but it has n't joined , a spokesperson for Exxon said . 
BP did n't answer calls to comment about the new response system . 
The British oil giant struggled for nearly three months to plug the well . 
It tried dropping a metal containment box over the gusher and shooting garbage down the drill hole to block the oil from seeping out . 
After three months , a second containment cap now seems to be working after a smaller cap only captured some of the oil . 
All these attempts were introduced with the caution that they 'd never been tried a mile underwater , where BP 's well was gushing oil . 
Exxon and the other companies on Wednesday promised their equipment will be tested beforehand . 
The new system draws on lessons learned from BP 's efforts and uses some similar equipment . 
The companies say the equipment should n't break down under extreme pressures and depths . 
The response system will include an array of underwater equipment designed to create a permanent connection and seal over a busted well . 
It will separate oil from gas and bring it to the surface where the gas can be burned off and the oil can be stored on tankers . 
The companies say the system could capture up to 100,000 barrels -- 4.2 million gallons -- of oil in depths of up to 10,000 feet , twice as deep as the waters BP was operating in . 
The four were not involved in the Gulf oil spill , but each rely on offshore drilling to generate significant revenue . 
Shell and Chevron have prominent drilling operations in the Gulf . 
The system 's similarities to what BP has used concerns U.S. Rep. Edward Markey , D-Mass . 
, one of the harshest critics of the industry 's disaster planning . 
While the new system could be deployed rapidly , `` the oil companies must do better than BP 's current apparatus with a fresh coat of paint , '' he said . 
He said the announcement of the containment system could be a positive step , `` but it can not be the industry 's last , '' adding that what 's needed are technologies `` that will prevent fatal blowouts in the first place . '' 
Rex Tillerson , chairman and chief executive officer of ExxonMobil , who has been critical of BP 's handling of the well prior to the explosion , echoed that sentiment in a statement announcing the new system . 
`` If we all do our jobs properly , this system will never be used , '' he said . 
`` The extensive experience of industry shows that when the focus remains on safe operations and risk management , tragic incidents like the one we are witnessing in the Gulf of Mexico today should not occur , '' Tillerson said . 
After numerous hearings on the safety of offshore drilling , the House passed legislation Wednesday that more than doubles the federal money for research in new cleanup methods and technologies . 
Lawmakers passed a second bill that promotes research on devices like blowout preventers that can prevent accidents . 
All deepwater exploration has come to a halt in the Gulf following the April 20 rig explosion . 
The Obama administration has banned deepwater drilling until more research can be done on whether its safe for the environment . 
The industry has warned of an exodus of rigs out of the Gulf , but so far that has n't happened . 
Only two rigs , both owned by Diamond Offshore , have been moved to foreign waters . 
`` It 's not so simple moving a rig . 
It takes a lot of time and money , '' Argus Research analyst Phil Weiss said . 
At the same time , once a rig does move from the Gulf it is n't likely to make a quick return , he said . 
According to their joint statement , the four companies will create a nonprofit organization called the Marine Well Containment Company to operate and maintain the response system . 
ExxonMobil will lead the effort and other companies will be invited to participate . 
ExxonMobil spokeswoman Karen Matusic said oil executives have been meeting over the past weeks to devise ways to handle another spill . 
About 40 engineers from the four companies have been working in Houston on this solution . 
Exxon and its engineers have worked with BP on its spill response , but the British company was n't invited to join the new venture . 
But the system would benefit if BP joined , Matusic said . 
`` Certainly BP can lend their expertise on what they 're discovering now as they 're containing the spill , '' she said . 
`` We certainly want to bring them in . '' 
