February 09 , 2011 | By Josh Levs , CNN Human Rights Watch says violent crackdowns on recent protests are not limited to the uprising in Egypt -LRB- pictured -RRB- . 
Numerous Arab governments have used violence to quash demonstrations in the wake of mass protests in Egypt , a leading human rights group says in a new report . 
Human Rights Watch , which says it conducts `` rigorous , objective investigations , '' issued the report Tuesday alleging clampdowns by Palestinian leadership , Saudi Arabia , Sudan , Syria , the United Arab Emirates , and Yemen . 
`` Images of the uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt have mesmerized the Arab public but have terrified their rulers , '' Sarah Leah Whitson , the group 's Middle East and North Africa director , said in a statement . 
`` They have responded with their usual mix of repression and intimidation to nip the buds of any wider democratic blossoming . '' 
Human Rights Watch said the Palestinian Authority , which controls the West Bank , `` used violence against peaceful demonstrators '' during a rally last week in which people were supporting the Egyptian protesters . 
`` Witnesses told Human Rights Watch that regular police and ` special forces , ' identifiable by their uniforms , punched , kicked , and detained participants , as well as at least two journalists and a Human Rights Watch research assistant , '' the report said . 
The report added that on January 30 , the Palestinian Authority shut down a solidarity demonstration . 
Hamas , which controls Gaza , `` quashed a solidarity demonstration on January 31 , '' Human Rights Watch said . 
`` The police arbitrarily arrested six women and threatened to arrest another 20 people , who had responded to a call on Facebook for a demonstration , as soon as they arrived at the Park of the Unknown Soldier in Gaza City . '' 
CNN reported on the January 31 demonstration , in which Hamas security broke up the event and detained some female protesters . 
CNN has also reported on the Palestinian Authority breaking up two attempts to stage small rallies . 
The Palestinian Authority said participants did not have government permission for the rallies . 
Witnesses said participants were pushed and shoved , and some were detained . 
Later , both the Palestinian Authority and Hamas allowed some events supporting solidarity with Egypt to take place . 
On Saturday , Palestinians demonstrating in support of Egyptian anti-government protesters , at an approved event in Ramallah , were forcibly dispersed when a few dozen men in civilian clothes disrupted the protest . 
