2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
Ghonim , who now refers to himself as an Egyptian activist , describes himself as Head of Marketing Middle East & North Africa at Google on his LinkedIn.com profile . 
His identity as a Google employee has helped bring attention to his role in the protests , but he was not in Egypt on business . 
That was incredible ; did the Earth shake ????? Zzzzz . 
Zzzzz We need a lot more brave individuals like Wael in the world ! 
Oh my goodness , Mohamad and Carlos from mex , what language . 
I am so shocked . 
You should n't be , Phunnie boy . 
After all , they are Tea Partiers and followers of Sarah Palin !!! February 10 , 2011 at 7:53 am | Report abuse | Is that right silly boy ? 
And all this time I thought Sarah was your mistress . 
And so should Kurdistan , but the U.S. and Turkey , due their excessive greed , just wo n't let it happen , tragically enough . 
February 10 , 2011 at 10:58 am | Report abuse | @carlos de mex : Donde estas pinche puto . 
Por favor chupa mi verga . 
Google has so much to offer , right ? 
Have a nice day . 
Mr. Ghonim do n't stop now . 
You need to be involved in the rebuilding process . 
Your clear passion for your people , intelligence , and eloquent manner will be an asset to your people . 
Good luck and God speed young man ! 
I agree with Daniel . 
This Ghonim obviously put his marketing skills to great use in kick starting an over due protest . 
Iran , you 're next baby ! 
@Mohamad : You are such a child . 
Grow up !! Now , make like a tree and leave . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival Triumph cruise ship that experienced fire in engine room being towed to Mobile , AL instead of Mexico #CNN Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
ly\/U6vgfT 6:30 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Looking for a good car for bad winter weather ? 
Check these out : cnnmon . 
