By the CNN Wire Staff Freed Google executive tells crowd , `` This country is our country '' Wael Ghonim emerges as the face of the uprising Crowds swell in Tahrir Square in day 15 of protests The vice president announces a committee will oversee constitutional reforms Cairo , Egypt -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Galvanized by the emotional words of a freed Google executive , thousands of Egyptians jammed Cairo 's Tahrir Square on Tuesday , some for the first time , dismissing the embattled regime 's pledges of constitutional reforms . 
The crowd swelled as the 15th day of protests progressed . 
A second front sprouted as several hundred protesters filled the city block where Egypt 's parliament building stands . 
Wael Ghonim , the Google executive who was seized January 28 and released Monday , may be emerging as a face for Egypt 's uprising . 
After a television interview that inspired protesters , Ghonim spoke from a makeshift stage Tuesday in Tahrir Square . 
`` This country , I have said for a long time , this country is our country , and everyone has a right to this country , '' he said . 
`` You have a voice in this country . 
This is not the time for conflicting ideas , or factions , or ideologies . 
This is the time for us to say one thing only , ` Egypt is above all else . ' '' 
His words prompted the protesters to begin chanting `` Egypt above all else . '' 
Freed Prisoners Tell Their Stories Getting to the truth in Egypt Journalists in Egypt reveal plight `` I apologize to you , I am so tired , '' Ghonim said . 
`` Today we are emphasizing our voice . '' 
As he walked off the stage , Ghonim told a reporter in English , `` We do n't care . 
We are going to do what we 've got to do . '' 
Ghonim , a Dubai-based marketing executive , is the administrator of a Facebook page called `` We are all Khaled Said , '' named after an Alexandria activist who was allegedly beaten to death by police . 
The page is widely credited with calling the first protest January 25 . 
Another Facebook page created to authorize Ghonim to speak on behalf of the protesters has 150,000 fans . 
`` I came today for the first time -LRB- Tuesday -RRB- , '' said Dalia , a protester in Tahrir Square . 
She did not give her last name . 
`` Nothing will make this regime go unless we keep on coming and keep on coming . '' 
Earlier , Vice President Omar Suleiman announced on state television that a committee has been authorized to amend Egypt 's constitution to allow for free , fair and competitive elections . 
The amendments , Suleiman said , would be drafted by an independent judicial commission . 
He said he had discussed a number of reforms in recent talks with opposition representatives . 
Among them were greater freedom for the media , the release of detainees and the lifting of the continuous state of emergency . 
He also assured Egyptians that they should not fear arrest for speaking their minds . 
But with the credibility of the regime in serious question , the statements from President Hosni Mubarak 's deputy fell short . 
Real change , say Mubarak 's foes , can only come with Mubarak 's immediate departure and an overhaul of the constitution , not amendments here and there . 
`` That 's not good enough , '' said Mohammed Habib , a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood , a key opposition party in Egypt that is outlawed by the constitution on grounds that it is based on religion . 
`` The first thing that the regime should do is for the president to leave , '' he said . 
`` The government is dividing the opposition through these announcements . '' 
Asem Abedine , head of the pan-Arab Nassiri party , said Mubarak is merely angling for time . 
`` The government is only making these announcements to avoid making real changes demanded by the people , '' he said . 
`` The emergency laws should be lifted . '' 
Mubarak has ruled Egypt with an iron hand since 1981 , aided by an emergency decree that gave him sweeping powers . 
How wealthy is Egypt 's Mubarak ? 
Since the protests began January 25 , he has appointed a vice president for the first time , reshuffled his Cabinet and announced that he wo n't seek a new term in September . 
However , the constitution remains , reshaped in 2005 and again in 2007 to help retain power for the ruling National Democratic Party . 
It has been at the heart of the dialogue between the government and some opposition representatives , who want several articles amended to make way for greater political participation . 
The demonstrations , powered by the stamina of those who have put everything at risk for change , got an extra shot of energy Tuesday from Ghonim 's emotional interview on Egypt 's Dream TV . 
He said four people surrounded him at 1 a.m. on January 28 . 
`` I yelled , ` Help me , ' but of course I knew these were security forces . 
`` The thing that tortured me the most when I was in detention was that people would find out that I was the admin -LRB- of the Facebook page -RRB- , '' he said . 
`` Because I am not the hero -- I was writing with the keyboard on the internet and my life was not exposed to any danger . '' 
He walked out of the Dream TV interview in tears after being shown photos of those killed in the uprising . 
`` I want to say to every mother and every father that lost his child , I am sorry , but this is not our fault , '' he said before leaving . 
`` I swear to God this is not our fault . 
It is the fault of everyone who was holding onto power greedily and would not let it go . '' 
But while the crowds remained large and boisterous , opposition voices have started to splinter . 
Some , including members of the self-declared Council of the Wise , have said they do n't agree that Mubarak 's immediate departure would be the best thing for Egypt . 
Arab League Secretary-General Amre Moussa , who was among protesters last week , told CNN that Mubarak should be allowed a `` dignified exit '' in September . 
`` I believe that the president should stay until the end of his mandate . 
The consensus is growing on this point because of certain constitutional considerations , '' Moussa said . 
State television in Egypt is suggesting that the United States is helping fund the protests , which -- it says -- have been infiltrated by Hamas , Hezbollah , Iran and others . 
The divisions within the opposition raised fears that they could work to the regime 's advantage . 
`` The danger at the moment is that this opposition , which a few days ago seemed to unite , is now being divided , '' said Cairo-based analyst Issandr El Amrani . 
`` The regime is using its tried and true tactic of divide and conquer . '' 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman , Salma Abdelaziz , Amir Ahmed , Frederik Pleitgen , Saad Abedine , Caroline Faraj and Jill Dougherty contributed to this report . 
