By Patricia Sellers February 9 , 2011 : 2:42 PM ET In Monday 's Postcard , Amany Eid , an Egyptian woman who was never politically active before , wrote about joining the demonstrations in Cairo 's Tahrir Square . 
Now we see that Eid is just one of hundreds of thousands of Egyptians who are finding their voices for the first time in their lives . 
Yesterday 's demonstrations in Tahrir Square were the largest yet and were relatively peaceful , thanks in part to the Egyptian Army . 
While it is n't the army 's intention to help the youth-driven uprising gain ground , Kissinger Associates ' Jami Miscik explains , some of its actions are helping them continue the protests in a mostly violence-free setting . 
That leads to the swelling of their numbers . 
Eid , who participated in the Fortune-U.S. State Department Global Women Leaders Mentoring program last year , was back with the masses at Tahrir Square yesterday . 
Here is her report . 
- Patricia Sellers The numbers have increased to the extent that we can not walk without bumping into people . 
We had to walk sideways . 
Previously , Army checkpoints were to make sure that the protesters do not have weapons or explosions going into Tahrir . 
Their role now is also to prevent the pro-Mubarak protesters from entering into Tahrir to avoid clashes with the anti- Mubarak protesters . 
Yesterday I went into Tahrir from another direction and went through the `` citizens checkpoint , '' where citizens check IDs and look for weapons . 
There is a physical search as well . 
A friend of a friend is a police officer , completely anti-regime . 
He wanted to come and protest as well as donate medicine . 
At the checkpoint , he showed them his ID ; it has your occupation on it . 
It said `` police officer . '' 
They asked him to leave Tahrir -LRB- as big as it is -RRB- or he would be escorted by the Army ! 
-LRB- No police patrols or officers are there in Tahrir . -RRB- 
He left , to avoid being thrown out or beaten ! 
He did not utter a word to us or even say goodbye . 
For the latest on the most influential women in business , philanthropy , government , and the arts , like us on Facebook . 
Profile in The Washington Post Sheryl Sandberg : Do n't leave before you leave Gina Bianchini The Steve Jobs route to building a startup Founder of Ning and Mightybell Fortune editor-at-large Pattie Sellers has written some of Fortune 's most talked-about cover stories , including '' Oprah 's Next Act , '' '' Can Meg Whitman Save California ? '' '' 
The $ 100 Billion Woman '' -LRB- on Melinda Gates -RRB- , and '' Remodeling Martha '' -LRB- on Martha Stewart -RRB- . 
She has helped oversee Fortune 's `` Most Powerful Women in Business '' package every year since its launch in 1998 . 
Sellers co-chairs the annual Fortune Most Powerful Women Summit , the preeminent gathering of women leaders in business , philanthropy , government , academia , and the arts . 
She also oversees various MPW programs that enable women leaders to extend their influence and empower the next generation . 
These include the Fortune-U.S. State Department Global Women Leaders Mentoring Partnership and Fortune Most Powerful Women Entrepreneurs . 
Pattie grew up in Allentown , Penn. , graduated from the University of Virginia , and started at Fortune in 1984 . 
Her blog , Postcards , is about how power players lead , manage others , and navigate their careers . 
S. State Department Global Women Leaders Mentoring Partnership brings rising-star women from countries around the world to the U.S. for three-week mentorships with participants of the annual Fortune Most Powerful Women Summit - among them Ursula Burns of Xerox , Laura Lang of Time Inc. , Marissa Mayer of Yahoo , and Tory Burch . 
Market indexes are shown in real time , except for the DJIA , which is delayed by two minutes . 
All times are ET . 
Disclaimer LIBOR Warning : Neither BBA Enterprises Limited , nor the BBA LIBOR Contributor Banks , nor Reuters , can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of BBA LIBOR . 
Morningstar : 2013 Morningstar , Inc. . 
Disclaimer The Dow Jones IndexesSM are proprietary to and distributed by Dow Jones & Company , Inc. and have been licensed for use . 
All content of the Dow Jones IndexesSM 2013 is proprietary to Dow Jones & Company , Inc. . 
The market data is the property of Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. and its licensors . 
FactSet Research Systems Inc. 2013 . 
Most stock quote data provided by BATS . 
