SANAA\/CAIRO | Fri Apr 8 , 2011 6:16 pm BST SANAA\/CAIRO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Protests erupted across much of the Arab world on Friday , the Muslim day of prayer , with demonstrators killed in Syria and Yemen while Egyptians staged one of the biggest rallies since President Hosni Mubarak 's fall . 
Syrian security forces killed 17 pro-democracy demonstrators and two were shot dead in Yemen . 
In Saudi Arabia local Shi'ites protested in the oil-producing east to call for the withdrawal of Saudi troops from neighbouring Bahrain . 
In Cairo 's Tahrir Square , perhaps the spiritual home of the Arab protest movement , crowds demanded Mubarak 's prosecution as discontent with military rule grows ; but in Oman heavy security prevented a planned demonstration after Friday prayers . 
Friday has become a peak day of protest for many Arabs since popular demands for freedom , democracy and an end to corruption began in Tunisia late last year and spread across the region . 
In Syria , security forces opened fire on thousands of demonstrators in the southern city of Deraa as protests against President Bashar al-Assad flared in several towns . 
A hospital source and an activist reported 17 dead in Deraa , where protests began last month before spreading across the country . 
`` There were snipers on roofs . 
The injured are being taken to homes . 
No one trusts putting his relative in a hospital in these circumstances , '' said a witness , who spoke to Reuters by telephone . 
Authorities have blamed armed groups for the violence , and state television broadcast footage of masked gunmen in plain clothes it said fired at security forces and civilians alike . 
It said a policeman and an ambulance driver were killed . 
Syria has prevented other media reporting from Deraa . 
In eastern Syria , ethnic Kurds demonstrated for reform despite Assad 's offer this week to ease rules which bar many of them from obtaining citizenship , activists said . 
Violence also broke out in Yemen as crowds demanded the overthrow of President Ali Abdullah Saleh . 
Two people were shot dead and 25 wounded by gunfire in the southern city of Taiz , hospital sources said . 
But Saleh rejected any aspect of a Gulf Arab mediation plan for talks with the opposition that would aim to end his 32-year rule . 
`` The Yemeni people are free to accept mediation from their brothers and friends , but they reject taking orders or intervention , '' Saleh said in a statement . 
Elsewhere , the day of protest was more peaceful . 
Tens of thousands of Egyptians in Tahrir Square demanded Mubarak 's prosecution and accused the military of being too slow to root out corruption from his era . 
`` Oh , Field Marshal , we 've been very patient ! '' 
chanted some of the demonstrators in the square , hub of the movement that toppled Mubarak on February 11 and left the army in charge , led by Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi . 
Friday 's protest had swollen by early afternoon to at least 100,000 , indicating growing frustration with the army which has enjoyed broad support since it took control of the country . 
`` It 's a strong message that the revolution is not over yet and is still going on and will not quieten down before its goals are realized , '' said Hassan Nafaa , a professor of political science and a prominent figure in the reform movement . 
Hundreds of Saudi Shi'ites also peacefully demanded that Saudi troops return from Bahrain , and called for political rights and freedoms at home , demonstrators said . 
The protests -- with riot police nowhere to be seen -- were held in the main Shi'ite Muslim center of Qatif , where demonstrators , some of them women , waved Bahraini as well as Saudi flags , and the nearby village of Awamiya . 
Banners read `` respect the rights to demonstrate '' and `` freedom of expression and opinion . '' 
Saudi Arabia sent 1,000 troops last month to Bahrain , a Sunni Muslim monarchy , to help contain pro-democracy protests led by that Gulf Arab country 's Shi'ite majority . 
Heavy security prevented demonstrations after Friday prayers in the Omani city of Sohar , where protesters camped out for over a month before forces moved them out last week . 
Checkpoints were set up across the city with dozens of armored vehicles blocking access to protest areas . 
Residents ' names were checked against a list and access to mosques was restricted , while a helicopter flew overhead , witnesses said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Mohamed Sudam , Erika Solomon , Khaled al-Mahdital , Nick Macfie , Saleh Al-Shaibany , Mariam Karouny , Yara Bayoumy , Khaled Yacoub Oweis , Jason Benham and Suleiman al-Khalidi ; writing by David Stamp ; editing by Ralph Boulton -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
