TOKYO | Fri Apr 8 , 2011 1:30 pm BST TOKYO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Japan announced power reduction targets for Tokyo and north Japan that will require big manufacturers and other large-scale users to cut peak summer consumption by one-fourth as it vowed to avoid rolling blackouts that could hobble the economy . 
The trade ministry also called for 20 percent power cuts by small-scale industrial power users served by quake-hit Tokyo Electric Power and Tohoku Electric Power , while household cuts were set at 15 to 20 percent , in draft proposals released on Friday . 
The government estimates that , with a particularly hot summer like last year 's , peak power production could fall short of demand by as much as 18,300 MW in the two utilities ' service area -- or about one-fourth of total demand -- after a massive March 11 quake and tsunami shut down several big nuclear and thermal power stations . 
With the reductions , to be implemented from July to September , the Tokyo area and northern Japan would in principle be able to avoid rolling blackouts , Trade Minister Banri Kaieda told a news conference , although that option would be held in reserve as a last resort to forestall an unexpected blackout for the entire service area if demand threatens to surpass supply . 
Tokyo Electric imposed rolling blackouts last month after the quake , which took out 23 percent of its generating capacity . 
The blackouts dealt a severe blow to activity in a region that generates 40 percent of GDP in the world 's third-largest economy . 
`` This curb in power demand must not lead to damage to Japan 's economic activity , '' Kaieda said . 
`` I hope firms in western Japan would boost their economic activity so that Japan 's economy as a whole will not shrink . '' 
Companies may also shift some of their output abroad to meet the targets , said Shigeru Suehiro , senior economist at the Institution of Energy Economics , Japan . 
Tokyo Electric , still struggling with a prolonged safety crisis at its Fukushima nuclear complex , said on Friday that it would be able to meet power demand for the next two months , although just barely . 
The ministry 's proposal requires big manufacturers to submit power-saving plans , such as adjustments to operating hours , and would subject them to modest penalties of 1 million yen -LRB- 7,164 pounds -RRB- if they fail to reach the targets . 
They could also be publicly identified as not meeting government requirements . 
The proposals , due to be finalized by the end of the month and Japan 's first government-imposed power curbs since the 1974 oil crisis , would require the reductions on weekdays from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. , when air-conditioning use would be heaviest . 
Kaieda said the government was not considering raising electricity rates to curb demand . 
-LRB- Reporting by Osamu Tsukimori ; Editing by Edmund Klamann -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
