A man looks at an electronic board at a brokerage house in Shanghai April 6 , 2011 . 
NEW YORK | Fri Apr 8 , 2011 11:29 pm BST NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Oil rose to a 32-month high on Friday above $ 126 a barrel on concerns of long-term supply cuts as expectations of more interest rate hikes in the euro zone drove the euro to a 15-month peak against the dollar . 
Commodities , including metals , gained broadly on expectations of stronger demand , the weak U.S. dollar and , in some cases , the threat of supply shortages . 
Global equities were boosted by optimism the worldwide economic recovery will fuel demand for commodities , and shares earlier hit their highest level in almost three years . 
But lofty oil prices became less appealing as the day wore on , and Wall Street was lower by mid afternoon . 
Brent crude surged $ 3.74 to $ 126.41 per barrel , its highest level since August 2008 as the war in Libya , unrest elsewhere in the Arab world and postponed elections in Nigeria drove a bullish attitude on oil . 
U.S. crude rose to a 30-month high , up $ 2.27 at $ 112.57 . 
`` It 's definitely momentum trading on all the troubles : Libya , Nigeria , Yemen , Bahrain and also on the uncertainty about a -LRB- U.S. -RRB- budget deal . 
No one is going to want to go home too short this weekend , '' said Dan Flynn , analyst at PFGBest Research in Chicago . 
The greenback was pressured by the prospect of a U.S. government shutdown . 
Republicans and Democrats have been in budget talks trying to reach an agreement that would avert a government shutdown at midnight . 
A stopgap bill that Democrats hope to pass in the Senate on Friday would fund the Pentagon through the rest of the fiscal year and other arms of government for another week at current levels , Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid said . 
Boosted by Thursday 's European Central Bank rate hike , the euro rose to its highest since January 2010 . 
The currency was up 0.9 percent at $ 1.4432 with a session peak of $ 1.4444 . 
The ECB 's move to raise its key interest rate to 1.25 percent has widened the euro zone 's yield advantage over the United States , Britain and Japan , where rates remain at record lows . 
ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet said policymakers were ready to tighten further if needed . 
But he stressed the ECB had not decided that Thursday 's move was the first in a series . 
Stronger-than-expected German trade data helped underscore the health of the euro zone 's largest economy , helping investors sidestep resurgent doubts over the resilience of the zone following Portugal 's request this week for aid to cope with its debt . 
Libyan rebels said they repulsed a government assault on the besieged city of Misrata but prospects faded for a military overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi . 
Protests erupted across much of the Arab world on Friday , the Muslim day of prayer , with demonstrators dying in Syria and Yemen . 
Egyptians staged one of the biggest rallies since President Hosni Mubarak 's fall . 
Spot gold hit a record high for the fourth day in a row and silver climbed past the $ 40 an ounce level for the first time since 1980 . 
Miners drove European stocks and the FTSEurofirst 300 index . 
FTEU3 closed up 0.4 percent at a five-week closing high . 
`` The next big thing is the U.S. earnings season , '' said Matt Brown , trader at Catalyst Markets . 
`` If we want the market to have further momentum we need the upside surprises to continue , otherwise investors may step away . '' 
The MSCI main world equity index . 
MIWD00000PUS rose 0.4 percent , earlier rising to its highest since July 2008 and on track for its third consecutive weekly gain . 
The Dow Jones industrial average . 
DJI fell 67.47 points , or 0.54 percent , to 12,342.02 . 
The Standard & Poor 's 500 Index . 
SPX gave up 7.88 points , or 0.59 percent , to 1,325.63 . 
The Nasdaq Composite Index . 
IXIC lost 20.10 points , or 0.72 percent , to 2,776.04 . 
In Washington , the White House and Congress worked to break a budget deadlock and avoid a federal government shutdown , after President Barack Obama and congressional leaders failed to reach a deal in late-night talks . 
Investment firm Goldman Sachs -LRB- GS . 
N -RRB- estimated a government shutdown lasting more than a week could cost the economy $ 8 billion in missed federal spending , dragging down growth . 
