Thursday , May 27 , 2010 ; 4:21 PM Scientists have found evidence of a large underwater `` plume '' of oil in the Gulf of Mexico , adding to fears that much of the BP oil spill 's impact is hidden beneath the surface . 
The scientists , aboard a University of South Florida research vessel , found an area of dissolved oil that is about six miles wide , and extends from the surface down to a depth of about 3,200 feet , said Professor David Hollander . 
Hollander said that he believed the plume might have stretched more than 20 miles from the site of a leak on the floor of the Gulf of Mexico , where the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig sank April 22 . 
It has not yet reached Florida . 
The plume is clear , with the oil entirely dissolved . 
`` Here is a situation where , unless you 're looking at the chemical fingerprints , -LRB- the oil -RRB- is absolutely not visible , '' Hollander said . 
`` It 's not some Italian vinaigrette or anything like that . 
It 's absolutely , perfectly clear . '' 
But , Hollander said , even this clear-looking water could contain enough oil to be toxic to small animals at the base of the gulf food chain . 
He said he was also worried that the oil contains traces of `` dispersants , '' soap-like chemicals sprayed into the oil to break it up . 
`` You do n't want to put soap into a fish tank , '' Hollander said . 
This discovery seems to confirm the fears of some scientists that -- because of the depth of the leak and the heavy use of chemical `` dispersants '' -- this spill was behaving differently than others . 
Instead of floating on top of the water , it may be moving beneath it . 
That would be troubling because it could mean the oil would slip past coastal defenses such as `` containment booms '' designed to stop it on the surface . 
Already , scientists and officials in Louisiana have reported finding thick oil washing ashore despite the presence of floating booms . 
It would also be a problem for hidden ecosystems deep under the gulf . 
There , scientists say , the oil could be absorbed by tiny animals and enter a food chain that builds to large , beloved sport-fish like red snapper . 
It might also glom on to deep-water coral formations , and cover the small animals that make up each piece of coral . 
`` It kills them because it prevents them from feeding , '' said Professor James H. Cowan Jr. , of Louisiana State University . 
`` It could essentially starve them to death . '' 
The University of South Florida vessel , the Weatherbird II , used sonar and other devices to sample the water below it . 
Other scientists have said they have little of the equipment necessary to find oil under the water -- leading to debates about whether the underwater plumes were even there . 
This week , Mike Utsler , who helps oversee the spill response off the entire Louisiana coast as BP Houma incident commander , said he 's only focused on taking oil off the surface . 
`` We do n't know there 's oil underwater , '' he said . 
But others had seen worrisome evidence . 
Owen Morgan of Amira , a group that specializes in breaking apart spills with oil-eating microbes , found evidence of the oil plume off Venice when his team sampled water 75 feet beneath the service . 
Morgan -- who said his company is pulling out of Louisiana because of insufficient cooperation from state and federal authorities -- showed a thick , gooey sample consisting of 60 percent crude oil . 
`` People do n't realize how bad it is , '' Morgan said , dipping a fork in the sample to show the goo that hung in midair without sliding off . 
`` This went on for three miles , of that consistency . '' 
William Hogarth , dean of the USF College of Marine Science , said university researchers have sent samples to federal officials for analysis , but it 's clear the oil is new because Stanford scientists had sampled the same area a year ago and found no evidence of oil . 
The Weatherbird II will conduct another tour next week , he said , with different researchers aboard . 
`` This is not natural seep , '' he said , adding that scientists will have to study the region for several years in order to properly gauge its impact . 
`` We 're talking about probably a three to five-year monitoring program to see what happens to food chain . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
