ON BARATARIA BAY , LA. -- In the Louisiana marsh , oil-coated pelicans flap their wings in a futile attempt to dry them . 
A shorebird repeatedly dunks its face in a puddle , unable to wash off . 
Lines of dead jellyfish float in the gulf , traces of oil visible in their clear `` bells . '' 
These scenes , scientists say , are confirmation of what they had feared for a month . 
Now that oil from the Gulf of Mexico 's vast spill has come ashore -- in some places , as thick as soft fudge -- it is causing serious damage in one of the country 's great natural nurseries . 
In nature , oil is a versatile killer . 
It smothers the tiny animals that make up a coral reef . 
It suffocates blades of marsh grass , cutting them off from air and sunlight . 
It clumps up a bird 's feathers , leaving it unable to fly ; then , trying to remove the oil , birds swallow it . 
For now , scientists are seeing the worst effects only in one corner of the Louisiana coast . 
But they 're concerned about what they 're not seeing -- and worried that the impact on animals and plants will only get worse . 
`` Now that the stuff is really sort of coming ashore , it really is living up to its potential . 
It 's certainly breached the sort of outer defense system of Louisiana , '' said James H. Cowan Jr. , a professor at Louisiana State University . 
`` It 's the very worst-case scenario for things like birds and mammals . '' 
On Wednesday , the oil company BP started a `` top kill '' of its leaking well , 5,000 feet below the surface and more than 40 miles off Louisiana . 
The procedure involves shooting high-pressure mud into the well , hoping the mud coming in will eventually overwhelm the oil shooting out . 
But even if that works , it will do nothing to rein in the oil that has escaped . 
That oil began washing up in Louisiana last week , about a month after the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig exploded and sank . 
It first appeared in the remote marshes near the Mississippi River 's mouth . 
Then , this week , it began washing into the vast complex of islands , lakes and bayous just west of the river . 
`` Unfortunately , it 's looking like a real oil spill now , '' said Larry McKinney , who heads the Harte Research Institute for Gulf of Mexico Studies , part of Texas A&M University . 
`` This is the stuff that does the damage . '' 
On Tuesday morning , Louisiana scientists ventured out here into Barataria Bay , looking for oil and oil-covered animals . 
Near Isle Grande Terre , a brown pelican -- the state bird -- sat atop a piling , its chest and head feathers matted down with oil . 
As the boat approached , it flew away . 
But within seconds , the pelican alighted on a nearby rock . 
It was already too weak to fly long distances . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
