Get the Morning Fix and the new Afternoon Fix delivered to your inbox or mobile device for easy access to the top political stories of the day . 
All you need is one click to get Morning Fix and Afternoon Fix ! 
Send an email with `` Politics and Pints '' in the subject line to us and we 'll make sure you know about upcoming `` Politics and Pints '' events . 
First thoughts on President Obama 's oil spill press conference Below are our first thoughts on what the takeaway from the press conference will be as the President heads to the Gulf tomorrow . 
\* The government = boss : From his opening statement to his answers to just about every oil spill-related question , President Obama made clear that BP was working under orders from the federal government , not the other way around . 
`` Make no mistake , '' he said . 
`` BP is operating at our direction . '' 
The repeated emphasis on that point is designed to rebut criticism that the Obama Administration deferred to BP in the clean-up effort . 
It 's a complicated argument to make . 
Because BP has been leading on the technological side -- as the President noted , the company is far better equipped than the government to figure out how to fix the problem -- but not on the overall strategy and direction of the effort . 
It 's a nuanced argument to make and a distinction that Obama has to hope average Americans understand . 
: It was clear from the very start of the press conference that Obama understood that he and his team were back on their heels politically when it came to the situation in the Gulf . 
And so , he methodically set out to emphasize that from the minute the oil rig accident occurred that he and his Administration have understood the gravity of the situation and the need to act quickly . 
`` This is what I wake up to in the morning and this is what I go to be tonight thinking about , '' Obama said about the spill . 
He added that his Administration is operating under a `` constant sense of urgency '' about the matter and noted that he convened a meeting of his top advisers in the Oval Office on the same day he learned of the accident . 
`` This has been our highest priority since this crisis occurred , '' he said . 
While Obama rejected the comparisons to how the Bush Administration handled Hurricane Katrina -- `` I will leave it to you guys to make those comparisons , '' he said -- it 's clear that the perceived detachment from President George W. Bush during that crisis is deeply impacting how Obama and his White House are seeking to handle this one . 
\* I feel your pain : Obama is not the most naturally empathetic politician -- that would be Bill Clinton -- but he does understand the need , in moments like this one , to make clear to people that he feels this stuff in his gut . 
Obama repeatedly used the word `` frustrated '' to explain his feelings ; `` I am angry and frustrated as well , '' he said in the early moments of the presser . 
He also sought to make clear to those in the affected area that he would not -- again the ghost of Katrina lingered -- forget about them . 
`` We are not going to abandon our fellow citizens , '' said Obama . 
But Obama , ever the political realist , acknowledged that the only way to change how people feel about the spill is to end it ; `` People are going to be frustrated until it stops , '' he said . 
\* Tough visuals : The difficulty of Obama 's political positioning on the oil spill was made plain when MSNBC and CNN went to a two-shot -- showing both the President as well as the punctured pipe continuing to spew into the Gulf Coast . 
On the one hand , Obama was asserting that he and his government were doing absolutely everything to solve the problem ; on the other , the picture of the pipe served as a stirring reminder that the problem still is n't fixed . 
Have thoughts of your own after watching the press conference ? 
Offer them in the comments section below . 
By Chris Cillizza | May 27 , 2010 ; 2:08 PM ET Posted by : raynetherwood | May 30 , 2010 1:59 PM | Report abuse How long has BP been in business ? 
BP is drilling in international waters like a startup company without knowledge that it is possible to drill into pockets of high pressure that could cause an incident like this . 
They were not , and are not , capable of shutting down the flow of petroleum and until it is shut down there is essentially nothing the administration can do to stop it from befowling our shores . 
The oil permeates every level of the Gulf from the sea bed to the surface and the technology does not exist to deal with a disaster of this magnitude . 
It can not be burnt off , it can not be blocked from reaching the coast and dispersants are inadequate to reach the sea bed . 
If men were placed shoulder to shoulder on the coast they could not prevent this disaster from reaching our shores . 
The only thing that can be done is to clean up as quickly as possible to minimize the damage as much as possible . 
Those of you who complain that the administration is not doing anything should share your ideas as to how to stop this disaster or heist your sorry behinds down to the Gulf Coast to lend a hand . 
You complain about to much government and now you complain that there is too little . 
You ca n't have it both ways . 
I am not sure that the U.S. Government has DIRECT authority to impose orders to BP or Transocean ... Possibly over Haliburton . 
One other issue -LRB- as an aside -RRB- : survivors of the explosion were muzzzled from making any accusatory comments regarding possible negligence on the part of Haliburton , Transocean or BP , and were virtually compelled to sign waivers before being returned to the mainland . 
This was reported on NPR , but no where else , as far as I know . 
I am not sure that the U.S. Government has DIRECT authority to impose orders to BP or Transocean ... Possibly over Haliburton . 
One other issue -LRB- as an aside -RRB- : survivors of the explosion were muzzzled from making any accusatory comments regarding possible negligence on the part of Haliburton , Transocean or BP , and were virtually compelled to sign waivers before being returned to the mainland . 
This was reported on NPR , but no where else , as far as I know . 
Obama has had and continues to have the best treatment from the left-stream media -- ABC , CBS , NBC , CNN , NY Times , Washington Post , etc. -- than any president in modern history . 
Obama 's problem is he has no executive experience -- he has never run anything , not even a very small business . 
He does n't understand that his political hack friends he put into power will blame him after they get accused of wrong-doing . 
Then , Obama will be `` hanging out to dry '' after he gets soaked . 
`` I was in charge from day one . '' 
`` The decisions were mine , not BP . '' 
As the oil sludge washes into Louisiana 's bayous , remember Obama is in charge , and was in charge from day one . 
You may as well be . 
What a pathetic , disingenuous report . 
He -LRB- Obama -RRB- speaks loudly and with forked tongue I am responsible and have been since day one - make no mistake about it . . 
BP is responsible for this mess . 
Translation - when it 's fixed I ' l take credit , until them BP = Bad People , Bad People . 
I 'm indicting the press for this . 
You are failing us on a daily basis allowing this BS to continue . 
As long as we are addicted to oil and a life style that is not sustainable without exploitation of the environment and the resources of this country and others , we will continue to have environmental disasters . 
Is n't it about time that we grow up and realize we ca n't have everything we want ? 
I find it troubling that this is the first press conference that this administration has held since July ! 
That was almost 9 months ago ! 
One way Obama could have avoided some of the current criticism is to have engaged , and answered reporters ' questions earlier . 
He should of had a press conference in the first week of this disaster . 
Say and think what you want about Bush but at least he held press conferences , and for better or often times worse , faced the scrutiny of reporters . 
Cushy interviews at the white house basketball court do n't count as press conferences . 
It is easy to sound eloquent when reading off of a teleprompter , but is more difficult when one has to think on their feet in the face of difficult questions . 
Why the previous attempts ? 
Was it a matter of BP trying to stop the leak at the least cost , rather than stop it at any cost ? 
Obama is just too calm with things but his response hs been engaging . 
He just has a PR problem . 
Also next time all hacks want deregulation and small government , Remember this oil spill and then preach that crap . 
Do not pretend to be for the enviroment like Hannity and Laura Ingraham who want to drill baby drill . 
Clean coal is a joke . 
Think about real clean energy - China and Europe are . 
Oh no , America is wrong and we should look to Europe . 
Someone call Glen Beck and have me labeled a Nazi or Marxist . 
Wait Beck does not even know where his left hand is . 
It 's in today 's ; TODAY 's Portland Press Herald . 
yet , Maine 's inventory of acclaimed oil spill containment booms left the warehouse YESTERDAY . 
GOVERNEMENT = BOSS ???? ... credibility gap widened considerably , completely passing the Pat Schroeder ` straight face ' test ... she also said '' Men play the game ; women know the score and now it 's measured in gallons of crude released over 40 days that WERE NOT CLEANED UP BY THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION . 
Obama 's street organizer game of B. S'ing the uneducated has worn thin . 
America is losing in the Gulf ; losing in Korea ; losing in Iran ; and using robots to commit genocide in Pakistan and Afghanistant . 
How do we keep Obama from destroying America ? 
She is nice but fairly partisan as well . 
On a side note , someone from EPA called me and asked about some analytical methodology I had worked on -LRB- they were interested in applying it to measure dispersant in the water -RRB- . 
I downloaded all my information to my EPA contact in a matter of seconds -LRB- I didn t say I had a lot of experience -RRB- and this included salutations . 
After the phone call , I was initially honored than I thought those guys are really in trouble if they are calling me for advise , but then again maybe they wanted to know how not to approach an issue . 
Ooooh they are good . 
I personally do see this event similar to Bush s Hurricane Katrina . 
I did not fault either president since in both cases the events overwhelmed the system . 
Who can be prepared for a Category 5 Hurricane hitting the coast with a city that is basically underwater from the start or be prepared for deep ocean blow out of an oil rig . 
Or for that matter and election that is decided by only a few votes . 
Our systems work when we have large margins . 
I would note there was a lot of good findings following Katrina especially simple ones like evacuating pets as well as people -LRB- simple but profound in its impact -RRB- . 
I am sure following this disaster there will be a lot of new key findings that will make us better prepared for such an event and preventing such an event . 
However , I heard a lot from the left about incompetent government during Katrina and Obama used Katrina often as a metaphor for change during his campaign . 
The same people -LRB- government workers -RRB- who served Clinton efficiently also served Bush ineffectively -LRB- Katrina -RRB- and these are the same ones serving Obama . 
You can not fault one president without faulting the other president , but that is what people on the left and right do all the time and both do it equally . 
Your approach is one that says if Obama says it , it must be true . 
Not very discerning Mr. Cillizza . 
LOVE your line that talks about the difference between fixing the leak a coordinating the strategy and direction of the effort . 
You tell us it 's `` a nuanced argument to make and a distinction that Obama has to hope average Americans understand . '' 
Oh , do n't worry , we understand `` real good '' and YOU do n't even need you to explain it to us . 
Do you understand the distinction between stopping the leak and leading a coordinated effort to clean up the spill ? 
Because that is what people are most upset about . 
Yes , BP is responsible ... now clean it up and send them the bill ! 
The emergency plan the government had in place , that was supposed to be acted on immediately , was never done . 
They did not even have the equipment of booms and starting fires . 
They never even had the equipment on hand that they should have by LAW . 
Also , he has never even said a word about Nashville . 
A horrible disaster and not a word . 
He is too simple minded to understand anything about this situation . 
The reason they drill in 5,000 feet of water , 50 miles offshore is because the federal government wo n't let them drill any closer . 
The easy to extract oil is NOT gone - the government will not let them take it . 
There is plenty of oil under the stinkin ' beach , for God 's sake . 
The reason the drilling is so risky is because the government makes them drill 50 miles offshore in water a mile deep . 
Drilling in the beach or 2 miles offshore would be much , much safer and cheaper . 
And there is plenty of oil there . 
Again , the guy is a total incompetent . 
And his claim of being in charge is ludicrous . 
He has done two vacations and numerous fundraisers since the blow . 
He only answered the plea from Bobby Jindal for permits to dredge up sand for protective islands today . 
A week or more after the request . 
And he has refused help from tech experts all over the world . 
The guy is an incompetent fool . 
Maybe we can impeach him for trying to buy off Sestej with the illegal offer of an admin job to drop his run against Arlen Spector . 
-LRB- Then we 'd get Biden - at least we 'd get a triple digit IQ - barely . -RRB- 
Are you going to keep with this new style , or revert to the partisan tone ? 
They have to be really careful - the risk of an explosion is high - that is why they did n't try this for a long time - if it explodes , the equipment below will be detroyed even more , and the leak will be worse . 
I 'm not sure if allowing the drilling mud to leak out is any better than the oil - my general feeling is the drilling mud is worse for the environment than the oil . 
You have no basis to complain about anyone after what you have done . 
What is wrong with you ? 
People who are passionate think that moderation is some kind of character flaw . 
Rush Limbaugh has a particular disdain for moderates and calls them squishy and unsure . 
Spoken as only a truly passionate person would view it . 
I am by nature moderate -LRB- I think -RRB- and consider moderation to be what is called a judicial temperament . 
Moderation , to me , means trying to withhold strong opinion to enable more facts to be considered . 
Once you take a position , it is human nature to defend that opinion , even if flawed . 
I find it painful to try discussing a subject with a passionate person . 
Whether I agree or disagree with him , usually I learn nothing new because new information is not presented in a credible way . 
Exaggeration undermines credibility , in my opinion . 
As soon as I see `` always '' and `` never '' and `` completely '' , I discount the writer 's opinion . 
All the dispersants is doing is serving to HIDE the oil beneath the surface - it is still coming ashore . 
It would have been FAR BETTER TO BURN OFF THE CRUDE . 
The problem is the ENVIRONMENTALISTS - THINKING THEY KNOW EVERYTHING - DID N'T WANT TO LET THAT HAPPEN - THEY DID N'T WANT TO DO WHAT WAS REQUIRED - WHICH WAS POUR KEROSENE ON IT TO LIGHT IT - Posted by : 37thand0street | May 27 , 2010 11:40 PM | Report abuse 12Bar -- that 's the unfortunate thing about this board ... it could be an actual public space for open policy discussion . 
But the lack of moderation makes this impossible . 
If you mean the former , I do n't know if it would help a lot . 
Real Clear Politics is moderated , but it 's gruesome . 
Anyone who is not a raving partisan gets the hell out of there fast . 
If you mean moderate people , then I agree with you . 
If the blog was only liberal , for example , the posters could moderate their opinions because they would n't be on the defensive . 
Likewise , if the blog was only conservative . 
Conservatives would n't feel like they have to defend their point of view . 
I would be interested in another blog that was n't so defensive . 
I know there are lots of issues I need to become more informed about , and truly I would welcome an exchange that was more curious and less accusatory . 
But the lack of moderation makes this impossible . 
I would welcome a discussion about what you see . 
I am open in exploring what the government could\/should have done . 
And BP , too . 
At least it would n't be one of these pointless shouting matches that is all about exaggeration . 
When I see the words `` utterly , completely , incompetent , racist , or affirmative action '' I just shut off . 
Waste of time and frivolous . 
Some of the contents of the `` spill response toolbox '' include , in clockwise order from the upper left , dispersants , skimmers , booms , and burning . 
Dispersants are usually used in conjunction with these other cleanup techniques . '' 
Oh , that 's you with the crystal ball . 
We have Obama - WHO STOPPED THE PRE-APPROVE PLAN TO BURN IT OFF . 
THAT IS OBAMA 'S SCANDAL - WHY WAS N'T THE PLAN FOLLOWED - WHY HAS N'T THE OIL BEEN BURNED OFF . 
This is the ENVIRONMENTALISTS AT THE WHITE HOUSE WHO THINK THEY KNOW EVERYTHING - THEY CONVINCED OBAMA NOT TO BURN IT OFF . 
I did n't throw out a stereotype - I had actual conversations with actual white guys who said these things . 
I could name names . 
I mean , besides Obama . 
This has served the rich and powerful very well , with low tax rates for the highest incomes and lax regulation so that companies like BP , GS , and Massey can do whatever they want , including total disregard for safety and the environment . 
With the financial crisis , the oil crisis , and the mining crisis , it could n't be more clear that this strategy does n't work . 
BP spent 15 days trying to get the blowoff valve working . 
If they had gotten it to close , the well would have been capped . 
They used dispersant all through this period because dispersant helps keep the oil from the shore and minimizes danger to fisheries . 
Using dispersant means the oil is not on the surface to be burned off . 
If someone had a crystal ball , and had known the BOV was defective , and that the cofferdam would not work , and that the tophat technique would n't work , and that the sippy tube would not be fully effective , and that shoveling mud down the hole would fail -LRB- as it presently is -RRB- , THEN maybe they would n't have used dispersant . 
Or maybe they would . 
Everything is a tradeoff . 
And yet we continue to hear from you saying this or that . 
You guy Obama FAILED - he has no idea what he is doing . 
FINALLY WE HAVE AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN A JOB WHICH HE CAN NOT HANDLE . 
Clearly - Obama is on vacation , then another vacation - FUNDRAISING IN CALIFORNIA AT THE GETTY MANSION . 
THE DEMOCRATS IN THIS COUNTRY HAVE HURT THIS COUNTRY BADLY BY FORCING THE COUNTRY TO HAVE THIS THIRD RATE GOVERNMENT IN A CRISIS . 
The democratic party is RESPONSIBLE for the FAILURES OF OBAMA . 
The democrats FORCED Obama - the affirmative action , inexperienced , no buiness experience , no economic experiend - OH YES COCAINE-EXPERIENCED guy - on this nation . 
Is that too transparent for him ? 
Why does he need a team of lawyers , a barricade of poll tested wording and a bureau of pr professionals to craft a reply ? 
Is that too transparent for him ? 
Why does he need a team of lawyers , a barricade of poll tested wording and a bureau of pr professionals to craft a reply ? 
is in charge , then why did BP more or less tell the EPA to go to hell when the EPA told them to stop using that chemical they were using to break up the oil ? 
To my knowledge , as of 5-27-2010 at 9:10 pm they are still using this very toxic enviromental and human toxic chemical . 
obummer better take the blame for this . 
He 's denying everything Gov. Jendal is asking for . 
Maybe we should have the Pres. of Mexico call obummer and demand he does what Gov. Jendall asks for . 
That 's the reason obummer is not sending what we need to cover and close our border . 
Pres. Calderon told him not to do it . 
So he thinks he satisfied the Am . 
People by sending 1200 troops down there to sit at desks . 
This way he obeyed Calderon 's order not to protect our border . 
Do n't you ever get tired of that schtick ? 
It 's called hubris . 
he should have dived down and plugged it himself '' . 
There 's been a Federal response plan in the works for just such an incident since 1994 . 
It 's called the `` In -- Situ Burn '' plan , and calls for an immediate use of fire booms , which , according to tests that were conducted then , and former National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Oil Spill coordinator Ron Gouquet , would have burned off 95 % of all the oil spilling into the Gulf for the last 37 days . 
Comrade Obama and his Keystone Cop -- like administation did nothing , and this mess was the result ! 
He \*\* , he did n't even mention the BP oil spill , nor cared about it for 9 days after it happened -LRB- GW Bush got crucified for waiting 4 days after Katrina , and he had to disregard the Stafford Act which in fact made it illegal for him to intervene , something Comrade Obama did n't have to contend with -RRB- . 
Appoint people on a colorblind basis , based only on qualifications . 
OTHERWISE , YOU GET A THIRD RATE GOVERNMENT WHICH CAN NOT HANDLE THE JOB . 
Tough - you do n't like it . 
The poster who writes about racism just does it to get others to respond to him . 
He 'll keep ratcheting up the provocation until he snags someone . 
I doubt he even believes his own post . 
What with all the bball and golf and vacations and speeches and apologies and finger pointing and Posted by : Moonbat | May 27 , 2010 9:56 PM | Report abuse `` boot to the throat '' is not a way to treat your partner in fixing a problem and is as immature a statement as Bush 's call to `` Bring 'em on '' to Iraqi terrorists -RRB- . 
The problem is that these issues get politicized and ordinary people fall into this magical thinking trap . 
`` If the President is `` tough '' well , then the well gets capped sooner . '' 
A lot of people see every problem through a political lens . 
The `` tough '' language is strictly for public consumption . 
If the government needs to get tough with BP , they 'll do it quite effectively , in private . 
What with all the bball and golf and vacations and speeches and apologies and finger pointing and Posted by : Moonbat | May 27 , 2010 9:56 PM | Report abuse The major problem - you do n't want to hear the major problem here - because you will harass and complain and whine like a sissy forever . 
But against my better judgement I will respond . 
The environmentalists in this country CAUSED THIS CRISIS - they do n't want drilling on the land , so it goes offshore , They do n't want it near shore , so now it is in mile-deep water - where it is difficult to plug the oil spill . 
IF THIS WERE ON LAND , IT WOULD HAVE BEEN PLUGGED A MONTH AGO . 
The real situation - is the environmentalists have BEEN SO UNREALISTIC - THEY HAVE FILLED UP EVERY EVIRONMENTAL REGULATORY AGENCY - STATE AND FEDERAL - AND THEY HAVE WASTED MILLIONS AND MILLIONS OF DOLLARS ON STUPID IDEAS . 
They have created a HOSTILE ENVIRONMENT BUSINESS . 
The environmentalists have not created a working partnership with anyone - instead EVERYONE IS A `` RESPONSIBLE PARTY '' - and you are responsible for UNLIMITIED LIABILITIES EVEN IF YOU DIDNT CAUSE THE PROBLEM . 
Yes , you may hate it - but the truth is if you own a piece of property - AND ANYONE polluted it - over the past 500 years YOU HAVE TO CLEAN IT UP You can go bankrupt , they do n't care . 
You can spend all your retirement savings , they do n't care . 
They just want everything go back to Pristine Wilderness . 
Why did he not do the same for the people killed on the oil rig ? 
One accident is the same as another , is n't it , in its tragedy ? 
To me his hesitancy to be a champion of the innocent people fighting the tragedy consequences of the events shows he is too calculating in his political fallout analysis - an overreaction to Bush 's perceived cluelessness is Obama 's scapegoat posturing -LRB- `` boot to the throat '' is not a way to treat your partner in fixing a problem and is as immature a statement as Bush 's call to `` Bring 'em on '' to Iraqi terrorists -RRB- . 
Most of the complaints I 've heard in my life about affirmative action have been from middle-aged white guys who have n't gotten as far up the ladder in their careers as they apparently believe they have the right to be . 
And they complain about women taking their jobs at least as much as they complain about African Americans . 
Can it , guys . 
Name the particular incompetent bureaucrats you object to - do n't make fuzzy-headed racist\/sexist remarks . 
If you do n't know who they are , find out . 
You 're all internet experts . 
Right now , there are a couple of things more important than politics , and that is the oil spill and the state of my portfolio . 
I do n't give a good g \* damn who or how the well\/oil\/financial industry gets proper regulation , but I want it done . 
I do n't make everything political -- industry has its role , government has its role . 
If you get the balance right , you get stability . 
If the balance gets mucked up , you get financial collapse , mysterious market swings like May 6 , uncappable oil wells . 
I am a pro business person , always have been . 
I worked in venture capital for years , and you do n't get more capitalistic than that . 
I believe in the free market , but I also believe in appropriate regulation . 
If you want to blame Obama because people blamed Bush , go right ahead . 
I really do n't care . 
Lot of wasted energy , in my opinion . 
Politicians and government are peripheral to most problems in the real world . 
I 'd rather focus on getting the well capped , getting the regulation right , getting the cleanup done as well as possible , than making silly and tangential political points . 
Whether Obama thinks about the well 24\/7 or just once in a blue moon , will not mean a damn thing in capping the well . 
The onus is on BP and its experts . 
You seem to think that someone has the magic answer . 
I think you are dead wrong . 
Come on - all these affirmative action minority APPOINTEES OF OBAMA have no clue what they are doing . 
It is 37 days into this and they still have no clue . 
OH WAIT - let me quote a section of the statute of 1990 and maybe that will do something ... ... OBAMA has NO CLUE - he has filled the government with the first minority in this position and the first minority in that position But in a crisis , THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS COMPLETELY PARALYZED . 
oH WAIT , THEY CAN BLAME SOMEONE ELSE . 
As if Bush was supposed to immediately BEAM EVERYONE IN NEW ORLEANS OUT TO NICE HOUSES IN THE SUBURBS ON HIGH GROUND LIKE IT WAS SOME STAR TREK EPISODE . 
Seriously , the democrats FOR YEARS have been unrealistic . 
Now you are complaining that someone else might be unrealistic ??? Go to your local democratic party headquarters and complain there . 
How is your affirmative action guy doing now ? 
Actual qualifications are not considered . 
Take Obama - way too many people in this country decided they would vote for him based on the COLOR OF HIS SKIN . 
The truth is the same man with the same resume - only WHITE - would NEVER HAVE BEEN CONSIDERED FOR PRESIDENT OR EVEN US SENATOR . 
THE NATION IS NOW STUCK WITH A THIRD RATE GOVERNMENT IN THE MIDDLE OF A CRISIS . 
HOW IS THAT POST-RACIAL THING WORKING FOR YOU NOW ???? Posted by : 37thand0street | May 27 , 2010 9:13 PM | Report abuse 12 bar . 
The point here is that the federal government is utterly incompetent and worthless at everything it does . 
To consider that we need more and bigger is getting more preposterous by the day . 
Since when is the government supposed to be oil exploration experts ? 
I thought that was the oil exploration industry 's job . 
The point here is that the federal government is utterly incompetent and worthless at everything it does . 
To consider that we need more and bigger is getting more preposterous by the day . 
The government should take over the operation and ignore BP . 
BP should take over the operation and ignore the government . 
Foreign oil experts should take over the operation and ignore BP & the government . 
Experts in oil drilling , but not connected to the oil industry should take over the operation and ignore everyone . 
Easy and obvious answers were ignored by everyone . 
Any clown could stop the gusher with common sense . 
I think all of this is b.s. . 
We better get ready to accept what is obvious . 
None of us arm-chair quarterbacks know what to do , or would be doing anything different than what is being done . 
The whole exploration industry , worldwide , is contributing to this effort . 
The essential problem is that once the blow off valve failed , we have NO technology to cap this well . 
We are probably waiting for another 2 months until the cross drilling relieves the pressure . 
The gubmnt could not control it 's wayout of a paper bag . 
The windbag is running out of wind . 
I just wanted to say that Mr. Obama s appearance today was void of any statements of leadership and full of self aggrandizement and blaming everyone from Bush to BP and it took him an hour to say it . 
Whew , he s taking the democratic party down one day at a time . 
After the eight days it took him and his staff to wake up the damage was done . 
The government seems to hate Louisiana . 
They could have saved the marshland if they had done what the locals know to do . 
But , that had to be approved and took weeks to even come to the surface as having been requested . 
The only thing that can save face for him now is to fire the two goofballs he sent down there . 
They 'll come crawling out late at night after we 've left the building . 
And the democrats did n't do their job . 
NOW we have a situation in which OBAMA REALLY IS RESPONSIBLE - AN OFFSHORE SITUATION and the democrats are HORRIFIED THAT THEY NOW DESERVE IT WORSE THAN THEY GAVE BUSH . 
All the antics of the democrats over the past 8 years are now becoming EXPOSED . 
EVERYTHING THEY DID TO BUSH IS NOW FAIR GAME . 
Posters , Hitler-mustaches - nasty signs - all what the democrats did to Bush - that is OK . 
But anyone does it to Obama - and the democrats cry . 
The democrats are NOT FIT to govern - the oil spill response has been AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION NIGHTMARE . 
INCOMPETENT PEOPLE APPOINTED TO POSITIONS IN WHICH THEY HAVE NO BUSINESS IN . 
THE OIL SPILL RESPONSE IS AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION NIGHTMARE . 
A majority -- 53 % -- say the same about Obama . '' 
Billy Nungesser , Parish President in Plaquemines , La. says `` the response to this has been worse than Katrina . '' 
Well , at least we got a speech . 
This is Obama 's baby now , which is why the left is starting to get even crazier . 
Obama is not even in crisis mode . 
Obama is about to take his SECOND vacation since the spill - and just got back from a FUNDRAISING TRIP TO CALIFORNIA . 
This is reeforced by the fact that the President went to Calif. for 3 fundraisers - one held in the Getty home - thus giving rise to the perception that he was not fully engaged in the process . 
No matter what he says or does , it will be impossible to erase this image . 
Secondly , it is obvious that , if they were in charge , the Coast Guard did n't get the memo : They have been an obstruction refusing to authorize any actions until the paper pushers got done with their Impact statemenst . 
Guess what - the impact has happened and the oil is in the marshes and will be difficult if not impossible to clean up . 
There is enough blame to go around - The state and local governments waited around to get permission to deploy barriers - they should have remembered the old adage - it is easier to get forgiveness then to get permission . 
To parapharse George Bush - - `` You all are doing a heck of a job . '' 
Do n't like what happens when you Drill , Baby , Drill ? 
Have to throw a punch at the administration that 's mopping up after your miserable attempt at governance . 
Do n't talk to me about Obama . 
YOU are to blame for the Gulf disaster , for the Wall Street debacle -LRB- `` Let the market decide '' you all proudly parroted . 
I hold the GOP voters and Bush Cheney responsible for putting their faith in corporations who do n't care about anything but their bottom line , and are so powerful that they OWN enough of Congress to stop or water down any reforms decent people try to make . 
It 's all Bush 's fault . 
Big business does n't own the Democrats , just the Republicans . 
We can stop drilling and just import ALL of our oil . 
But then what if we have a problem with a tanker ? 
Well , that would be Bush 's fault , too ! 
But Bobby the dreamer has a Republicans response to complicated problems , just do something pretty stupid and then blame someone else when it does n't work . 
BP gave YOU millions in campaign money , no wonder you do n't push on them ... '' Obama 's donations from Oil companies : $ 800K McCain 's donations from oil companies : $ 2.7 mil Right , Obama was big oil 's man ... . 
No , I guess that would n't be your thing - ca n't download porn and work at the same time , right ? 
No one believes it but the loons . 
Not just here , everywhere on the blogosphere ... trying to confuse the American public . 
It just so happens that no matter how many liars there are , President Obama projected a commanding presence today and those images will be shared with the general public over the airwaves tonight and going forward . 
Face it , losers , you LOST THE ELECTION and your fraudulent attacks on President Obama will LOSE . 
Do n't like it ? 
I guess since Obama 's speech , all that oil has just disappeared . 
It was all a big lie . 
This is what passes for liberal thought . 
The War Room , actually the response team headquarters , has been in operation in Houston since the problem started . 
Stocked chock full of deep water engineers from all over , with the ability and authority to call up deep water assets from wherever they can get to the site . 
-LRB- Start with the Plum Line and keep looking . -RRB- 
It is so easy to armchair second guess when you do not have all the facts , which we looking in from the outside , do not have . 
Separate issue from stopping the leak . 
Democrats decided to gamble on the nation 's well being - seeing if an affirmative action candidate who was also a former cocaine user could handle the job as President . 
The McCain\/Palin campaign received approx . 
three times as much as Obama 's . 
Perhaps you were n't around in 2008 , but Drill Baby Drill chants were heard in Minneapolis , not Denver . 
I do n't think anyone received more money from BP than Obama . 
Maybe more money from big oil in general . 
Check out what happened to your tweet column on this . 
She 's a Darwinian dead end . 
Ca n't seem to function in an environment where her wild-eyed political theories are challenged . 
In her world , all of life 's little problems can be answered with one of three responses : Posted by : Brigade | May 27 , 2010 7:51 PM | Report abuse It is immaterial that Obama called his people around a table in the White House to discuss the Deepwater Horizon explosion and the oil spill . 
He had the wrong people , none of them had the least idea of the available technology , or even who to call . 
The secretary of Energy is an academic . 
The Sect ' y of Interior is antipathetic to petroleum . 
The entire Administration was more interested in blaming than addressing the problem . 
Today , leaders in LA have decided to proceed with plans that they know will work , but have been delayed for weeks by the Feds . 
They 're willing to risk jail to do that . 
Biz leaders in NOLA issued a statement a few minutes ago again begging Obama to set a `` war room '' in the region to coordinate the efforts of the State , Feds , and private sector . 
The best minds with access to the latest technology , which the Administration has not even begun to utilize . 
How can they direct BP ? 
All the WH has done is impede the clean-up . 
The Administration has failed . 
There is a lack of management ability at the highest levels and an unwillingness to admit what they do not know . 
They are not now , nor have they been for one minute , `` in charge '' of anything . 
They do n't know how . 
I had commented in an earlier thread that Scooter Libby was not convicted of outing Valerie Plame , or even knowing who did , but was caught in a perjury\/obstruction trap in the investigation . 
But this supposedly successful attorney failed to grasp the purpose of the post or my comments on the John Adams project . 
He accused me of not knowing Libby was convicted and of changing the subject . 
However , the subject ot the Plame investigation was the outing of a CIA agent and that was the purpose of my response to his ignorant allegation . 
It looks like the same guy who got Libby is going after the John Adams Project and the traitorous ACLU lawyers . 
Hopefully , they can all join the she-male Lynne Stewart in prison . 
If leichtman1 has any character at all , I would expect him to be more interested in the actual outing of CIA operatives than busting Scooter Libby . 
From a column by Mark Thiessen , `` The double standard here is incredible . 
Contrast the relentless investigation of the Valerie Plame leak with the foot-dragging of the Obama administration in the case of ACLU lawyers who not only exposed the identities of real covert operatives , but shared this information directly with our nation s enemies . 
The Miller amendment is simply intended to ensure that their actions receive the proper investigation and that any future violations of our laws and national security policies will similarly be investigated . 
It s about time . '' 
Unless we SHOVE HIM BACK ... the cost of 30 MILLION ... -LRB- do n't believe that 10-12 million crap - that was 10 years ago -RRB- ... will break our backs . 
He J U S T W O N ' T S T O P. I guess we need to teach a lesson - NO means NO on the so-called `` immigration reform '' - which we all know is amnesty\/citizenship - and a broken America . 
NO , YOU FREAK , NO. . 
NOW DO YOUR F 'N JOB . 
Your continued usage of a University computer for non-academic and\/or non-University related purposes violates the Terms of Usage you sign at the beginning of every academic year . 
I have informed the IT department and they are in the process of tracking who you are . 
Just wanted to give you a heads up as this is the type of thing that can get your tenure revoked . 
Mainly those who apparently expected him to put on a wet suit , dive down to the sea bottom , and wedge himself into the leak -- stopping it with a superhuman effort worthy of Mr. Fantastic -LRB- Reed Richards -RRB- . 
They might just do that . 
CC calls the Republican structure fire unorthodox nominees , heh , heh . 
But just because he is my guy , that does not mean he is a genius , The One , or beyond criticism . 
ceflynline , my kids ' baseball game -LRB- again -RRB- is in one hour , but I get your point . 
If I have time tonight , I 'll respond . 
Briefly , I do n't agree with the premise . 
Was it Union Carbide -LRB- who ? -RRB- 
, but they will never be forgotten in Bhopal . 
Who made Chernobyl ok ? 
This is not some oil spill and BP knew that . 
Our government flying wing for BP is crazy . 
What is this `` unified command '' propaganda device ? 
look , a cleaned bird released to the wild , lets have a press release on our web site . 
Was it two weeks ago the BP CEO said on camera he expected the environmental damage to be minimal ? 
He has since retracted , but did people really think it would all just disappear when the gusher got stopped ? 
That is what Obama was doing - instead of working on the oil spill . 
Obama JUST GOT BACK FROM A FUNDRAISING TRIP TO CALIFORNIA . 
He tries to be an expert but is n't , and people are finally seeing through the smokescreen . 
He is a typical `` this is how it should be '' politician who does not know how to get anything done . 
If he shut up once and instead put his butt on the line and did some work , people might start to listen to him , but with the way he acts and lectures down to people like he is the smartest person in the room , well , people just are sick of him and his lies and ignorance . 
NO OBAMA 'S HIGHEST PRIORITY WAS SMEARING THE REPUBLICANS ON THE WALL STREET BILL . 
Come on - can he get serious ? 
The feds , beginning with the teleprompter-in-charge sock-puppet do n't have a clue how to stop the disaster . 
Their only expertise is in finding a scapegoat while protecting their collective derrieres . 
Do n't like what happens when you Drill , Baby , Drill ? 
Have to throw a punch at the administration that 's mopping up after your miserable attempt at governance . 
Do n't talk to me about Obama . 
YOU are to blame for the Gulf disaster , for the Wall Street debacle -LRB- `` Let the market decide '' you all proudly parroted . 
I hold the GOP voters and Bush Cheney responsible for putting their faith in corporations who do n't care about anything but their bottom line , and are so powerful that they OWN enough of Congress to stop or water down any reforms decent people try to make . 
Jimmy Carter gets another bump from the worst President ever spot as Obama continues to entrench himself as the most clueless , biggest liar , biggest electoral mistake of a president ever perpetrated upon this United States . 
Relief in 2012 from the insanity and lies . 
And some of them would secretly be working with shadowy Russian masterminds to plot his assassination or removal from power under the 25th amendment , or something . 
And the oil spill would have been caused on purpose as part of some diabolical scheme by corrupt businessmen looking to make a ridiculous amount of money in a foolhardy gamble that ends with them being killed by the shadowy Russian masterminds after they have outlived their usefulness . 
Anyway , my point , I think , is that if Obama is surrounded by sycophants , it ai n't anything like `` 24 . '' 
On other columns and blogs experts willing to sign their names are claiming pretty much exactly that , and quote laws to back it . 
Me , I 'm just an observer . 
I can see lots of reasons to be unhappy with Obama and his administration , I just ca n't see that any particular thing he did was so obviously wrong at the time as to be obvious at the time . 
Else where in these same columns and blogs other experts , willing to be identified , are pointing out that from the first minutes of the disaster , in response to an extent emergency plan , the Feds and the oil Industry have been following the current disaster plan . 
Currently there are so many ROCVs working the site that it is getting hard to work . 
While we have been commenting , the people who know how to spread the very best butter have been spreading it in quantity . 
That may not be the best solution , but apparently it is the current written plan , from which score all the choirs sing . 
When the time to review comes , we may assume that that score will be revised in light of lessons learned . 
Perhaps when that revision is done we can best serve by reminding the feds and Big Oil to keep revising that score BEFORE we have to do it from lessons learned . 
Obama 's team has FAILED to protect the MOST IMPORTANT ESTUARIES in the Western Hemisphere ! 
This incompetence equals that of the W administration ! 
I am going to the FL Keys to volunteer this weekend BECAUSE Obama is in charge and will clearly be unable to protect the Keys when the oil goes there - and it will ! 
This is going to prove to be the worse environmental disaster ever to hit this poor , old , abused planet . 
Only a NUCLEAR DISASTER would be worse . 
Are we supposed to trust them to manage more nuclear power plants ? 
That 's large government at work for you ... red tape stopping things that can be done and should be done from getting done . '' 
Let 's assume that the very moment the rig began to blow up , Obama had signed the waiver and Jindahl began his artificial reef . 
Three or four years from now the first parts of Jindahl 's Island would begin to pop up above the waves , and in ten years perhaps ten miles of barrier island might be ready . 
So it is obviously a terrible tragedy that Obama has wasted these verymany weeks in not letting Bobby J have his science fiction fantasy . 
Now , as to that island , want to try to guess its effects on everything from potential damages to beaches in Mississippi , Alabama , Florida , Cuba , Haiti , the Dominican Republic , Puerto Rico ... ? 
Building a string of barrier islands at the fifteen fathom line might be an excellent idea for a lot of reasons , but before we really screw things up we just might want to consider its effect on the whole Gulf region . 
But Bobby the dreamer has a Republicans response to complicated problems , just do something pretty stupid and then blame someone else when it does n't work . 
no bigger LIAR than BO ! 
In charge , he did n't even know that the MMS person had quit !! Posted by : morphy | May 27 , 2010 6:00 PM | Report abuse `` Obammy stop blaming every President - be a MAN for a change ! 
BP gave YOU millions in campaign money , no wonder you do n't push on them ... '' Obama 's donations from Oil companies : $ 800K McCain 's donations from oil companies : $ 2.7 mil Right , Obama was big oil 's man ... . 
It is not possible to leave them responsible , but that is a long discussion . 
The Official Deepwater Horizon Unified Command website is the administration 's decision making record . 
It conflates the company and the administration in a way I have never seen before . 
Exxon did not make Prince William Sound whole and neither will BP make the Gulf as it was . 
It is not in their power . 
Obama , like everyone else , is only now starting to realize this disaster is not only bigger , in terms of the oil in the water , it will have far worse consequences than Exxon Valdez . 
But even if he did decide to let BP twist in the wind of blame for political\/economic purposes , it was the wrong thing to do , in my opinion . 
There is not a common sense comment from the lot of you . 
You would n't know how to stop a water leak in your parent 's home . 
But you know how to jabber wing nut b.s. Why do n't you go down there and volunteer your vast amount of internet surfing time to assist in clean up efforts ? 
No , I guess that would n't be your thing - ca n't download porn and work at the same time , right ? 
BP lied to the Feds , and the public . '' 
Yes and it is still happening . 
Why did Obama fail to understand he needed non-oil industry dependent biological oceanography experts and engineers to take charge of many if not most of the early decisions ? 
He had no idea . 
He is surrounded by political sycophants , like an episode of 24 . 
A book or three will be written on the early days of this disaster and how BP stayed in charge of every decision that mattered . 
When is the media going to start exposing these vile hate-filled people for what they really are ? 
Of course , this morning the pictures of the work going on on the surface were so crowded by work vessels that there was flatly NO camera angle that would hide the combined efforts of about everybody who could possibly make a contribution to the solution without mostly getting in the way and adding to the problem . 
Sort of interesting how nobody took the time to research just how extensive the response effort was . 
Easier to just blame Obama for not parting the sea and walking out there and laying on his hands and curing the well . 
History is going to find that Obama , the cool head when all about were losing theirs , was rather effective in getting all the parts to work together . 
AND , because he left BP in charge , he leaves BP as financially responsible as it is possible to leave them . 
He ALSO uses this disaster , not of his creation , to bring needed control to out of control wildcatting in deep water in the Gulf . 
Cool , calm , collected , efficient and effective . 
Change we can believe in . 
If this is Obama 's government at work , just imagine the diaster ahead in the government managed health care . 
Now , by Obama 's own words , the anti business liberals including the press have only their aspiring dictator Obama to blame for the lack of progress in stopping the flow of oil into the Gulf . 
Obama is beginning to admit his incompetence and failure as a president and diplomat . 
Democrat liberals called Bush every name in the book and all but accused him of personally arranging Hurricane Katrina . 
Now they 're defending an administration that has taken its own sweet time time reponding to this oil spill . 
I eagerly await the congressional\/Justice Dept. investigation into BP 's financial ties to Obama 's election and the pass they seem to have gotton on some safety matters . 
I wonder if Chris Cillizza thinks 37thand0 is an embarrassment to Georgetown ? 
Does n't matter though . 
Democracy is a noisy mess and politics is a contact sport . 
We ca n't wait for November . 
It could n't be that he actually felt the need for another big lie . 
When will this country wake up to the fact that the community organizer is a farce ? 
This whole speech was to point out that he is and has been doing whatever is possible since it first happened . 
He would n't have had to give this speech had not so many cried `` This is Obama 's Katrina '' - which is wrong on so many levels !! Posted by : linda35 | May 27 , 2010 5:34 PM | Report abuse OK , just to make it clear . 
In hindsight , all of the Tea Baggers , Party of NO ! 
members are now ranting and raving because Obama did not immediately seize all of BP ships , equipment , and manpower , and start fixing the problem that BP 's greed created ? 
-LRB- They would have saved 500K by removing the heavy mud and reusing it -RRB- What ever happened to the GOP\/Libertarian concept of the sanctiy private property ? 
Had he done that the gnashing of teeth and screams of anger from you people would have been heard throughout the country . 
The Fact is that the Feds relied upon BP 's `` expertise '' to tell them what was happening on the bottom , the rate of the flow , solutions , etc. . 
BP lied to the Feds , and the public . 
What equipment does the US Government have on hand and in its inventory to cap a blown out well 5000 feet under the water ? 
BP owned the well , they owned the equipment , and employed the workers . 
Obviously , oil leases will have to be revised to allow immediate Federal control of the well and all assets when and if such disaster should ever occur again . 
I will agree that where the Feds failed is in controlling the spill itself . 
There should have been super tankers there in a week bottling up the spill , and pumping in the oil and water . 
Could the Feds have ordered that ? 
Could they have seized BPs private property and commandeered the ships to the Gulf ? 
Would they in fact have done that had BP not misrepresented the magnitude and scope of the flow ? 
Want to bet that there will be some serious changes to the terms of off shore oil leases to provide for such contingencies in the future ? 
How about changes in how the oil companies are regulated , and when federal regulators can go to work for them ? 
The financial consequences of this spill and the stifling of correct information about its severity could very well result in the bankruptcy and dissolution of BP . 
It is obvious from some of the posts that some of you would not be happy if Obama was in a diving bell trying to plug up the well head himself . 
It is so easy to armchair second guess when you do not have all the facts , which we looking in from the outside , do not have . 
He was clearing brush and he fell down and he crashed his bike too . 
Not just here , everywhere on the blogosphere ... trying to confuse the American public . 
It just so happens that no matter how many liars there are , President Obama projected a commanding presence today and those images will be shared with the general public over the airwaves tonight and going forward . 
Face it , losers , you LOST THE ELECTION and your fraudulent attacks on President Obama will LOSE . 
Do n't like it ? 
In hindsight , all of the Tea Baggers , Party of NO ! 
members are now ranting and raving because Obama did not immediately seize all of BP ships , equipment , and manpower , and start fixing the problem that BP 's greed created ? 
-LRB- They would have saved 500K by removing the heavy mud and reusing it -RRB- What ever happened to the GOP\/Libertarian concept of the sanctiy private property ? 
Had he done that the gnashing of teeth and screams of anger from you people would have been heard throughout the country . 
The Fact is that the Feds relied upon BP 's `` expertise '' to tell them what was happening on the bottom , the rate of the flow , solutions , etc. . 
BP lied to the Feds , and the public . 
What equipment does the US Government have on hand and in its inventory to cap a blown out well 5000 feet under the water ? 
BP owned the well , they owned the equipment , and employed the workers . 
Obviously , oil leases will have to be revised to allow immediate Federal control of the well and all assets when and if such disaster should ever occur again . 
I will agree that where the Feds failed is in controlling the spill itself . 
There should have been super tankers there in a week bottling up the spill , and pumping in the oil and water . 
Could the Feds have ordered that ? 
Could they have seized BPs private property and commandeered the ships to the Gulf ? 
Would they in fact have done that had BP not misrepresented the magnitude and scope of the flow ? 
Want to bet that there will be some serious changes to the terms of off shore oil leases to provide for such contingencies in the future ? 
How about changes in how the oil companies are regulated , and when federal regulators can go to work for them ? 
The financial consequences of this spill and the stifling of correct information about its severity could very well result in the bankruptcy and dissolution of BP . 
It is obvious from some of the posts that some of you would not be happy if Obama was in a diving bell trying to plug up the well head himself . 
It is so easy to armchair second guess when you do not have all the facts , which we looking in from the outside , do not have . 
This is why I miss Howard Dean . 
the personal appeal that his daughter asks him about the oil leak was priceless ... how he tried to blame the prior administration without naming them ... every time he took responsibility he made sure you knew it was n't his fault but someone elses . 
I did really like his one phrase where he stated that history would judge him and his response . . 
that was a very `` Bush-like '' answer Over all his performance was lacking today . 
He looked uncomfortable and unsure how to answer some questions so he ignored them . . 
like how about using the same technology the Saudi 's used on a similar spill with tankers . 
President Obama feels the pain of the people in the Gulf States . 
The President and his team have been directing and managing the oil crisis from Day one ! 
The fact , that the oil leak has not been blocked is nothing at all to do with the speed and persistence of President Obama 's response , but everything to do with the technical difficulties of blocking an oil spill at such depth ! 
how we missed Red Adair ! 
President Obama and his team are not trained to stop oil leaks ! 
That 's BP 's job ! 
We must not blame the President for something that is outside his control ! 
NO OBAMA 'S HIGHEST PRIORITY WAS SMEARING THE REPUBLICANS ON THE WALL STREET BILL . 
Come on - can he get serious ? 
NO OBAMA 'S HIGHEST PRIORITY WAS SMEARING THE REPUBLICANS ON THE WALL STREET BILL . 
Come on - can he get serious ? 
Who is the subject matter expert here and who has the years of experience , the equipment , and the personnel to deal with deep water issues ??? Instead of being bossy and trying to score political points in the press ... how about acting as a partner that is eager\/willing to help facilitate the needs to stop the leak and prevent further disaster ?? Posted by : alutz08 | May 27 , 2010 5:13 PM | Report abuse And , of course , Obama offered ample evidence of exactly HOW the government has been in charge , right ? 
Obama is the hypno-toad . 
We simply absorb and believe everything he says without asking for any substantiation . 
It must be difficult to ask tough questions while basking in the glow of his light . 
In one comment you insist that the entire press conference was a waste of time because the media did nothing but lob `` gotcha '' questions ... at the president they 're infatuated with . 
I know people can buy boxes of stupid at WalMart ; maybe you can find a box of brains somewhere . 
Where did the DNC find this guy ? 
Did he actually pass the bar somewhere ? 
I vote we fire the DNC . 
We could have run someone really Presidential like Martin Sheen . 
Better yet , let 's draft Alan Grayson . 
I guess the only consolation is that the guy with Alzheimer 's and the Arctic Pom Pom Girl did n't get elected . 
Ca n't you just see that play out , `` Aw come on guys . 
Do n't be mad . 
I thought the red button was for warm milk and cookies . 
Maybe no one will notice what happened to London . '' 
Yet Obama feels its his right to reverse direction on that voluntary policy , play golf while oil seeps into the gulf ... play in Hawaii while troops fight and a hijacker attempts to bring down a plane on Christmas Day , and refuses to , as the ` Ragin Cajun ' put it best , `` Get down here and get in the middle of the situation . '' 
In 37 days , Obama has only visited once , and is begrudgingly going once more because his poll numbers have dropped . 
Instead of threatening a `` boot on the neck of BP , '' maybe he should be throwing as much resources that the Federal Govt\/Military has to the use of BP to help speed up the closing of the leak . 
Talk about a lack of leadership . 
Whoever said that the GOP is against big gov ' t only when they 're not got it exactly right . 
Three miles out - that 's the Feds territory - hence the reason Jindal ca n't protect his coastline without a waiver - that Obama could sign in a heartbeat - is n't Obama the one who stated that now he was President that the `` oceans would heal '' ? 
Republicans are saying `` sign the waiver , Mr. President , so the ocean and the shoreline of Louisiana can heal '' and the Green President has n't done it . 
That 's large government at work for you ... red tape stopping things that can be done and should be done from getting done ... ... but I 'm probably wasting my breath on you because someone from the Democrat Party is n't the one the telling you what to think . 
I guess I don ; t understand the GOP criticism of what they call a slow fed gov ' t response to the Gulf crisis . 
I thought the GOP was all about smaller gov ` t , the power of the individual , and letting corporations do their own thing . 
Not when it comes to scoring cheap political points , I guess . 
njacobs | Posted by : LMW6 | May 27 , 2010 4:58 PM | Report abuse George Bush , 8 years in office -LRB- 2920 days -RRB- Time spent at Camp David : Total time on vacation : 977 days , 33 % of his term . 
Three miles out - that 's the Feds territory - hence the reason Jindal ca n't protect his coastline without a waiver - that Obama could sign in a heartbeat - is n't Obama the one who stated that now he was President that the `` oceans would heal '' ? 
Republicans are saying `` sign the waiver , Mr. President , so the ocean and the shoreline of Louisiana can heal '' and the Green President has n't done it . 
That 's large government at work for you ... red tape stopping things that can be done and should be done from getting done ... ... but I 'm probably wasting my breath on you because someone from the Democrat Party is n't the one the teling you what to think . 
I guess I don ; t understand the GOP criticism of what they call a slow fed gov ' t response to the Gulf crisis . 
I thought the GOP was all about smaller gov ` t , the power of the individual , and letting corporations do their own thing . 
Not when it comes to scoring cheap political points , I guess . 
njacobs | Posted by : LMW6 | May 27 , 2010 4:56 PM | Report abuse hey boodah , you dolt ... if the accident occurred closer to shore in shallower waters , then all of the proven alternate methods to seal the leak would have worked ... instead of failing at the 1 mile depth . 
The leak probably could 've been severed within a couple days if you can get to it faster . 
The aspect of this crisis that President Obama could have controlled is the response to the danger of oil coming ashore , and he did not take control . 
He could have commandeered ships , boats , dredges , etc. and prevented the oil from coming ashore , but he did n't . 
He did marshal an army of lawyers to make sure BP is held accountable as any good Harvard Law grad would . 
But he did n't take command and provide the resources to prevent the damage to the coast of Louisiana and other Gulf Coast states even though he had more than 30 days before the oil actually came ashore . 
Not a shining moment . 
you know , like over at the SEC . 
when the slacker in chief takes a long vacation after five weeks of inaction , it is hard not to have that trickle down to the troops . 
All I can say is 2012 ca n't get here fast enough . 
Like some of the other claims he made -LRB- the government is doing as much as possible -RRB- this stinks of more BS rhetoric that sounds greater than it really is . 
Much like the economy and financial reg reform , the white house has cooked up this false reality that they did what was necessary and all is saved . 
To anyone who 's been paying attention this is obviously not the case . 
More importantly , this will be a field day for both dems , repubs , liberals , conservatives , and media pundits in terms of what this means politically versus discussing the effectiveness of the energy plan , questioning the notion of drilling for oil , questioning the need for more oil , raising the cap limits on the liability of damages of BP , etc. . 
This like many other important points of policy making will be drowned out in the media so the real back door negotiations can take place and further drive this country into the mess and decay it already lives in . 
?? Our military , law enforcement , and ELECTED OFFICIALS need to HONOR THEIR OATH TO THE U.S. CONSTITUTION !!! Posted by : dan_kempf | May 27 , 2010 4:38 PM | Report abuse Posted by : bsimon1 | May 27 , 2010 4:33 PM | Report abuse It 's hilarious that the new GOP spin is that regulation pushed BP farther out and this is what caused the disaster . 
As if drilling closer to the shore would n't simply have caused the massive amounts of oil to come ashore sooner . 
Republicans are n't this dumb , are they ? 
-LRB- a democrat -RRB- had no emergency planning when a Category 5 hurricane hit the shore of a city that starts out under water and in that situation it was the sitting President s fault -LRB- a republican -RRB- . 
Do you not see the irony in your statement ? 
How partisan can you get . 
Either Obama is at fault for not doing enough for this one of a kind oil spill or Bush was not at fault for a one of a kind hurricane . 
I tend to think both are not at fault simply because of the enormity of the event . 
I think if Hurricane Katrina hit during Obama s watch the same thing would have happen as did with Bush -LRB- minus all the learning s since Katrina -RRB- . 
Is democracy just about who can yell the loudest and the quickest ? 
These spammers -LRB- whatever their job may be -RRB- may have valid opinions but I honestly want to read some real diversity . 
When is the media going to start exposing these vile hate-filled people for what they really are ? 
The private sector will ALWAYS recklessly disregard safety for profit . 
Republicans are against big government except when they are n't . 
It was not my first idea but this is ridiculous . 
His measured response is a non-starter . 
I do not care about photo ops , but do want a radical reinvention and his presence there would perhaps prompt this . 
I think he is in a bubble , as W was . 
So , break out . 
He could stay out of the way in a military base , or on a military ship . 
It would not impede anything , and might help . 
His lack of awareness of his own personnel changes was disturbing in this time of crisis . 
He needs a wakeup call from someone other than his little girl . 
All hands on deck , literally . 
p.s. is there no pertinent expertise elsewhere in the world - the far northern European underwater rigs , etc. . 
SOMEONE must have a clue . 
Maybe another nation mandated an emergency plan that we lack , and we could access this ? 
Is chucking hair , mud and chopped tires as , uh , good as it gets ? 
What if they fail , and pressure pops open a bigger chasm ? 
AND they are prosecuting Blago for basically doing the same thing . 
Initially he tried to demogougue the situation , planning on the country to rally behind his socialist agenda . 
When it turned out that he had chosen badly and was on the wrong side , he tried to pivot . 
for someone who has been calling for big government oversight of everything on the face of the earth , his blame first , ask questions later fake did not fly . 
now he was caught simultaneously blaming others while still claiming he was in charge . 
the confusion did not change today . 
He does not even seem to know who works for him on a day to day basis . 
the personnel he sent to AZ are prohibited from enforcing the law . 
Hire a bunch of people to do nothing . 
his oil spill experts are paid to think about things and not act . 
sounds like Messiah himself , does n't it ? 
Who knows , maybe they are just using more viscous `` mud '' now . 
I got news for you dopes , Comrade Obama and his administration have been in charge since day one -- 36 or so days ago -- because the Feds have control of all areas outside the USA 's three-mile limit . 
Within the three-mile limit , the states are in charge because of the Stafford Act . 
The Stafford Act made it illegal for the Feds to respond to any disaster , unless asked to by the individual states affected . 
This is the reason George W. Bush did n't respond right away after the Katrina Hurricane disaster hit New Orleans and Louisiana . 
He would have violated the Stafford Act . 
Comrade Obama was in charge of the BP oil spill alright , and we 've all seen the result . 
That is what Obama was doing - instead of working on the oil spill . 
Allegations that the White House offered Joe Sestak a job in exchange for dropping out of the Pennsylvania Senate race echo an earlier report of a job offer to candidate Andrew Romanoff in Colorado . 
On September 27 , 2009 the Denver Post reported that the Obama administration offered Senate candidate Romanoff a position if he canceled plans to run for the Democratic nomination against incumbent Sen. Michael Bennet . 
The paper said the job offer , which specified particular jobs , was reportedly delivered by Jim Messina , Obama 's deputy chief of staff . 
One position cited by the Post was a job at USAID , the foreign aid agency . 
Messina contacted Romanoff soon after news leaked in August 2009 that Romanoff , former Colorado House speaker , would make a primary run against Bennet . 
This wo n't matter to progs , who find the Chicago style corruption of the Democrat party kind of cute . 
Charlie Rangel is still in office although temporarily not chairing the committee that writes tax laws , after all . 
And Barney Frank is still chairing the banking committee . 
And the only reason Eric Massa is gone is because he was going to vote the wrong way on ObamaCare . 
We do n't need another axis of evil speech , ever . 
No one chooses their own nickname from a TV show and then insists everyone use it . 
I remember when kids tried that in middle school and sometimes even in high school . 
The laughter , the mortification , it never worked . 
Have some self-respect Piyush , do the paperwork , talk to the magistrate like everyone else who had to change a name they hated . 
Do n't just call yourself `` Bobby '' , become Bobby . 
A team of lawyers will be crafting a reply to that question to studiously avoid having to say anything that could be used in court later . 
therefore we are all going to refrain from mentioning this standard Chicago practice anymore . 
I thought the GOP was all about smaller gov ` t , the power of the individual , and letting corporations do their own thing . 
Not when it comes to scoring cheap political points , I guess . 
Obama JUST GOT BACK FROM A FUNDRAISING TRIP TO CALIFORNIA . 
this is the cheapest form of manipulation from the fraud we elected . 
Allowing the fiction to persist until today that this thing was a fraction of its actual size was a nuanced decision ? 
It was either sink the oil with detergent or walk away from the whole thing ? 
Whaddya mean he no choice ? 
ATTENTION POTUS : AVOID THE PERILS OF A ` NATIONAL EMERGENCY ' RESPONSE Mr. President , in the next few days , a mounting chorus of fair-weather friends and knowing foes will press you to militarize the oil spill response . 
Please think carefully before you sign off on draconian measures that may result in a restriction of constitutional rights -- fomenting opposition to your leadership . 
And get that fleet of tanker-skimmers on the water , STAT . 
Maybe he does n't really have another choice , but President Obama should know better than to think voters will understand nuance . 
How exactly will that help the situation , short of providing photo-ops ? 
Obama is not an oil man , and the government does n't own any of the equipment needed for this process . 
People need to think about the actual practicality of the situation , rather than just drawing impulsive conclusions based on the administration 's media presence . 
I do n't expect berry to repeat answering hard questions for another full year . 
time for a vacation . 
An hour of work every 6 or 8 months , needed or not , is enough . 
now where 's my jet , my chef and my doctor , I gotta go . 
A really great leader would have even had the oil company pay for it . 
This is the kind of thing a state with off-shore drilling nearby needs to prepare for . 
People are going to be more frustrated after it stops . 
The frustration is only beginning . 
But people like greatgran are fools . 
The American people who elected the oil men Bush\/Cheney are responsible for this disaster , right along with BP\/Haliburton . 
You people who hate government , you Piyush Jindal fans , YOU did this . 
That said , Obama was and is responsible for the response . 
Leaving BP in charge of the most important decisions and the sequence of those decisions relative to the response was a bad decision . 
The long term is the only term for a problem like this , ask people who live in Prince William Sound whether Exxon made good , whether they are all done being frustrated . 
SO first let 's take control of BP and Halliburton assets and use their money not taxpayers money to solve the problem , pay for the clean up and provide necessary compensation for all of the people affected by the mess hitting the coast . 
Let 's freeze the assets of these businesses and make sure no big bonuses go the CEO 's and make sure the small businesses suffering on the coast get compensation so they can survive and prosper . 
Obama only delivers hot air and shocking as it is , blamed the Bush administration . 
Can you believe that ? 
He is shameless and of course blameless . 
He proves he is no leader . 
Jindal is my hero out there walking the walk trying to do all he can while that worthless `` o '' plays golf and goes to fundraisers . 
I hope the citizens of these southern states start to see these worthless '' know nothing do nothing '' Democrats for what they really are , worthless . 
This is their version of big government and that is to benefit while you suffer and all of us pay the tab . 
There is \* no \* place for even reasoned , respectful dissent with this President ? 
You are in favor of what he does or you are misinformed . 
This reminds me of the healthcare debate , where you either agreed with The One or you were misinformed . 
He campaigned that way as well - remember the straw man arguments he would pose at town halls : present his position and then say `` or maybe you think we should do nothing '' or `` we ca n't just stand still '' although there was -LRB- were -RRB- opposing views . 
Nobody proposed we should stand still , or do nothing , about the economy , or healthcare . 
It was a preposterous fib from The One and a cheap rhetorical stunt . 
Arrogant to continue to primly opine that yours is literally the only possible stance in any given situation . 
It 's a gussied-up version of `` my way or highway . '' 
There 's a party line , hew to it or just shut up . 
Thanks , but no thanks . 
I think we need all points of view and we need a President who is non-defensive in the face of critique . 
I wish we had one . 
My administration will prepare a statement . 
Now I have some Bball to play . 
Instead of opening with an update on the urgent top-kill procedure , Mr. Obama circled the wagons and went on the defensive . 
And for good reason , since the media questions were one big game of ` gotcha . ' 
After the same question was asked in seven different ways , the president finally said that he is responsible . 
Not one question was asked about mitigating the long-term environmental and economic consequences of the spill . 
No one thought to bring up our teetering economy , or the additional $ 145 billion bailout just announced . 
Nope , this was all about Mr. Obama , and the media 's infatuation with him . 
What a waste of time ... Posted by : mtpeaks | May 27 , 2010 3:07 PM | Report abuse I knew we were in trouble when Obama made it clear in an interview last year that the first priority of a politician is to get re-elected . 
And unfortunately this is the way he governs . 
Rather than act as the Chief Executive of his branch of government , he acts like the leader of the Democratic party and as such he isolates those who are not democrat allowing his ideaology to guide his thoughts and actions . 
This oil spill is his presidency in a microcosm - implement a series of half-measures , look to gain opportunistic political advantage , demonize another party and practice symbolism over substance . 
His ideology and arrogance trumped the moral and ethical response which should have been to mobilize all the necessary resources to minimize the environmental and financial impact of this disaster . 
Instead he immediatley sought political cover . 
I guess it boils down to one word ... leadership . 
A quality he obviosly lacks . 
HOMELAND HIT LIST TARGETS ` DISSIDENTS , ' ` UNDESIRABLES ' FOR SILENT MICROWAVE TORTURE , FINANCIAL SABOTAGE , VIGILANTE COMMUNITY STALKING HARASSMENT : VETERAN JOURNALIST Has POTUS been a target of cell tower - based microwave radio frequency weapon system -- deployed nationwide ? 
we have heard enough about his worry , his urgency and his concern . 
it all feels very 30,000-feet high , looking way down . 
why is there no czar ? 
why have BP US assets not been frozen , against future claims and equal to liability ? 
why have labor dept. people not been with the fisherman , and helping them fend off BP lawyers with $ 5,000 hush money checks . 
Bobby Jindal is looking better every day . 
Who 'd thunk it ? 
The One needs to get there and stay there , and leave a deputy with a brain in charge . 
no more press statements about impatience . 
that was old a month ago . 
When he is getting spanked by Carville , it 's bad . 
The McCain\/Palin campaign received approx . 
three times as much as Obama 's . 
Perhaps you were n't around in 2008 , but Drill Baby Drill chants were heard in Minneapolis , not Denver . 
And he had to play the sympathy card with little Mashika . 
BP gave YOU millions in campaign money , no wonder you do n't push on them ... two crooks . 
Golfing , basketball and social events do not solve America 's issues . 
You ca n't handle your position ... RESIGN ! 
Check out what happened to your terrance wall column on this . '' '' 
Okay , blame OBAMA !!!!! Posted by : Jimbo77 | May 27 , 2010 2:38 PM | Report abuse i didnt think it was his best . 
not knowing about if the head of mms was fired or resigned ? 
he didnt seem comfortable up there . 
Are you saying that Obama learns everything through second hand sources ? 
No , the opposite . 
I am saying he was a part of the process of setting up her sacrifice , to be announced prior to his press conference . 
This has been a way for high priests and rulers to help their constituents feel better about the pain and anger associated with disasters that have or may befall them . 
Obama did not `` find out '' about this lady getting fired . 
When bad things happen , someone falls on their sword , or a witch hunt occurs and someone has to be burned at the stake . 
This is part of ruling a mob . 
Too bad for Birnbaum , she is no more responsible for dead turtles washing up in the weeds than you or I , but she is being treated that way , as if her firing will help the healing process . 
Check out what happened to your tweet column on this . 
