Gulf oil spill update : Top kill maneuver A frame grab , taken from a BP live video feed , shows activity during the `` top kill '' procedure to stop the flow of oil from the Gulf of Mexico oil well May 26 , 2010 . 
BP Plc launched an ambitious deep sea operation to choke off a gushing oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico on Wednesday , but President Barack Obama cautioned Americans there was no guarantee it would work . 
-LRB- Reuters -RRB- Thoughts , comments , suggestions or criticisms about The Post 's Live Q&A s ? 
Send us an e-mail . 
Thursday , May 27 , 2010 ; 1:00 PM The top kill is underway , success uncertain . 
BP engineers are pumping mud at a furious rate into the damaged blowout preventer that sits on the uncapped well at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico . 
The hazardous-but-high-reward maneuver comes five weeks into the oil spill crisis amid an intensifying atmosphere of political recrimination that has spread from the Gulf Coast to the White House and Congress . 
Greg McCormack : Hi I am Greg McCormack , Director of the Petroleum Extension Service the University of Texas we are following the activities in the Gulf of Mexico and I am here to explain the Top Kill Operation . 
Silver Spring , Md. : Soaking up oil : Whenever I am changing my oil in my car I make certain that I have a bucket of sawdust around -LRB- I am a woodworker -RRB- . 
When I knock over the old oil from my car , I just throw a few scoops of sawdust on it . 
It is immediately soaked up the oil and then I scoop it up with a dust pan -- problem resolved . 
There are millions of cubic yards of sawdust available from lumber mills , furniture makers , etc. . 
Has anybody suggested this . 
If interested , I can demonstrate or just try it yourself . 
This oil\/sawdust could be disposed of by incinerating or easily hauled away . 
Denver , Colo. : I 'm trying to understand the logic behind the complaints that BP is n't doing enough . 
This is such a major PR disaster for them -- their name is going to be associated with Oil Spill for decades to come , like Exxon . 
What possible business reason would there be for them not to be doing everything possible to stop the leak and clean stuff up ? 
Baltimore , Md. : I find it a bit amusing that once it was announced that the `` top kill '' had worked , all the live camera feeds that a multitude of Web sites were showing live , suddenly ceased . 
At least I ca n't find one anywhere to save my soul . 
So what is this : some `` conspiracy '' to divert attention from what could be an incomplete success , or just a stupid media mindset of `` no drama ? 
Nothing to see here , move along , folks ... '' ???? Greg McCormack : There are multiple web sites showing the live feed . 
Because it is streaming they occasionally go down or stop showing the video . 
Downingtown , Pa. : I 'm unclear on how extensive the cement plug will be . 
Will it extend from near the sea floor to deep below ? 
Or will it be at the base of the drill casing and extend upward ? 
Perhaps a related question : How significant is the risk that hydrocarbons will bypass the plug and find a way to the sea floor ? 
Newport Beach , Calif. : Why are U.S. deep water drillers not required to drill a relief well at the same time the drill the initial well ? 
I understand this is a requirement in other countries including Canada . 
Would n't that have prevented much of this disaster ? 
Bowie , Md. : Without human intervention , what will ultimately happen to the oil that 's been spilled ? 
Will it eventually evaporate ; dissolve ; sink to the bottom ? 
Laurel , Md. : The United Kingdom produces a lot of petroleum from the North Sea . 
Is it BP doing that , too ? 
If their environmental practices are consistent , is that region at as much risk as our Gulf ? 
Arlington , Va. : It sounds to me like BP is just grasping at straws . 
They want to appear to be doing something , but they really know that the oil is going to continue to flow for several more months until the alternate well is drilled . 
Rockville , Md. : Our popular image of a land-based oil well is that it starts with a gusher spraying out the top of a rig . 
How are offshore wells initially dug in order not to leak in the first place ? 
Brooklyn , N.Y. : One thing I have never understood about the spill is that it is apparently an ` exploratory ' well . 
It seems to be an awful lot of oil for a non-production well . 
Did they just hit too much oil that had more pressure than the well could handle ? 
If this were a full production well that had ruptured how much worse would the disaster be ? 
Arlington , Va. : In the news you often read that the cement would plug the well `` permanently . '' 
How permanent is `` permanently '' ? 
Wo n't the cement crack and deteriorate over time just like with any structure ? 
Are there any long-range estimates of how long this plug is designed to last ? 
Washington , D.C. : What do you think about President Obama 's halt to offshore drilling for six months ? 
Does offshore drilling have a future ? 
If not , where do we get the oil ? 
Arlington , Va. : What happened to 4-story cofferdam they tried lowering over the leak originally ? 
Is it going to be left on the seafloor or did they raise it back up and recover it ? 
Palo Alto , Calif. : A little technical information is always interesting , and your guesses would be nice if you lack the actual data : What was the pressure at the wellhead prior to the start of the top kill , what pressure might have been imposed by the kill mud pumping , and what flow rates down hole might have been achieved in the first hour , and then say at hour 12 ? 
Centreville , Va. : Mr. McCormack , it has been widely reported that for the northern drilling Canada does require a relief well be drilled simultaneously with the production well . 
The reason this is n't going to cause a 2nd blowout is that the relief well taps into the original well drill hole and plugs it . 
The relief well does n't actually drill into the oil reservoir . 
Willis , Mont. : Why are n't they using a compound like drylock fastplug ? 
It will solidify under water . 
Metairie , La. : Why would BP , realizing this is an unprecedented disaster with an unprecedented need , not go outside of their company to have a national summit -- to confer with the top engineers of the country -LRB- even competitors like Chevron , Shell , etc. -RRB- to help solve this issue and work for the good of the whole industry ? 
Washington , D.C. : Hi Greg , my question is could this attempt to plug the well with mud have been done at the start ? 
I do n't know whether it 's true , but I 've heard that BP avoided it because they wanted to have the well available to them again in the future and did n't want to lose a moneymaker , so they tried other ways first . 
In that case , they 've been looking out for their interests instead of the country 's , and that 's when the government should have forced them to action on this earlier . 
Your thoughts on that ? 
Houston , Tex. : If the professionals do not know to fix this , why do people think blaming Obama will help ? 
Does the president have some skills here beyond what the pros have ? 
Hook 'em : The technical challenges that BP are faced with today have never been faced with before . 
Panama City , Fla. : I 'm curious about what we see continuing to escape the riser ? 
It does not appear as black as before but the volume of gas would seem to have increased , if it is in fact gas -LRB- Methane -RRB- Washington , dc : If the mud and cement plug is successful , is there a chance that it could produce pressure build-up elsewhere in the well 's pipes , causing other leaks ? 
Richmond , Va. : It looks as if pumping this heavy mud into the well is resulting in a substantial reduction in the amount of oil flowing from the leak -LRB- s -RRB- . 
If this is the case why not just keep injecting the heavy mud into the well to keep the oil out of the water ? 
Is n't the mud non-toxic ? 
Washington , D.C. : If a major hurricane were to hit the Gulf this hurricane season , how would that affect the oil that has already spilled ? 
I 'd imagine that it would aid in its devastating spread . 
Katy , Tex. : Seems to me nobody on the rig was watching the flowback of mud into the tank when swapping it out with Seawater . 
When this is all said and done , how is the interaction between service companies and producers going to be affected ? 
I see more service requirements , but with greater oversight from the oil companies , and this time hopefully with a competent `` Company Man . '' 
Rockville , Md. : Can you recommend a book with a chapter about the technical side of offshore drilling , suitable for an informed citizen to understand ? 
Exton , Pa. : Is there a technical reason not to immediately proceed with the junk shot if the top shot seems to be gaining ground on the blowout ? 
Omaha , Neb. : Is freezing anything an option ? 
Could it help with the current efforts at all ? 
Rockville , Md. : I work as a safety professional , so my job is to always examine worst case scenarios . 
Can BP really say with a straight face that they , and virtually every other oil company on the planet , never thought a blowout preventer could fail in this manner ? 
Just reading the few details about the incident , this seems like a 0.01 percent possibility , and certainly something worth investing some time and money into thinking about preventing or at least coming up with an efficient response plan . 
I just can not believe engineers have been flying by the seat of their pants on this response and that NOBODY ever considered that something like this could happen and came up with a way to fix it . 
Rutherford , N.J. : How wide is the opening of hole on the ocean floor and does it get bigger or smaller towards the surface . 
Also , does oil in most wells rise due to pressure or pumped to the surface ? 
Anonymous : Can the well be plugged using conventional weaponry such as torpedo ? 
Flower Mound Texas : Why did BP representatives , over strenuous objections of the crew on board , decide to replace the drilling mud that held the gas down in the well ? 
Is n't that heavy mud supposed to be there all the time ? 
What was it replaced with ? 
Cleveland , Ohio : I realize BP does not want to raise expectations . 
But given that it has now been almost 24 hours , about how long should we expect to wait before hearing that the flow has been stopped ? 
Editor 's Note : washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Discussions and choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts ; guests and hosts can decline to answer questions . 
washingtonpost.com is not responsible for any content posted by third parties . 
To Refresh Page : Press the F5 key on your keyboard or click here . 
: Christless Christianity Guest : Dr. Michael S. Horton Viewpoint is a paid discussion . 
The Washington Post editorial staff was not involved in the moderation . 
