Congress 's Afterthought , Wall Street 's Trillion Dollars Sen. Christopher J. Dodd -LRB- D-Conn . -RRB- 
authored the 1991 legislation , which was requested by Wall Street . 
-LRB- By Lauren Victoria Burke -- Associated Press -RRB- On the day before Thanksgiving in 1991 , the U.S. Senate voted to vastly expand the emergency powers of the Federal Reserve . 
The critical language was contained in a single , somewhat inscrutable sentence , and the only public explanation was offered during a final debate that began with a reminder that senators had airplanes to catch . 
Yet , in removing a long-standing prohibition on loans that supported financial speculation , the provision effectively allowed the Fed for the first time to lend money to Wall Street during a crisis . 
That authority , which sat unused for more than 16 years , now provides the legal basis for the Fed 's unprecedented efforts to rescue the financial system . 
Since March 2008 , the central bank 's board of governors has invoked its emergency powers at least 19 times : to contain the wreckage of Bear Stearns and ease the fall of American International Group , to preserve Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley , to limit losses at Bank of America and Citigroup , to lend more than $ 1 trillion . 
The repeated use of the once-dusty law has surprised and alarmed a wide range of people , including economists and members of Congress . 
It has even raised worries among presidents of the regional banks that make up the Federal Reserve system . 
Many critics are concerned that an institution not accountable to voters is risking vast amounts of public money and choosing which companies get help . 
Others are concerned that the Fed 's new role will interfere with its basic responsibility for regulating economic growth . 
There is also a question about the roots of the crisis : Did investment banks take greater risks in the past two decades because they knew the Fed could rescue them ? 
The 1991 legislation , authored by Sen. Christopher J. Dodd -LRB- D-Conn . -RRB- 
, was requested by Goldman Sachs and other Wall Street firms in the wake of the 1987 market crisis , and it would save some of them a generation later . 
Fed Chairman Ben S. Bernanke and other leaders of the central bank have argued that the emergency authority has allowed it to rescue the financial system and that without it , the economy would be in far worse shape . 
And they argue that they are using the power as Congress intended . 
`` This provision was designed as a last resort to make sure credit flows when times are tough and credit is n't being extended , '' said Scott Alvarez , the Fed 's general counsel . 
`` That 's exactly what it 's being used for today . '' 
Rep. Barney Frank -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
, chairman of the House Financial Services Committee , said that the actions taken by the Fed have been necessary and important but that those actions should have been taken by an agency accountable to voters . 
He said he was not aware of the Fed 's emergency power until September , and he favored removing much of that authority from the Fed once the crisis has passed . 
