Oil execs in Senate hearing as gulf oil spill cleanup efforts continue -- photos Oil companies stress one another 's failures in a Senate hearing as cleanup and containment efforts continue in the Gulf of Mexico , after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig April 20 . 
View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
The Interior Department exempted BP 's calamitous Gulf of Mexico drilling operation from a detailed environmental impact analysis last year , according to government documents , after three reviews of the area concluded that a massive oil spill was unlikely . 
Now , environmentalists and some key senators are calling for a reassessment of safety requirements for offshore drilling . 
Sen. Judd Gregg -LRB- R-N.H. -RRB- , who has supported offshore oil drilling in the past , said , `` I suspect you 're going to see an entirely different regime once people have a chance to sit back and take a look at how do we anticipate and clean up these potential environmental consequences '' from drilling . 
BP spokesman Toby Odone said the company 's appeal for NEPA waivers in the past `` was based on the spill and incident-response history in the Gulf of Mexico . '' 
Once the various investigations of the new spill have been completed , he added , `` the causes of this incident can be applied to determine any changes in the regulatory regime that are required to protect the environment . '' 
`` I 'm of the opinion that boosterism breeds complacency and complacency breeds disaster , '' said Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
`` That , in my opinion , is what happened . '' 
Jack Gerard , president of the American Petroleum Institute , said it is important to learn the cause of the accident before pursuing a major policy change . 
`` While the conversation has shifted , the energy reality has not , '' Gerard said . 
`` The American economy still relies on oil and gas . '' 
While the MMS assessed the environmental impact of drilling in the central and western Gulf of Mexico on three occasions in 2007 -- including a specific evaluation of BP 's Lease 206 at Deepwater Horizon -- in each case it played down the prospect of a major blowout . 
In one assessment , the agency estimated that `` a large oil spill '' from a platform would not exceed a total of 1,500 barrels and that a `` deepwater spill , '' occurring `` offshore of the inner Continental shelf , '' would not reach the coast . 
In another assessment , it defined the most likely large spill as totaling 4,600 barrels and forecast that it would largely dissipate within 10 days and would be unlikely to make landfall . 
`` They never did an analysis that took into account what turns out to be the very real possibility of a serious spill , '' said Holly Doremus , a law professor at the University of California at Berkeley who has reviewed the documents . 
The MMS mandates that companies drilling in some areas identify under NEPA what could reduce a project 's environmental impact . 
But Interior Department spokesman Matt Lee-Ashley said the service grants between 250 and 400 waivers a year for Gulf of Mexico projects . 
He added that Interior has now established the `` first ever '' board to examine safety procedures for offshore drilling . 
It will report back within 30 days on BP 's oil spill and will conduct `` a broader review of safety issues , '' Lee-Ashley said . 
BP 's exploration plan for Lease 206 , which calls the prospect of an oil spill `` unlikely , '' stated that `` no mitigation measures other than those required by regulation and BP policy will be employed to avoid , diminish or eliminate potential impacts on environmental resources . '' 
While the plan included a 13-page environmental impact analysis , it minimized the prospect of any serious damage associated with a spill , saying there would be only `` sub-lethal '' effects on fish and marine mammals , and `` birds could become oiled . 
However it is unlikely that an accidental oil spill would occur from the proposed activities . '' 
Kiern Suckling , executive director of the environmental group Center for Biological Diversity , said the federal waiver `` put BP entirely in control '' of the way it conducted its drilling . 
`` The agency 's oversight role has devolved to little more than rubber-stamping British Petroleum 's self-serving drilling plans , '' Suckling said . 
BP has lobbied the White House Council on Environmental Quality -- which provides NEPA guidance for all federal agencies -- to provide categorical exemptions more often . 
In an April 9 letter , BP America 's senior federal affairs director , Margaret D. Laney , wrote to the council that such exemptions should be used in situations where environmental damage is likely to be `` minimal or non-existent . '' 
An expansion in these waivers would help `` avoid unnecessary paperwork and time delays , '' she added . 
Lawmakers on Capitol Hill were talking Tuesday about curtailing offshore oil exploration rather than making it easier . 
In addition to traditional foes of offshore drilling such as Democratic Sens. Robert Menendez -LRB- N.J. -RRB- and Bill Nelson -LRB- Fla. -RRB- , Senate Majority Leader Harry M. Reid -LRB- D-Nev . -RRB- 
and centrists such as Max Baucus -LRB- D-Mont . -RRB- 
and Richard G. Lugar -LRB- R-Ind . -RRB- 
said they are taking a second look at such methods . 
`` It 's time to push the pause button , '' Baucus told reporters . 
Staff writer Steven Mufson contributed to this report . '' 
