Oil execs in Senate hearing as gulf oil spill cleanup efforts continue -- photos Oil companies stress one another 's failures in a Senate hearing as cleanup and containment efforts continue in the Gulf of Mexico , after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig April 20 . 
View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
The urgent question along the polluted Gulf of Mexico : How bad will this get ? 
No one knows , but with each day that the leaking oil well a mile below the surface remains uncapped , scientists and energy industry observers are imagining outcomes that range from bad to worse to worst , with some forecasting a calamity of historic proportions . 
Executives from oil giant BP and other energy companies , meanwhile , shared their own worst-case scenario in a Capitol Hill meeting with lawmakers , saying that if they fail to close the well , the spill could increase from an estimated 5,000 barrels a day to 40,000 barrels or possibly even 60,000 barrels . 
Three scientists in separate interviews Tuesday said the gulf 's `` loop current , '' a powerful conveyor belt that extends about 3,000 feet deep , will almost surely take the oil down through the eastern gulf to the Straits of Florida , a week-long trip , roughly . 
The oil would then hang a sharp left , riding the Florida Current past the Keys and north again , directly into the Gulf Stream , which could carry it within spitting distance of Palm Beach and up the East Coast to Cape Hatteras , N.C. For the moment , the oil flowing from the blown-out well in what the industry calls Mississippi Canyon Block 252 is still many miles north of the loop current . 
A three-day forecast by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration does not show the oil and the current crossing paths . 
But Robert Weisberg , an oceanographer at the University of South Florida who has been monitoring the situation , said a new filament of the current is reaching toward the oil slick . 
`` The loop current is actually going to the oil , versus the oil going to the loop current , '' Weisberg said . 
The crisis in the gulf is shot through with guesses , rough estimates and murky figures . 
Whether the oil blows onshore depends on fickle winds . 
This oil slick has been elusive and enigmatic , lurking off the coast of Louisiana for many days as if choosing its moment of attack . 
It has changed sizes : In rough , churning seas , the visible slick at the surface has shrunk in recent days . 
The oil by its nature is hard to peg . 
It 's not a single , coherent blob but rather an irregular , amoeba-shaped expanse that in some places forms a thin sheen on the water and in other locations is braided and stretched into tendrils of thick , orange-brown gunk . 
There may be a large plume of oil in the water column , unseen . 
A BP executive said the company has had success in treating the oil at the point of the leak with dispersant chemicals sprayed by a robotic submarine . 
A federal fleet has fought high waves in attempts to skim or burn the oil . 
Rough weather has actually been a blessing , said Ian MacDonald , an oceanography professor at Florida State University . 
In heavy surf , the oil has been breaking up , and toxic , volatile substances have been evaporating . 
`` It chews up the oil ; some of it sinks , '' MacDonald said . 
The good news ends there . 
`` What remains forms what 's called mousse , which is like chocolate mousse . 
It 's an emulsion , which is an emulsion of oil , air and water , in a thick , gelatinous layer , and that 's nasty stuff , '' MacDonald said . 
No one is sure how much oil is spilling . 
An early estimate by the Coast Guard of a 1,000-barrel-a-day flow was upped to 5,000 barrels with the discovery of an additional leak , but officials now caution against giving any estimate too much credence . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
