Dr Conrad Murray is charged with the involuntary manslaughter of Jackson A recording of Michael Jackson bemoaning his unhappy childhood has been played to the trial of the doctor charged with his death . 
In the audio recorded six weeks before the star 's death , an apparently drugged Jackson tells Conrad Murray about his plans to stage a series of concerts . 
Jackson says the shows in London will be for children as he did not have a childhood . 
Dr Murray is charged with the involuntary manslaughter of Jackson . 
The clip , already aired in last week 's opening statements , was played in full on Wednesday at the trial in Los Angeles . 
Jackson 's slurred voice is heard telling Dr Murray of plans to build a children 's hospital - the biggest in the world - after the concerts , billed as This Is It . 
I love them because I did n't have a childhood , I feel their pain '' It would be an achievement , Jackson said , that even Elvis Presley and The Beatles did not match . 
`` That will be remembered more than my performances . 
My performance will be up there helping my children and always be my dream , '' Jackson is heard telling his doctor in the 10 May 2009 recording . 
`` I love them . 
I love them because I did n't have a childhood ... I feel their pain . 
I feel their hurt . 
I can deal with it . '' 
With Dr Murray murmuring agreement , Jackson refers to the children of the world as `` angels '' and says : `` God wants me to do it . 
I 'm gonna do it , Conrad . '' 
Toward the end of the recording , there is a period of silence before Dr Murray asks : `` You OK ? '' 
Eight seconds pass before Jackson mumbles : `` I am asleep . '' 
The more than four-minute audio recording was found on Dr Murray 's mobile phone by forensic digital expert Stephen Marx . 
The tape was played by prosecutors to show that Dr Murray knew for weeks the adverse effects of heavy sedatives he was administering to Jackson . 
The prosecution says Dr Murray was distracted while he should have been monitoring Jackson . 
Recent witnesses have included Dr Murray 's girlfriend , Nicole Alvarez -LRB- pictured -RRB- The doctor 's lawyers say Jackson self-administered a lethal dose of propofol , a powerful sedative which the singer was using as a sleeping aid . 
Witnesses in the past two days included several of the doctor 's mistresses and his current girlfriend , Nicole Alvarez . 
Prosecutors say she received shipments of propofol at her apartment on Dr Murray 's behalf . 
She said she never knew what was being sent . 
The trial is expected to last around five weeks . 
If convicted , Dr Murray could spend up to four years in prison and lose his licence to practice medicine . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
