Black Eyed Peas out of Cardiff Michael Jackson concert The Black Eyed Peas are not now playing the Michael Jackson tribute concert Event organisers said the cancellation was due to `` unavoidable circumstances '' . 
The singer 's sister La Toya and the Jackson Brothers , Christina Aguilera , Cee Lo Green and Gladys Knight and Smokey Robinson are amongst the stars taking part . 
BBC Radio 1 presenter Fearne Cotton will co-host the Millennium Stadium concert with Hollywood star Jamie Foxx . 
`` It is with regret that we announce the removal of Black Eyed Peas from the Michael Forever bill , but I look forward to a great night with other earth shattering artists , '' said Chris Hunt , the chief executive officer of Global Live Events . 
UK artists taking part are Leona Lewis , Alexandra Burke , JLS and Diversity . 
The singer died in June 2009 while rehearsing for his This Is It tour Ne-Yo , Pixie Lott , Alien Ant Farm , Jennifer Hudson and Craig David , the next generation of Jacksons , and 3T will also perform while Beyonc will give a video contribution . 
Michael Jackson died aged 50 in June , 2009 while rehearsing for his This Is It tour . 
The tribute concert in Cardiff will raise money for three charities including the Los Angeles-based Aids Project . 
On Tuesday his brothers Marlon , Tito and Jackie Jackson , who will be taking part in the concert with their sister La Toya , defended the decision to hold the event while the trial of his doctor is under way in the US . 
However , Janet Jackson will not be attending the concert . 
The singer said she would find it `` difficult '' because it coincides with the trial of the singer 's doctor . 
The event is also opposed by brothers Randy and Jermaine and some fans say the timing in inappropriate . 
Prosecutors at the trial in Los Angeles claim Dr Conrad Murray caused the pop star 's death by giving him a powerful anesthetic , Propofol , to help him sleep . 
Dr Murray denies involuntary manslaughter . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
