Greenpeace activists place a banner with the British Petroleum -LRB- BP -RRB- Logo in a protest against the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico at the Austrian BP headquarters in Wiener Neustadt July 22 , 2010 . 
Banner reads '' BP out of the deep sea '' . 
LONDON | Fri Oct 22 , 2010 11:49 am BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP 's -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- Gulf of Mexico oil spill meant it missed out on an industry-wide trend of higher profits and rising production in the third quarter , according to a Reuters poll . 
BP 's third-quarter replacement cost profit was forecast down 2 percent to $ 4.60 billion -LRB- 2.9 billion pounds -RRB- despite a 12 percent rise in crude prices , a 29 percent hike in U.S. natural gas prices and a doubling in British gas prices , the poll found . 
By contrast , Royal Dutch Shell -LRB- RDSa . 
L -RRB- was expected to post a 50 percent rise in current cost of supply -LRB- CCS -RRB- net income to $ 4.3 billion . 
Industry No. 1 Exxon Mobil -LRB- XOM . 
N -RRB- was forecast to post a 53 percent rise in net income to $ 7.26 billion , while U.S. rival Chevron 's -LRB- CVX . 
N -RRB- net income was seen up 15 percent to $ 4.41 billion . 
Replacement cost and CCS earnings exclude unrealised gains or charges related to changes in inventory values and , as such , are comparable with net income under U.S. accounting rules . 
`` The focus will be on the ongoing implications of the Macondo disaster but it will be very important to see that underlying operating and financial performance remains competitive , '' analysts at UBS said in a research note . 
BP took a $ 32 billion charge in the second quarter to account for the likely costs of the oil spill -- the worst ever in the United States . 
However , analysts do not believe that was the end of the matter . 
Barclays Capital analysts expected BP to increase the provision for the oil spill by $ 2-3 billion because it took BP over a month longer to seal the well , for good , than it thought . 
Also , the analysts polled said they expected BP 's oil and gas production would likely drop , on average , by 3 percent in the quarter because the oil spill response effort sapped resources from its other fields in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Across the sector , Barclays predicted a 4 percent rise compared to the 2009 period , and Exxon 's output was seen up 19 percent to 4.4 million barrels of oil equivalent per day -LRB- boed -RRB- , largely thanks to its June acquisition of XTO Energy . 
A brighter spot for BP may come in refining . 
All the big , integrated oil companies should receive a boost from higher average margins globally . 
However , the gains were uneven , with margins in the United States , where BP 's facilities are mainly based , jumping almost 30 percent , while margins in Europe , where Shell and Exxon have more capacity , were flat . 
With the oil well plugged on July 15 and killed for good on September 19 , it was inevitable the spill would impact the quarter 's results -- whose release has been delayed by a week due to additional work needed to account for the disaster . 
BP investors are now looking for clues in the results statements and teleconferences with management as to how fast new chief executive Bob Dudley can turn the oil major around . 
`` The path to rehabilitation post Macondo and Bob Dudley 's new strategic direction are the key to performance rather than Q3 earnings , '' analysts at Citigroup said in a research note . 
