Tuesday , March 3 , 2009 ; 4:57 PM President Obama , seeking to boost public confidence in his economic recovery plan and U.S. markets , suggested today that now is a good time for investors with `` a long-term perspective '' to buy stocks , and he vowed that the nation 's financial mess `` is going to get cleaned up . '' 
Speaking to reporters after an Oval Office meeting with visiting British Prime Minister Gordon Brown , Obama said he has no doubt that his plan to rescue the U.S. economy will work . 
Among the topics he discussed with Brown , he said , were efforts to coordinate economic stimulus plans with other members of the Group of 20 , an organization of major world economies that is holding a summit meeting in London next month . 
On the domestic front , `` I 'm absolutely confident that credit 's going to be flowing again , that businesses are going to start seeing opportunities for investment , they 're going to start hiring again , people are going to be put back to work , '' Obama said in response to a question . 
`` What I 'm looking at is not the day-to-day gyrations of the stock market , but the long-term ability for the United States and the entire world economy to regain its footing . 
And , you know , the stock market is sort of like a tracking poll in politics . 
You know , it bobs up and down day to day . 
And if you spend all your time worrying about that , then you 're probably going to get the long-term strategy wrong . '' 
The U.S. banking system `` has been dealt a heavy blow , '' and a lot of losses `` are working their way through the system , '' Obama said , adding that `` it 's not surprising that the market is hurting as a consequence . '' 
He continued , `` On the other hand , what you 're now seeing is profit and earning ratios are starting to get to the point where buying stocks is a potentially good deal if you 've got a long-term perspective on it . 
I think that consumer confidence , as they see the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act taking root -- businesses are starting to see opportunities for investment and potential hiring . 
We are going to start creating jobs again . '' 
Obama predicted that government actions `` are going to slowly build confidence , but it 's not going to happen overnight . '' 
He urged Americans `` to just recognize that we dug a very deep hole for ourselves . 
There were a lot of bad decisions that were made . 
We are cleaning up that mess . 
It 's going to be sort of full of fits and starts , in terms of getting the mess cleaned up ; but it 's going to get cleaned up . '' 
`` And we are going to recover , '' Obama said . 
`` And we are going to emerge more prosperous , more unified and , I think , more protected from systemic risk , having learned these lessons , than we were before . '' 
Pressed later at a White House news briefing on whether Obama had essentially issued a `` buy call '' to help boost the stock market , spokesman Robert Gibbs dismissed the notion . 
Obama has often `` talked about the fact that brighter days for our economy are ahead , if we take important steps and make important decisions now , about addressing many of the problems and challenges that we face . '' 
He said Obama has also said `` that it 's not his job to comment on or react to what the market does , up and down , on any given day , but instead to look at the longer term , at the longer horizon , at what can be done in this country to meet those challenges . '' 
On Capitol Hill , meanwhile , Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke said the government needs to continue moving aggressively to combat the recession and financial crisis , even as it takes steps to rein in the budget deficit in the longer term . 
Testifying before the Senate Budget Committee , Bernanke said more money might be needed to stabilize the financial system . 
`` Although progress has been made on the financial front since last fall , more needs to be done , '' Bernanke said . 
`` Whether further funds will be needed depends on the results of the current supervisory assessment of banks , the evolution of the economy and other factors . 
The administration has included a placeholder in its budget for more funding for financial stabilization , should it be necessary . '' 
With that and fiscal stimulus spending , the government debt will likely approach 60 percent of gross domestic product , up from 40 percent before the financial crisis and the highest since the years after World War II . 
Bernanke said that debt ratio makes it all the more important to contain deficits in the future to maintain credibility among the investors worldwide who buy U.S. government debt . 
But he gave a strong endorsement to continued -- and expensive -- efforts to deal with the crisis in the near term . 
`` We are better off moving aggressively today to solve our economic problems , '' Bernanke said . 
`` The alternative could be a prolonged episode of economic stagnation that would not only contribute to further deterioration in the fiscal situation , but would also imply lower output , employment and incomes for an extended period . '' 
But , he added , `` maintaining the confidence of the financial markets requires that we begin planning now for the restoration of fiscal balance . '' 
He said the government will need to withdraw the temporary parts of the fiscal stimulus as the economy recovers , and spending on stabilizing the financial system must `` wind down . '' 
Bernanke , as is his practice , neither endorsed nor opposed many specific spending recommendations contained in the proposed budget released by the Obama administration last week . 
On such issues as energy , health care , education and tax policy , he said only that they are `` complex policy issues in which the specific design of each program is as important as the budgetary amount allocated to it '' and that Congress `` will have considerable work in evaluating how to proceed . '' 
