Dr Chan said the pandemic would be of '' moderate severity '' The World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- has declared a global flu pandemic after holding an emergency meeting . 
It means the swine flu virus is spreading in at least two regions of the world with rising cases being seen in the UK , Australia , Japan and Chile . 
WHO chief Dr Margaret Chan said the move did not mean the virus was causing more severe illness or more deaths . 
The swine flu -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus first emerged in Mexico in April and has since spread to 74 countries . 
We have evidence to suggest we are seeing the first pandemic of the 21st Century Dr Margaret Chan , WHO director general Official reports say there have been nearly 30,000 cases globally and 141 deaths , with figures rising daily . 
Hong Kong said it was closing all its nurseries and primary schools for two weeks following 12 school cases . 
It is the first flu pandemic in 40 years - the last in 1968 killed about one million people . 
However , the current pandemic seems to be moderate and causing mild illness in most people . 
Most cases are occurring in young working age adults and a third to a half of complications are presenting in otherwise healthy people . 
Dr Chan said : `` We have evidence to suggest we are seeing the first pandemic of the 21st Century . 
`` Moving to pandemic phase six does not imply we will see increased in deaths or serious cases . '' 
She added it was important to get the right balance between complacency and vigilance and that pandemic strategies would vary between countries depending on their specific situation . 
It is global and fulfilling the requirements of a pandemic Professor John Oxford , flu expert And the WHO does not recommend closure of borders or any restrictions on the movement of people , goods or services . 
But the picture could change very quickly . 
`` No other pandemic has been detected so early or watched so closely , '' Dr Chan said . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called for calm . 
`` Let me stress : this is a formal statement about the geographical spread of the disease . 
It is not in itself a cause for alarm , '' he said . 
He warned that in the developing world the consequences of the virus could be more serious , and that the southern hemisphere was now entering the flu season . 
One factor which has prompted the move to a level six pandemic was that in the southern hemisphere , the virus seems to be crowding out normal seasonal influenza . 
Pandemic ` no cause for alarm ' The move was not prompted by the situation in any one country but the reports that it had spread in several parts of the world , officials said . 
The BBC 's Imogen Foulkes , in Geneva , says that while the number of cases has made the declaration inevitable , the WHO will have to manage the global anxiety the declaration of a pandemic will generate . 
Experts have warned that poorer nations , especially those in the southern hemisphere now heading into their winter season , face the greatest risk from the flu pandemic . 
There have been more than 800 cases in the UK with some areas of Scotland being particularly hard hit . 
The government has been stockpiling antivirals such as Tamiflu and has ordered vaccine , some doses of which could be available by October . 
SWINE FLU - THE BASICS Symptoms usually similar to seasonal flu It is a new version of the H1N1 strain which caused the 1918 flu pandemic Current treatments do work , but as yet there is no vaccine Good personal hygiene , such as washing hands , covering nose when sneezing advised England 's chief medical officer Sir Liam Donaldson said the WHO declaration of a pandemic would not significantly change the way the UK was dealing with swine flu at the moment . 
But he added there could be some minor changes to who received antivirals . 
`` The declaration of a pandemic per se does n't make a big difference to the way we are handling the outbreaks we have . 
`` We are going to continue to investigate every case that occurs and treat their contacts with antivirals even though they may not be ill . 
`` The difference is that the Health Protection Agency has learned a lot about approaching this question of antiviral prophylaxis and they are going to be treating the closer contacts of the cases , rather than the more far-flung contacts , because they feel that that is supported by what they know so far about how the disease is transmitting . 
He added : `` These flu viruses can change their pattern of attack , so when we come into the flu season in the autumn and winter in this country , when we expect a big surge of cases , we need to watch very carefully to see if the character of the virus is changing . '' 
There is concern that the virus might mutate in the southern hemisphere over its winter and become more virulent , but there 's no sign of that yet Scottish health secretary Nicola Sturgeon said a move to level six means that countries need to be ready to implement pandemic plans immediately but the UK was already operating at a `` heightened state of readiness '' . 
But it could affect the speed at which the UK gets pandemic vaccine supplies but that had been factored into pandemic planning . 
Flu expert Professor John Oxford said people should not panic as the outbreak was milder than others seen in the past century . 
`` It is global and fulfilling the requirements of a pandemic but I do n't think anyone should worry because nothing drastic has happened between yesterday and today . '' 
