UNITED NATIONS | Fri May 20 , 2011 1:46 pm EDT UNITED NATIONS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Kuwait was among 15 nations elected on Friday to the U.N. Human Rights Council after Syria , under pressure over its crackdown on protesters , dropped its bid for an Arab slot on the controversial panel . 
Kuwait stepped into the race last week after Western countries persuaded Arab states that Syria was not a suitable candidate . 
In a General Assembly vote , the Gulf emirate was elected along with India , Indonesia and the Philippines on a clean , or uncontested , slate of Asian nations for three-year council terms . 
Africa and Western Europe also presented clean slates but there were contested votes for Eastern Europe -- where the Czech Republic and Romania defeated Georgia -- and Latin America , where Chile and Costa Rica edged out Nicaragua . 
The 47-nation Human Rights Council , based in Geneva , is the main U.N. body charged with monitoring member states ' compliance with international rights norms . 
Critics say it spends too much time denouncing Israel while ignoring violations by Sri Lanka , Bahrain , China , Russia and other countries . 
Libya , elected to the council last year , is suspended because of its civil war . 
Syria told a closed meeting of Asian U.N. members on May 11 it had agreed to swap candidacies with Kuwait , which was set to run for the council in 2013 , and drop out of the 2011 race , diplomats said . 
Syrian Ambassador Bashar Ja'afari denied at the time that the decision was connected with events in his country , where troops and tanks have killed hundreds of anti-government demonstrators in recent weeks . 
He said the move was based on `` reconsidering our priorities '' and Syria would run for the council in 2013 . 
Even though Syria was not standing up for membership , five of the 192 countries in the General Assembly voted for it on Friday , assembly president Joseph Deiss said in announcing the results . 
Because the ballot was secret it was unclear who they were . 
Elected for the so-called `` Western European and others '' group were Austria and Italy , while Burkina Faso , Botswana , the Congo Republic and Benin were elected for Africa . 
Human rights groups have hailed the fact that Syria will not be elected this year but , as they have done in past years , criticized the clean slate system under which regional groups present only as many candidates as seats are available . 
`` Without competition for seats on the Human Rights Council , the membership standards set by the General Assembly become meaningless , '' said Peggy Hicks of New York-based Human Rights Watch . 
`` Manufactured slates of candidates may be easier for states , but they are bad for the council . '' 
Geneva-based group UN Watch said Kuwait and Congo were `` not qualified '' to be on the council . 
Kuwait 's `` ruling family largely sets the policy agenda and dominates political life . 
Formal political parties are banned , '' it said , adding that the country limits freedom of the press and assembly and has no independent judiciary . 
In Congo , the group said , recent elections were `` marred by irregularities , '' press freedom was limited and the judiciary was subject to corruption and political influence . 
The defeat of Nicaragua was a setback for left-wing governments in the Latin America group , which also includes Caribbean states . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
