Friday 10 June 2005 00.05 BST American diplomats and army commanders have held indirect talks with insurgents in Iraq , the first officially sanctioned contact between the two sides in two years of violence . 
A US embassy official in Baghdad said efforts were under way to `` engage '' elements of the resistance in an apparent softening of the Bush administration 's opposition to negotiations . 
`` In order to achieve stability and -LRB- an -RRB- end to the insurgency and stop Iraqis from being killed in large numbers , the insurgency has to be addressed , '' the official told reporters . 
`` I do n't think the people we are sitting in the room with are directly operational , but they have relationships with them , sometimes through family ties , sometimes through previous associations with the previous regime . '' 
The briefing was on the record but under embassy rules the official could not be named . 
He did not elaborate on the substance of the talks and it was unclear which of the insurgency 's numerous groups had been engaged . 
The contacts , conducted mainly through Sunni Arab tribal and religious leaders , were limited to factions which could be coaxed away from violence and into mainstream politics , the official added . 
That ruled out Abu Musab al-Zarqawi 's al-Qaida in Iraq and other radical Islamic groups believed responsible for most of the suicide bombings . 
`` Some insurgents are irredeemable and have to be dealt with in a purely military way . '' 
The US has made public overtures to Iraq 's Sunni Arabs , a disaffected minority driving the insurgency , but until now drew the line at contacts with the `` terrorists '' denounced by President Bush . 
The administration has come under increasing pressure to show progress in a war which claims approximately two American lives daily and is blamed for shortfalls in army recruitment . 
A recent Gallup poll showed 57 % of Americans do not believe it was worth invading in March 2003 . 
It is no secret that some US commanders on the ground have informal and indirect contacts with their opponents , mostly via Sunni mosques and tribal elders . 
The embassy official suggested those channels have become more formalised . 
The insurgency is a complex mix of criminal gangs , Sunni Arab nationalists , former members of Saddam Hussein 's Ba'ath regime and Islamic radicals , with many foreigners among the latter . 
Two years ago Mr Bush 's response was `` Bring 'em on '' . 
But as casualties soared and the nascent Iraqi state reeled , the US reached out to the Ba'athists and Sunnis , encouraging , for example , the country 's new Shia and Kurdish rulers to scale back purges known as `` de-Ba ` athification '' . 
Earlier this week an Arab Sunni politician and former electricity minister , Ayham al-Samarie , said two groups , the Islamic Army in Iraq and the Army of Mujahideen , were ready to talk to the government . 
The prime minister , Ibrahim al-Jaafari , said yesterday he hoped to draw `` all sectors '' of Iraqi society into the political process and hinted that this included homegrown insurgents . 
The ruling Shia and Kurdish coalition promised to give Sunni Arabs a greater role in writing a new constitution by increasing their membership on the drafting committee , where they occupy two out of 55 seats . 
Some officials said Sunnis would be given an additional 13 seats , matching Kurdish representation , but President Jalal Talabani , himself a Kurd , said the government would meet Sunni demands for an extra 20 to 25 seats . 
The British foreign secretary , Jack Straw , visiting Baghdad as part of a European Union delegation , expressed confidence that Iraq would have a referendum-approved constitution and elections by the end of the year . 
The delegation also pledged financial support for Iraq . 
