Demonstrators against Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad take part in a march after Friday prayers in Kafranbel near Adlb November 18 , 2011 . 
The banner -LRB- top L -RRB- reads , '' Tell the killer he will meet the fate of those he kills '' . 
AMMAN | Sun Nov 20 , 2011 11:54 am EST AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Arab League said on Sunday it had rebuffed a request by Damascus to amend plans for a 500-strong monitoring mission to Syria , after President Bashar al-Assad vowed to continue his crackdown and said he would not surrender to outside pressure . 
Within hours of Assad ignoring a deadline to halt repression of protesters , residents said two rocket-propelled grenades hit a major ruling party building in Damascus on Sunday , the first such reported attack by insurgents inside the capital . 
Confronted since March by street demonstrations against 41 years of rule by his family , Assad said he had no choice but to pursue his crackdown on unrest because his foes were armed . 
`` The conflict will continue and the pressure to subjugate Syria will continue . 
Syria will not bow down , '' he told Britain 's Sunday Times newspaper . 
Arab League Secretary General Nabil Elaraby rejected Syria 's request to alter a plan for the fact-finding mission -- which would include military personnel and human rights experts -- in a letter to Syria 's foreign minister . 
`` The additions requested by the Syrian counterpart affect the heart of the protocol and fundamentally change the nature of the mission , '' said the letter , released by the Arab League . 
Syria 's Foreign Minister Walid al-Moualem said the plan as it stood compromised the country 's sovereignty but Damascus had not rejected the mission Moualem said the proposed mission has `` pervasive jurisdiction that reaches the level of ... violating Syrian sovereignty '' and said he would send the Arab League a letter with questions about its role . 
`` We will reply to the Arab League secretary general by responsibly presenting a number of queries , '' he told a televised news conference in the Syrian capital . 
The Cairo-based League had given Damascus three days from a meeting on November 16 to abide by a deal to withdraw military forces from restive cities , start talks between the government and opposition and pave the way for an observer team . 
It was not immediately clear what action the Arab League would take after the deadline passed unheeded by Damascus . 
The pan-Arab body had threatened sanctions for non-compliance , and it suspended Syria 's membership in a surprise move last week . 
NO NEW TALKS IN SIGHT `` Although the time-frame has ended , there have been no meetings or calls for meetings except at the level of delegations -LRB- to the League -RRB- , '' a representative of one Arab state at the League told Reuters . 
In a statement , the League said it remained committed to a peaceful , Arab-engineered solution to the Syrian upheaval , touched off by other Arab popular revolts that have overthrown the autocratic leaders of Egypt , Tunisia and Libya this year . 
Syrian authorities blame the violence on foreign-backed armed groups which they say have killed some 1,100 soldiers and police . 
By a United Nations account , more than 3,500 people , mostly civilians , have been killed in the unrest . 
Assad signaled no retreat from his iron fist policy in a video released after his forces killed 17 more protesters on Saturday . 
`` The only way is to search for the armed people , chase the armed gangs , prevent the entry of arms and weapons from neighboring countries , prevent sabotage and enforce law and order , '' he said in footage published on the Sunday Times website . 
On Sunday , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said troops manning roadblocks in Homs fired on residential areas and wounded three protesters . 
In the nearby town of Talbiseh , security forces delivered the bodies of two men arrested last month and in Idlib another two civilians were killed in military operations , the British-based group said . 
Assad said there would be elections in February or March when Syrians would vote for a parliament to create a new constitution and that would include provision for a presidential ballot . 
The Syrian Free Army , comprising army defectors and based in neighboring Turkey , claimed responsibility for the attack on the Baath Party building in Damascus . 
There was no independent verification of the claim and Moualem denied that any attack had taken place . 
But a witness said security police blocked off the square where the building is located and reported seeing smoke rising from it and fire trucks in the area . 
`` The attack was just before dawn and the building was mostly empty . 
It seems to have been intended as a message to the regime , '' he said . 
Syrian authorities have barred most independent journalists from entering the country during the revolt , making it difficult to verify accounts from activists and officials . 
It was the second reported hit on a high profile target in a week , underscoring a growing opposition challenge to Assad - who blames `` armed terrorist acts '' for the unrest - from a nascent insurgency alongside mostly peaceful protests that have persisted despite the intensifying crackdown . 
Assad , who inherited power from his father in 2000 , is a member of the Alawite minority community , an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam that dominates the state , the army and security apparatus in the majority Sunni Muslim country of 20 million . 
The Syrian Free Army said the grenade attack was a response to the refusal of Damascus to release tens of thousands of political prisoners and return troops to barracks , as called for by the plan agreed between the Arab League and Damascus . 
Non-Arab Turkey , once an ally of Assad , is also taking an increasingly tough attitude to Damascus . 
Turkish newspapers said on Saturday Ankara had contingency plans to create no-fly or buffer zones to protect civilians in neighboring Syria if the bloodshed worsens . 
`` It 's almost certain that Bashar al-Assad 's regime is going down , all the assessments are made based on this assumption . 
Foreign Ministry sources say that the sooner the regime goes down , the better for Turkey , '' one Turkish paper reported . 
Activists in the central city of Homs said the body of Farzat Jarban , an activist who had been filming and broadcasting pro-democracy rallies there , was found dumped near a private hospital on Saturday with two bullet wounds . 
`` Security police are no longer just shooting protesters , they are targeting activists when they least suspect it , such as when they take their children to school , '' said a doctor from Homs who has fled to Jordan . 
Tanks and troops deployed in Homs after large anti-Assad protests six months ago . 
The authorities say they have since arrested tens of `` terrorists '' in the city who have been killing civilians and planting bombs in public places . 
Moualem said the West and some Arab countries were ignoring the actions of armed gangs in Syria who had been killing people `` according to their identity cards , '' referring to growing reports of sectarian killings between majority Sunni Muslims and Assad 's Alawite community in Homs . 
But he dismissed fears that the country might be heading toward civil conflict . 
`` There will not be a civil war , however hard they try to ignite it . '' 
Dissident colonel Riad al-Asaad , organizing defectors in Syria from his new base in southern Turkey , denied government allegations that adjacent states were allowing arms smuggling into Syria . 
`` Not a single bullet '' had been smuggled from abroad , he told al Jazeera television . 
Weapons were brought by defectors , obtained in raids on the regular army or bought from arms dealers inside Syria , he said . 
Asaad said no foreign military intervention was needed other than providing a no-fly zone and weapons supplies , and that more deserters would swell his Free Syrian Army 's ranks if there were protected zones to which they could flee . 
`` Soldiers and officers in the army are waiting for the right opportunity , '' he told al Jazeera . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Syria rebuffs Arab League plan . 
Boy Syria is in real trouble now . 
That Arab League is one of the toughest paper tigers around you know . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
