British industrialists are angry that huge American companies like Halliburton and Bechtel win so much business in the UK Haliburton , the US engineering giant formerly headed by vice-president Dick Cheney , has long been a bte noir of British business . 
But as talks to hammer out a deal over Britain 's new aircraft carriers reached crisis point this weekend , it has never been less loved . 
Since the Iraq war , when the Houston company won contracts to put out oil fires in Iraq without having to bid against competitors , it has been synonymous with White House cronyism . 
British engineers and oil industry operators felt they had been frozen out of lucrative work and spat blood . 
When it emerged that Halliburton was overcharging for the petrol it was importing from Kuwait , the anger grew . 
Investigations into the activities of Halliburton subsidiary Kellogg Brown and Root in the Gulf revealed tales of kickbacks to employees , poor cost control , and further overcharging . 
Nevertheless , Halliburton secured more contracts to work on Iraqi oil infrastructure . 
US congressmen headed by Democrat Henry Waxman demanded investigations , not least into the role of Cheney in the contracting process . 
According to the US Congress committee on government reform , Halliburton has received $ 10.3 billion from contracts there . 
Although US government work in Iraq is channelling less into company coffers this year than last , it still contributed $ 1.7 bn of total $ 5.2 bn revenue in the last quarter of last year . 
This at a time when Halliburton faces claims worth billions in asbestos-related lawsuits , which saw it post a fourth-quarter net loss of close to $ 1bn . 
Halliburton is facing several investigations around the world . 
KBR is part of a consortium that is under investigation for allegations of bribery in a Nigerian gas contract . 
And back in the post-Enron US , the company last year paid $ 7.5 m to settle accusations that it misled investors because it did not disclose an accounting change in 1998 , when Cheney was CEO . 
But last week the focus was in Britain as KBR UK appeared close to winning a vital role on Britain 's largest-ever naval shipbuilding contract , the roughly # 3bn program to build two new aircraft carriers . 
Ministry of Defense officials were preparing to announce that KBR had been chosen as the ` physical integrator ' -LRB- PI -RRB- on the program , the overseer that will manage the complicated integration of design , systems and construction by a wide range of prime and sub contractors . 
BAE Systems , the UK 's largest defense firm , was furious . 
BAE is part of the alliance - along with Thales of France and the MoD itself - that was formed to manage the project . 
It is the owner of two of the yards where hull modules could be built . 
It said it would pull out of the alliance if KBR was chosen as the PI . 
BAE says there is no need to have a body above the alliance and is livid at the thought of it being KBR . 
` They do n't have a happy reputation either here or overseas , ' one company source said last week . 
The prospect of KBR taking the ` overseer of overseers ' role has united the UK 's often bickering shipbuilders . 
` If they award it to KBR you are going to have the Americans and the French running the carrier program , ' says one . 
` The whole thing is a nonsense . ' 
It is hard to separate two key issues : unhappiness at the way the carrier contract has been handled over the past two years , and simple dislike of KBR . 
BAE was unhappy that its role as prime contractor was open to competition in the first place , and when two years ago it appeared that its rival , Thales , had won the competition to be prime , it channelled its fury into negotiating its way on to the top table as a project manager , shifting Thales to a design role . 
The MoD , however , would not demote Thales , and insisted on the two compa nies forming the alliance , with the MoD joining as mediator . 
BAE has flexed its muscles repeatedly , last year announcing the sale of its shipbuilding division in what many industry insiders interpreted as a negotiating tactic to ensure its influence in the program . 
Zafar Khan , analyst at SG Securities , says : ` The whole thing is now a bit of a mess . 
The problem is the buck will pass from one to the other . 
And then you get KBR on top of the whole thing , which has added a further layer of complexity . ' 
If nothing else , the carrier contract has demonstrated that BAE deploys tactics with the MoD that invite comparison with Halliburton 's at the Pentagon . 
Nevertheless , BAE 's protestations are echoed by other major UK companies . 
One source suggested that the real Halliburton agenda was to use the carrier contract as a wedge to break its way into the UK naval shipbuilding business , which has a full order book stretching out more than a decade and a half . 
` We do n't want to open up our numbers and details to KBR and Halliburton . 
There is unease about letting in a potential competitor and one that probably has another agenda , ' the source said . 
BAE , along with Portsmouth-based VT Group and Babcock , owner of the Rosyth dockyard in Fife , were all nervous when it became clear before Christmas that KBR had won because they suspected it wanted to take work into a disused oil platform yard at Nigg , further up the Scottish coast . 
The timing is doubly sensitive because the structure of UK shipbuilding is under review . 
The government and the industry are considering a consolidation of yards into one or two separate companies . 
Another senior industry figure says : ` The UK builders have suffered from the peaks and troughs of this industry , and now that there is the chance of a sustained peak there is incredulity at why the government is handing it to an outsider . ' 
He adds : ` If BAE pulls out and becomes a subcontractor , the project -LRB- due for completion between 2012 and 2015 -RRB- will be a disaster and will be late . ' 
Meanwhile , industry leaders suspect KBR may have over-promised on the carrier deal . ' 
I know exactly how they got it , ' says one . 
` Tony Pryor -LRB- head of KBR UK -RRB- went in and said `` Look , we 've built these oil platforms and they 're much bigger than the carrier , and that 's for starters . 
Of course we can do it . '' 
And he wowed them . ' 
Pryor was unavailable for interview last week , although KBR said it had proven expertise in working on complex major projects and pioneered the alliance approach to contracting . ' 
I saw the spec for the PI contract , ' says one executive . 
` It asked the PI to take all time and financial risk in return for managing the project and taking the margin . 
We said we could not do that , and I know the others did too , but KBR said okay . ' 
Now , he says , there is evidence that the original specifications have changed , and that KBR is set to win a three-month , # 5m deal to ` scope out ' the responsibilities on the program , before retendering for a longer term . 
` The key question is , what kind of risk will they be taking on when they renegotiate . 
They are very skilled at renegotiating that kind of thing . ' 
The implication in all of this is clear - that Halliburton sweet-talks governments into deals . 
Detractors have plenty of precedents to point to . 
KBR 's progenitor , Brown and Root , had close relations with president Lyndon Johnson stretching from his days as a Texan state politician and received contracts to supply logistical support in Vietnam and build dams in the US . 
Two decades later , KBR drew up the ` Logcap ' arrangements for US military logistical support . 
It went on to win the contract . 
But , with the PI contract up for re-tender , the question in the government 's mind will be , how good is KBR ? 
` The only thing you need to say is `` DML '' , ' says one detractor , referring to the company , majority-owned by KBR , that won the contract to build docks at Devonport for refitting nuclear submarines . 
The original # 576m cost of the project soared by 2002 to # 900m amid unclear responsibilities . 
A report by the National Audit Office found that DML had ` no experience of managing a major construction project that was subject to civil nuclear safety standards ' . 
Moreover , the NAO found that ` despite the stated allocation of risk in the contract , the MoD agreed to fund most of the cost increases ' . 
Detractors have to be careful . 
KBR has won a range of other projects , such as the armed forces Conlog contract -LRB- the UK equivalent of Logcap -RRB- , where it can demonstrate expertise . 
The NAO says it has no criticisms as yet of this , or any of the other recent deals KBR has won from government , ranging from NHS IT programs to road building . 
Indeed , one of its detractors admits , it has collaborated with KBR in other areas , such as road building , and the work has been good . 
` But there is a bit of a difference between a road and an aircraft carrier , ' he adds . 
Many point to the fact that to mitigate its asbestos liabilities , Halliburton placed KBR in US chapter 11 bankruptcy protection a year ago . 
Now its CEO Dave Lesar has said he wants to sell it . 
One well-connected Whitehall insideris baffled : ` The thing that puzzles me is why a company with this record , that is up for sale , that could be owned by anyone next month , is being put in charge of the most sensitive defense contract ever ? ' 
A cynic might respond that ministers hope Halliburton does sell KBR . 
Then it will be clear of the shadow of its Houston parent for good . 
