Friday , December 3 , 2010 ; 10:17 PM BP lawyers have said that government estimates of the size of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill are too big , perhaps by as much as 20 to 50 percent , signaling a dispute that will determine how many billions of dollars of fines BP will have to pay under the Clean Water Act . 
The BP attorneys made their comments in an Oct. 21 meeting with staff members of the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling , Priya Aiyar , one of the commission lawyers , revealed at a hearing Friday . 
The oil giant , in a paper submitted to the presidential oil spill commission , also took issue with one of its draft reports . 
BP said that the assertion that `` a consensus is emerging that roughly 5 million barrels of oil were released by the Macondo well is both premature and inaccurate . '' 
BP said that the estimates by the Energy Department and an inter-agency group `` appear biased toward the maximum amount of oil that could have been discharged , rather than the amount of oil most likely to have been discharged . '' 
Penalties for spilling oil start at $ 1,100 a barrel and can rise to $ 4,300 if negligence is proved . 
Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
, a sharp critic of the company , said in a letter Friday to BP chief executive Bob Dudley that `` BP 's new claim that the spill is much smaller than previously thought flies in the face of multiple lines of evidence , and raises questions whether this is a scientific finding , or a litigious position . '' 
The oil company said that government and other academic experts did not properly take into account factors such as temperature differences , the amount of natural gas mixed in , and partial blockages from bent pipes , partial closure of the blowout preventer and from debris . 
The company said that the flow rate had increased over time as impediments to the oil were cut away or eroded by the tremendous force of the oil and gas . 
BP said that it was still too soon to reach a final conclusion about how much oil leaked from the Macondo well after a blowout sank the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , killing 11 people . 
While the government 's group left a margin of error of 10 percent , BP said it `` believes the range of uncertainty is substantially greater . '' 
The government has estimated that 62,000 barrels a day initially gushed from the Macondo well after the blowout , later dropping to 53,000 barrels as the reservoir was depleted . 
But the flow rate has been a subject of dispute from the early days of the spill , when the government estimated that 5,000 barrels a day were leaking into the gulf . 
Later , BP was collecting 25,000 barrels a day , and oil was still gushing into the gulf . '' 
