When Ros Atkins , a BBC radio presenter , came back to the UK after working in Mexico City , family and friends avoided him like he had , well , swine flu . 
After reading his account , we wondered about others who have visited Mexico recently and experienced the same sort of reaction upon returning home . 
If you have been to Mexico since the outbreak of the H1N1 virus , what was the reaction from loved ones ? 
Or have you changed your travel plans as a result of the disease ? 
Share your thoughts by sending us a response on our GuardianUS Twitter page . 
You can do this by logging on to your Twitter account , typing @GuardianUS and then your comment of 140 characters or less . 
Of course , you can always comment on this blog post . 
Thank you for contributing . 
Barack Obama has lifted restrictions on Cuban Americans traveling to the communist country and relaxed controls on the transfer of money to their relatives on the island . 
The president said Democratic change will come to the island more quickly if the US reaches out to its people and their relatives in America . 
Will the moves work or are there other measures that should be enacted ? 
Share your thoughts by sending us a response on our GuardianUS Twitter page . 
You can do this by logging on to your Twitter account , typing @GuardianUS and then your comment of 140 characters or less . 
Of course , you can always comment on this blog post . 
Miss Universe Dayana Mendoza said Guant namo was ' a loooot of fun ' . 
Photograph : Susana Gonzalez\/Reuters Pageant officials are calling the post by the beauty queen , Dayana Mendoza from Venezuela , a misunderstanding . 
During a tour of the dentention center with Miss USA , Crystle Stewart , Mendoza wrote that the facility was `` a loooot of fun '' and the prison had an `` unbelievable '' beach in the bay . 
`` We visited the detainees ' camps and we saw the jails , where they shower , how the -LRB- y -RRB- recreate themselves with movies , classes of art , books . 
It was very interesting , '' she said . 
A statement from the president of the Miss Universe organization , Paula Shugart , has replaced the posting . 
Shugart wrote that Mendoza was referring to `` the hospitality she received while meeting the members of the US military and their families '' . 
Greg Gutfeld , host of the Fox News program Red Eye , has apologised to Canada for comments that were made about the country 's military during a show on 17 March . 
On one segment of the show , a panel talked about Canadian lieutenant general Andrew Leslie 's assertion that the military would need a one-year break from fighting in Afghanistan after Canada 's commitment ends in 2011 . 
Gutfield laughed at Leslie 's suggestion saying : `` The Canadian military wants to take a breather to do some yoga , paint landscapes , run on the beach in gorgeous white capri pants . '' 
`` Is n't this the perfect time to invade this ridiculous country ? 
They have no army , '' he added . 
Canada 's defense minister Peter MacKay demanded an apology from the presenter before attending a repatriation ceremony for Canadian troops who were killed in Afghanistan last Friday . 
In a statement issued to Fox News today , Gutfeld said his comments `` may have been misunderstood '' and that he did n't intend to disrespect `` the brave men , women and families of the Canadian military '' . 
116 Canadian soldiers have died in Afghanistan . 
On Monday , Venezuela 's president Hugo Ch vez announced halting a program that provided free heating oil to low-income US citizens . 
The leftist leader had reportedly heralded the initiative as a clear sign of his generosity toward America 's poor . 
However , the recent steep drop in the price of oil , Venezuela 's chief export , forced the nation 's government to cut spending and the program was scrapped in the process . 
But yesterday , Ch vez backtracked and announced that the program was reinstated . 
And of course , such a quick reversal did not come without criticism . 
According to McClatchy newspapers , Dennis Jett , former US ambassador to Peru , believes Chavez is trying to `` save face '' and mask his nation 's financial problems . 
Maybe , maybe not . 
The Cuban president Raul Castro at Cuba 's National Assembly election session in Havana . 
Photograph : Ismael Francisco\/AFP\/Getty images Raul Casto wants to end a 40-year-old diplomatic freeze by meeting Barack Obama 
