BP clashes with scientists over deep sea oil pollution Obama team ` incensed at being kept in the dark ' as company denies existence of underwater oil clouds A used oil boom part is disposed of in Louisiana . 
Photograph : Reuters BP has challenged widespread scientific claims that vast plumes of oil are spreading underwater from its blown-out rig in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The denial comes as the oil giant prepares for a new operation to put an end to the worst oil spill in US history which could see the leak get worse before it gets better . 
The company 's challenge to several scientific studies is likely to put it further at odds with an increasingly angry Obama administration , which has accused it of playing down the size of the leak in an effort to limit possible fines . 
BP 's chief executive , Tony Hayward , said it had no evidence of underwater oil clouds . 
`` The oil is on the surface , '' he said . 
`` Oil has a specific gravity that 's about half that of water . 
It wants to get to the surface because of the difference in specific gravity . '' 
Hayward 's assertion flies in the face of studies by scientists at universities in Florida , Georgia and Mississippi , among other institutions , who say they have detected huge underwater plumes of oil , including one 120 metres -LRB- 400ft -RRB- deep about 50 miles from the destroyed rig . 
BP 's claim is likely only to further anger environmentalists and the White House , which has grown increasingly suspicious of the company 's claims to be frank and transparent on developments . 
The president 's environmental adviser and director of the Office of Energy and Climate Change Policy , Carol Browner , has accused BP of misstating the scale of the leak . 
`` BP has a vested financial interest in downplaying the size of this , '' she said on CBS television . 
`` They will pay penalties at the end of the day , a per-barrel per-day penalty . '' 
Ed Markey , chairman of the House of Representatives environment committee , has also accused BP of underplaying the scale of the disaster and suggested that it may have a criminal liability . 
`` The fine that can be imposed upon them is based on how many barrels -LRB- pour in to the sea -RRB- . 
It could wind up in billions of dollars of fines , '' said Markey . 
`` They had a stake in low-balling the number right from the beginning . 
They were either lying or they were incompetent . '' 
The Politico website reported that the Obama team was incensed that the company failed to inform it for a day and a half after suspending the failed `` top kill '' operation to plug the spill using rubber tyres and mud . 
Obama is expected to hold his first meeting today with the leaders of an oil spill commission he established to make policy recommendations about US offshore oil drilling . 
The commission will be similar to those that looked into the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger in 1986 and the Three Mile Island nuclear accident in 1979 . 
Also today , US attorney general Eric Holder will meet federal prosecutors and state attorneys general in New Orleans . 
It will be Holder 's first trip to survey the damage before what legal experts believe will be a criminal investigation into the disaster . 
The dispute between the administration and BP comes as the company readies its latest effort to contain the flow of oil in to the sea , following the failure of top kill . 
The new plan involves an intricate operation to cut the top off the damaged riser that brought oil to the surface of the destroyed rig . 
The intention is to create a flat surface to which to attach a valve that would divert the oil into a pipe and on to a ship . 
But slicing the top off the damaged pipe may result in oil flowing into the sea at a faster rate until the new valve is fitted . 
Even if successful , the operation would only limit , not entirely stop , oil from flowing into the sea . 
If this measure failed , BP 's best hope of halting the oil would remain the drilling of a relief well that would ease the pressure on the damaged one . 
But the US government has warned that the spill could continue into August . 
The attempts to stop the oil flow have been given added urgency by the start of the hurricane season tomorrow . 
Forecasters are predicting an unusually high number of storms over the next six months . 
If the oil is still spread across the sea , a hurricane is likely to disperse it over a much wider area and push it deeper into marshlands and other inland areas , making the environmental disaster even worse . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is predicting between eight and 14 hurricanes this season , with perhaps a similar number of smaller storms . 
The US military has ruled out taking charge of the operation to stem the flow of oil from the blown-out BP rig . 
The chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , Admiral Mike Mullen , today said that military chiefs had looked at the available equipment and concluded that `` the best technology in the world , with respect to that , exists in the oil industry '' . 
A day earlier , the former US secretary of state , Colin Powell , said the military should step in because the crisis was now `` beyond the capacity '' of BP to stop . 
