Fears grow over oil spill 's long-term effects on food chain Top US official describes the BP oil spill as ` one of the greatest environmental challenges of our time ' Workers clean up oil on a beach in Port Fourchon , Louisiana , May 24 , 2010 . 
Photograph : Daniel Beltra\/Greenpeace\/EPA As oil continues gushing from the ocean floor into the Gulf of Mexico , with no sign of stopping until a new well is finished this August , scientists , environmentalists and local residents are beginning to reckon with the reality of a massive annihilation of sea creatures and wildlife . 
Dead animals are already washing up on shores . 
Birds have been found dying in pools of oil and dispersant , which have taken over their marshland habitats . 
Several species in the Gulf of Mexico are already endangered , including the Kemp 's Ridley and Leatherback sea turtles , the Sperm Whale , and birds such as the Piping Plover and the Gulf Sturgeon , according to the Arizona-based Centre for Biological Diversity -LRB- CBD -RRB- . 
Assistant Professor Michael Blum of Tulane University 's Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology warns that some species may be at risk of extinction . 
`` There are ... hundreds of shorebirds and marine mammals that are acutely sensitive to oil . 
You could potentially lose whole species , have extinction events . 
Brown pelicans were just taken off the endangered species list . 
On this threshold , a big dieback and mortality event , they would be pushed back into a situation where they could be endangered , '' Blum said in an interview . 
`` A lot of the species of most concern - sea turtles and dolphins - migrate , use our breeding grounds or they 're a very important feeding ground , '' he explained . 
While there are no dolphin species whose populations exclusively migrate through the Gulf , Blum said those dolphins not impacted by the Gulf would be in such low numbers that they may not be able to reproduce at an adequate rate to avoid extinction . 
The EPA admits the impact of the oil spill - and the unprecedented use of toxic dispersants to break up the oil - on wildlife is unknown . 
`` We 're still deeply concerned about the things we do n't know . 
The long-term effect on aquatic life is unknown , '' EPA Secretary Lisa Jackson said in a conference call with reporters this week . 
The agency says will require rigorous autopsies and necropsies to determine whether the animals are in fact dying because of the oil and no other reason . 
It says soil and air sampling do not show dangerous levels of contaminants so far . 
`` They 're saying it 's really not clear - it 's a safe thing to say . 
As a scientist , one does n't want to overreach and reach erroneous conclusions , '' Blum said . 
However , he added , `` from a real world perspective , going down , seeing what 's happening and understanding the ecology of the system , we 're facing immediate effects of exposure . '' 
`` Certainly when oil washes up against the shoreline you have immediate toxic effects on almost anything . 
If you 're a fish , you get oil on your gills and ca n't breathe . 
If you 're a crab , same story . 
If you 're a plant , you get suffocated , it reduces photosynthesis , '' he said . 
Jackson , who has toured the Gulf Coast twice since the disaster began , told reporters , `` It 's clear oil is piling up in marshes . 
It 's quite a bit . '' 
She referred to the oil slick that has been reaching some shores and marshlands as `` the goop '' . 
`` We 're sampling the goop . 
There 's lots of speculation of what could be in this goop , we 'll look for dispersant chemicals as well as what else might be in there , '' Jackson said . '' 
BP has thrust upon us one of the greatest environmental challenges of our time . '' 
The Gulf marshlands are a breeding ground for many animals . 
Young shrimp , for example , mature in the marshlands , and then migrate to the ocean where they become food for fish . 
In three or four years , if there are no adult shrimp to migrate out , the entire food chain could be affected . 
`` Really , there are cumulative effects over time . 
There 's immediate shock to system , immediate toxicity and immediate mortality - birds , dolphins , marine mammals oiled . 
The mortality is relatively small in comparison to the potential effect that may accumulate over time . 
Things are not as bad now as they likely will become , '' Blum said . 
Watchdog groups complain that the drilling plans submitted by oil companies like BP to the U.S. government reveal a cavalier attitude towards the risk posed to animals in the Gulf . 
`` One of the exploration plans I read said , if there is a spill , the wildlife can probably just navigate around it . 
So the burden is really on the wildlife , '' said Miyoko Sakashita , CBD Oceans Director . 
`` Some animals have more keen sense and have stayed away . 
But there have been studies of sea turtles that go right through it , '' Sakashita said in an interview . 
`` Even if they can avoid the spill while it 's a plume in the water , that removes it from the habitat . '' 
The extent of the impact on Gulf Coast animals will depend on many factors , scientists say . 
It now looks like the spill will continue until August , although it is not clear whether the spill will continue at its current rate , or spew faster . 
It will also depend on whether BP or the U.S. government can keep the oil away from the coast , using techniques like `` booming '' - the placing of barriers in the water - or possibly using tankers to suck up the oily water , separate out the oil , and return the clean water into the ocean . 
Meanwhile , concerned citizens across the U.S. are taking matters into their own hands by sending absorbent materials like human hair and nylon stockings for use in soaking up the oil . 
Justin Fredericksen , a hair stylist at Mint Salon in Atlanta , got tired of feeling depressed about the disaster and decided to do something : last weekend , he organised local hairdressers to offer free cuts for customers who donate their hair to the cause . 
Despite the relief efforts , if a hurricane were to hit the Gulf this storm season - which is predicted to be very active - it would bring much of the oil onto the shore . 
Blum says it 's easier to separate oil from water than it is to separate oil from the marshlands , which he described as a `` sponge '' . 
Locals worry a hurricane this season could be the nail in the coffin for marshlands already teetering on the brink of destruction . 
cents This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity by IPS , CGIAR\/Biodiversity International , IFEJ and UNEP\/CBD , members of Communicators for Sustainable Development . 
