BP 's clumsy response to oil spill threatens to make a bad situation worse Chief executive Tony Hayward 's comments have done little to aid attempts at damage limitation Tuesday 1 June 2010 22.58 BST Tony Hayward 's comments in a Guardian interview made the company appear aloof and unconcerned about environmental damage . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP The public relations strategy for dealing with a disaster such as the Gulf of Mexico spill , now officially the worst in US history , was always going to be about damage limitation . 
With each failure to stem the flow , BP 's credibility has taken another blow . 
But at times , BP 's response has made the situation worse . 
In an interview with the BBC a month ago , chief executive Tony Hayward attempted to shift the blame for the accident to the US owner of the sunken rig , Transocean . 
`` This was not our accident This was not our drilling rig ... This was Transocean 's rig . 
BP press officers briefing journalists that week repeated the line that `` this was not our accident '' . 
Never mind that investigations into what caused the accident had barely started , with BP , Transocean and the company in charge of cementing the well , Halliburton , all pointing the finger at each other . 
Weeks later , after BP gave details of its own preliminary findings into the cause of the accident , a more contrite Hayward said : `` A number of companies are involved , including BP , and it is simply too early and not up to us to say who is at fault . '' 
But the damage had been done , as BP appeared to be trying to duck responsibility . 
Duncan John , a partner at StrategicFit , a strategy consultancy for the energy industry , praised BP for spelling out how likely each of their attempts to halt the spill were to work . 
But warned : `` Communication over the extent of their responsibility and the consequences may run the risk of aggravating an already sceptical public if not carefully handled . '' 
Last month , Hayward also made some ill-advised comments in an interview with the Guardian which received widespread coverage around the world . 
Asked about the amount of oil and dispersant flowing into the gulf , he responded : `` The Gulf of Mexico is a very big ocean . 
The amount of volume of oil and dispersant we are putting into it is tiny in relation to the total water volume . '' 
While technically correct , the comments made the company appear aloof and unconcerned about the environmental damage being done . 
In the same interview , he also said that if all other attempts failed , he could `` guarantee '' that the flow of oil would stop in three months with the completion of a relief well . 
At that stage , oil had not reached land in large quantities . 
But pressed about the damage already done to the marine environment , he said : `` No , that 's the point you seem to be missing ... The containment exercise on the surface is proving to be extraordinarily effective . '' 
Independent scientists have since found vast underwater plumes of oil , including one 120 metres -LRB- 400ft -RRB- deep about 50 miles from the destroyed rig . 
Hayward , who has a PhD in geology , said on Monday that BP had no evidence of such an underwater slick , arguing that because oil is lighter than water it will rise to the surface . 
For BP , seeing is believing , it seems . 
Last month , it flew a group of journalists , including the Guardian , in a helicopter over the Gulf of Mexico . 
The plan had been to fly over the site of the accident itself to see the clean-up efforts , but the pilot had to turn back half-way because there was n't time . 
BP officials on board insisted there was no oil to see anyway , as all the oil was being dispersed by hundreds of thousands of gallons of chemicals , which regulators have since restricted because they could be making the pollution worse . 
The official estimated flow rate of 5,000 barrels per day , a figure repeated by BP , increased last week to between 12,000 and 19,000 barrels . 
The revision was partly based on new video footage of the leak from the seabed which BP only released following pressure from scientists and the US Congress . 
Civil penalties are charged on a per barrel basis up to $ 4,300 each so BP 's liabilities are in direct proportion to the size of the leak . 
BP has said the effort to protect the shoreline of Louisiana is run jointly by itself , the US Coast Guard , and the much-maligned US offshore regulator , the Minerals Management Service -LRB- MMS -RRB- . 
When it comes to the hugely complex attempts to stop the flow of oil 5,000 feet below the surface , BP is running the show . 
With anger in the US mounting over BP 's failure to stem the leak , President Obama has been under pressure to take control of the operation . 
But he knows only the industry not governments has the technical knowledge required . 
This means Obama has little choice but to rely on BP , the company he has been heavily critical of , to try and fix the mess it may have had a hand in creating . 
Matthew Lockwood , from the centre-left thinktank , the Institute for Public Policy Research , says the spill underlines the dilemmas faced by governments in the era of big energy companies . 
The enthusiasm and can-do attitude of the 2,500 BP staff seconded from all around the globe to handle the disaster are not under question but this is not their job and the company is not an environmental organization , despite attempts to rebrand it as `` Beyond Petroleum '' . 
Hayward on Sunday alluded to the role BP has unwillingly adopted : `` I 'm sorry . 
We 're sorry for the massive disruption it 's caused their lives . 
There 's no one who wants this over more than I do . 
I 'd like my life back . '' 
A version appeared on p16 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 22.59 BST on Tuesday 1 June 2010 Our selection of best buys The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off moorehn : I believe it ! 
