BP chief executive Tony Hayward is under fire for making insensitive remarks on the oil spill . 
Photograph : Pablo Martinez Monsivais\/AP Shares in BP plunged as much as 20 % at one stage today wiping another # 14bn off the company 's market value after the oil producer failed over the weekend to stop its catastrophic oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico . 
BP has now lost # 44bn of its value since 20 April , when the Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded . 
By 2.30 pm the shares had staged a partial recovery from early lows of 420p , after their biggest fall in 18 years , but were still trading 14 % lower at 423.1 p. City experts believe the combination of the continuing leak and the prospect of huge future legal costs and political damage in the US could be disastrous for the company . 
Dougie Youngson , oil analyst at Arbuthnot , said : `` This situation has now gone far beyond concerns of BP 's chief executive Tony Hayward being fired , or shareholder dividend payouts being cut it 's got the real smell of death . 
This could break BP . 
`` Given the collapse in the share price and the potential for it to fall further , we expect that it could become a takeover target particularly if its operating position in the US becomes untenable . '' 
Hayward has come under fire in the US for his handling of the crisis and drew further criticism when he appeared make an insensitive remark when asked about the impact of the spill . 
`` I 'm sorry . 
We 're sorry for the massive disruption it 's caused their lives . 
There 's no one who wants this over more than I do . 
I 'd like my life back , '' he said . 
BP 's next move to stop the leak involves deploying remote-controlled submarines to carry equipment and cut small pipes 5,000 feet -LRB- 1,524 m -RRB- below the surface of the water , ahead of placing a containment cap over the leak . 
It should take four days to complete , although the spill could worsen before then . 
BP has spent almost $ 1bn -LRB- # 700m -RRB- so far attempting to plug the leak , but said it was `` too early '' to quantify other potential costs and liabilities associated with the incident . 
The total bill could rise to as much as $ 12bn , according to UBS . 
Tony Shepard , an analyst at Charles Stanley , said : `` With the prospect of several more months of pollution , BP and the oil industry will come under increasing pressure . 
This environmental catastrophe will have global implications for the whole industry in terms of new deepwater drilling regulations . '' 
The company has received as many as 30,000 claims , mostly from businesses in the US states of Texas , Louisiana , Alabama and Florida , which involve loss of earnings or bereavement suffered by families of the 11 workers killed when the rig caught fire . 
Speculators rushed to buy protection against a potential default of BP credit , sending its price to $ 170,000 to protect $ 10m of debt a $ 68,000 jump from the previous day , according to Markit . 
Investors demand a premium of 148 basis points on average to buy BP 's bonds over government debt , according to Bloomberg News . 
That 's almost double the 77-basis point spread on notes sold by industrial companies with similar credit ratings . 
