Ixtoc 1 collapse caused largest peacetime spill and was a lesson-packed forerunner of BP disaster Tuesday 1 June 2010 23.59 BST Sanderlings feed as workers search the beach for oil debris in Grand Isle , Louisiana . 
Photograph : Lee Celano\/Reuters Juan Antonio Dzul was a teenager when the Ixtoc 1 oil rig collapsed in June 1979 in the Gulf of Mexico , 70 miles from the fishing town of Champot n where he grew up and still lives . 
The memory of the huge spill that followed is etched on his mind . 
`` The oil covered the reefs and washed up on the shore . 
Fish died and the octopuses were buried under the oil that filled the gaps between the rocks where they live , '' he recalled in a phone interview . 
`` Even today you can find stains on rocks a few centimetres deep , and if you stick something metal in them the smell of oil still escapes . '' 
Champot n was one of the first and worst-hit areas reached by the estimated 3m barrels of oil that poured into the sea over the next nine and a half months . 
The Ixtoc disaster is still by far the largest peacetime spill , as well as a lesson-packed forerunner of the disaster in progress , as the Deepwater Horizon also exploded and sank after a blowout preventer failed . 
The parallels are most striking in the methods that failed to cap the damaged well head beneath . 
`` They tried to put a funnel on top of it , injected mud and saltwater and cement , but everything they tried to put in the well was forced out by the pressure , '' says Abundio Juarez . 
He was one of the top engineers in the state-owned company , Pemex , that was exploring the Ixtoc deposit at the time , although he was not directly involved in the control effort . 
He says the company also tried golf balls . 
`` We sent divers down and today they have robots , but the only solution then , and now , is a relief well and that takes time . '' 
Pemex also used booms and skimmers , and dumped chemical dispersants on the slicks . 
That , the scientists say today , helped reduce the amounts reaching the shore but sent encapsulated oil down to the sea bed with some initially devastating effects , particularly for shrimp larvae . 
Meanwhile , the oil was washing up all along the gulf , a foot deep in some places , as it was pushed northwards by prevailing winds and currents until it finally crossed the Texas border two months later and eventually coated almost 170 miles of US beaches . 
The beach that caused most international concern in Mexico was Rancho Nuevo , a key nesting ground for critically endangered Kemp 's Ridley sea turtles which had already lumbered up the sand in their hundreds to lay eggs . 
By the time the eggs hatched , the oil was lapping at the shore . 
Had an emergency US-Mexican operation not airlifted them over the spill to cleaner waters beyond , a generation might have been wiped out . 
But although Ixtoc was a big disaster , it did not develop into the long-term catastrophe that scientists initially thought was inevitable . 
`` This is not to say there were no consequences . 
Just that the evidence is that these are not as dramatic as we feared , '' says Luis Soto , a marine biologist from the National Autonomous University of Mexico . 
`` After about two years the recuperation was well on the way . '' 
Wes Tunnell , now at the Texas Harte Research Institute , took samples before and after the oil arrived in Texas that showed an immediate 80 % drop in the number of organisms living between the grains of sand that provide food for shore birds and crabs . 
`` Sampling a couple of years after the spill indicated the populations were back to normal , '' he says . 
Six years after Ixtoc 1 exploded it was hard to find any evidence of the oil , he says . 
`` It is rather baffling to us all . 
We do n't really know where it went . '' 
But although their message is hopeful , those who studied the Ixtoc disaster warn against assuming the gulf is automatically heading for another quick comeback . 
Ixtoc 1 stood in just 50 metres -LRB- 165ft -RRB- of water , while Deepwater Horizon was drilling 1,500 metres below the surface . 
It is also likely that the quantity of chemical dispersants being used today is significantly larger , potentially blocking the work of the oil-eating micro-organisms . 
But what worries Tunnell most is that over-fishing may have reduced the ability of the gulf to bounce back . 
`` It was much more resilient 30 years ago than today . 
My fear is it is reaching a tipping point . '' 
