HOUMA , Louisiana | Mon Jun 7 , 2010 1:07 am EDT HOUMA , Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Staffers at a BP oil spill response center in Louisiana are preparing for a long battle as they try to contain the `` blob '' of oil from a ruptured Gulf of Mexico well that is fouling coastal waters and beaches . 
The well is leaking crude at a rate of 12,000 to 19,000 barrels a day despite a number of attempts by BP to cap it , polluting wildlife refuges in Louisiana , barrier islands in Mississippi and Alabama and some of Florida 's famous beaches . 
While officials in a command center in BP 's U.S. headquarters in Houston work on halting the subsea flow of oil , an even bigger team near Houma , Louisiana , is dealing with the spill on the water 's surface and overseeing shoreline cleanup operations for Louisiana , the state hardest hit by the spill . 
Other BP command centers in Mississippi , Alabama and Florida manage the shoreline response in those states . 
Up to 1,000 people , including military personnel , BP officials and scientists , work at the center in Houma in a building that is normally a BP training center for offshore engineers . 
Operations are conducted during daylight hours . 
Every hotel room in Houma and the surrounding area has been booked for an indefinite period to accommodate the workers . 
A free dry-cleaning service has been added , while the building 's kitchen - which was designed to cook breakfast and lunch for 50 to 75 people -- has been beefed up to turn out free meals 24 hours a day . 
`` We 've got the best food -LRB- of all the command centers -RRB- , '' Mike Utsler , the incident commander and effective head of the center in Houma , told Reuters during a recent visit . 
The emphasis on food is a deliberate strategy to keep morale high . 
Some staff came onboard expecting a shorter haul but they no longer know how long they will be away from home . 
`` We 'll rotate out for a few days -LRB- every two weeks -RRB- until it 's over , '' said Barbara Callahan of the International Bird Rescue Research Center . 
Some personnel work 14 days on , 14 days off , but others have much shorter breaks . 
Utsler has not had a day off since he flew down from Alaska 38 days ago . 
The command centers are a collaborative effort among BP , the state government , the Coast Guard and government agencies and under the control of Washington 's point man on the crisis , Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen . 
BP occupies most of the senior roles . 
In addition to Utsler , most of the division heads are BP executives . 
Their deputies come from the Coast Guard , safety regulator OSHA , the U.S. Minerals Management Service or other government bodies . 
Last week , BP placed a containment cap on the well in an attempt to capture the flowing oil at source and bring it to ships on the surface . 
But the company still faces public anger and mounting political pressure over its efforts . 
Some politicians are unhappy with BP 's leadership role in containing the spill and hint the company 's obligations to its shareholders may color its judgments , a suggestion rejected by Utsler . 
`` Our focus is on the mission , '' he said . 
The heart of the operation is the main control room , which has long rows of desks cluttered with laptop computers . 
Large flat-screen televisions , blown-up photographs , maps and projection screens cover the walls . 
Teams of experts in oil burning , the spraying of dispersants , and oil skimming , sit in clusters alongside teams of legal and financial specialists . 
BAD INDUSTRY PRACTICES MEANS MUCH CLEANUP PRACTICE The Houma Command Center 's first priority is to keep the oil slick , which it refers to as `` the blob , '' off the shore by skimming , burning or capturing it with absorbent booms . 
When it hits land , or affects wildlife , the relevant units kick into gear . 
The relative frequency of spills around U.S. coastlines means the response effort has been able to draw from a rich seam of experience . 
`` I 've worked on 50 to 60 oil spills since 1996 , mostly in California , '' said Michael Ziccardi , associate professor of clinical wildlife health at the University of California Davis . 
Houston-based Rhonda Murgatroyd , a specialist in treating oiled birds , said , `` I spend a lot of my time in Louisiana and Texas ... but on a much smaller scale . '' 
So far , relatively few animals have been oiled , said Ziccardi , who has responsibility for sea mammals and turtles . 
But he is not complacent . 
`` We 're prepared for oiled manatees , '' he said . 
When it comes to cleaning up the shore itself , decades of oil spills have taught some counter-intuitive lessons , namely that doing nothing is sometimes the best thing -- especially in the case of marshlands -- as cleanup efforts can do more damage than the oil itself . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
No wonder BP refuses to tell -- each barrel is worth royalty money it owes , so the lower the figure BP says is flowing into the Gulf of Mexico , the lower its liability to the American taxpayer . 
What a cheap and corrupt company BP is . 
After the blowout is plugged and it pays the local economy business losses and the cleanup costs , the company should be sued for royalties as well as being sued for any failings leading to the disaster . 
You really believe Obama s true intent is to distribute BP s dividends to the people who have been effected by this environmental catastrophe ? 
More like his true intent is to make sure Wall Street profits handsomely ! 
It has been leaked out to foreign news that Haliburton had intentionally damaged the oil pipe , but Obama and BP has done everything they can to cover this up . 
Since the day he took office he has extended Bush s radical bills but put it on steroids , or created more new radical bills and has lied to the Americans with a straight face . 
Do your homework , your days of freedom are numbered . 
Even the internet is going to be taxed soon ! 
Jay Rockefeller , Internet should have never existed . 
But of course , they now use terrorist as a scapegoat to limit your freedom ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
