They want Brooksley Born to say four words , four simple words : `` I told you so . '' 
Ah , but she wo n't -- not at legal conferences or dinner parties . 
Not even in a quiet moment in her living room , giving her first interview with a major news organization since last fall 's economic collapse . 
She just smiles , perched ever so properly in an upholstered armchair at her Kalorama home . 
`` More coffee ? '' 
she asks daintily , changing the subject . 
A little more than a decade ago , Born foresaw a financial cataclysm , accurately predicting that exotic investments known as over-the-counter derivatives could play a crucial role in a crisis much like the one now convulsing America . 
Her efforts to stop that from happening ran afoul of some of the most influential men in Washington , men with names like Greenspan and Levitt and Rubin and Summers -- the same Larry Summers who is now a key economic adviser to President Obama . 
She was the head of a tiny government agency who wanted to regulate the derivatives . 
They were the men who stopped her . 
The same class of derivatives that preoccupied Born -- including the now-infamous `` credit-default swaps '' -- have been blamed for accelerating last fall 's financial implosion . 
But from 1996 to 1999 , when Born was the chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission , the U.S. economy was roaring and she was getting nowhere with predictions of doom . 
So , upstairs in the big house in Kalorama , Born tossed and turned . 
She woke repeatedly `` in a cold sweat , '' agonizing that a financial calamity was coming , she recalled one recent afternoon . 
`` I was really terribly worried , '' she said . 
Before taking office , Born had been a high-octane attorney , an American Bar Association power player , a noted advocate of feminist causes and co-founder of the National Women 's Law Center . 
But none of that carried much weight when she crossed over into government ; for all her legal experience , she was a woman who was n't adept at playing the game . 
She could be unyielding and coldly analytical , with a litigator 's absolute assertions of right and wrong . 
And she was taking on Beltway pros , masters of nuance and palace politics . 
She marched into congressional hearing after congressional hearing -- pin neat , always with a handbag -- but no one really wanted to listen . 
The Wall Street Journal declared that `` the nation 's top financial regulators wish Brooksley Born would just shut up . '' 
The Bond Buyer newspaper compared her to a salmon `` swimming against raging currents . '' 
