We 're about to mark the anniversary of the financial meltdown . 
But do n't expect to see any clinking of champagne glasses , because except for a handful of prescient -LRB- or lucky -RRB- investors , it 's been a ghastly two years . 
The nightmare started June 12 , 2007 , when news broke that two Bear Stearns hedge funds speculating in mortgage-backed securities were melting down . 
That was the precursor to the panics and collapses that have led to a worldwide recession and the fall of mighty institutions like Bear , American International Group , Lehman Brothers and Royal Bank of Scotland . 
But even a clinkless anniversary has its uses -- it 's an occasion to reflect on the past and contemplate the future . 
So let 's look at what the meltdown is really about , the underrated impact of Lehman 's collapse , and where we go from here . 
Yes , the meltdown started with subprime mortgages -- subprime is a Wall Street euphemism for junk but can spread far beyond that . 
Problem areas now include credit cards , construction loans , office buildings , shopping centers , leveraged buyouts , nonjunk mortgages , and the various and sundry securities based on all that stuff . 
So even if the U.S. housing market were miraculously restored to health tomorrow -- not likely -- we 'd still have major grief . 
What almost everyone -LRB- including me -RRB- missed two years ago is that the world 's financial system was a disaster-in-waiting . 
It was clear that housing prices , leveraged buyouts and such were being driven by vast amounts of money looking for something to buy , no matter how idiotic . 
What was n't clear is how the markets are interlinked and internationalized . 
Thus , piggish behavior in the United States -- financial swine flu , as it were -- sped around the world even faster than regular swine flu has . 
Enter , or rather exit , Lehman , which failed in September 2008 . 
Financial markets freaked out , for reasons we 'll get to . 
The markets ' problems dragged down the economy , creating a slowdown that 's been putting a second hurt on the markets . 
It 's the first time we 've seen this pattern since the Great Depression . 
Letting Lehman croak seemed rational , after the uproar six months earlier when taxpayers bailed out Bear Stearns 's creditors and allowed Bear shareholders to get $ 10 a share for stock that was essentially worthless . 
But the unexpected consequences of Lehman 's failure scared the pants off the world 's financial-crisis managers . 
First , because of a little-noted 2005 change in U.S. bankruptcy laws , Lehman 's counterparties -- the institutions on the other side of huge bets that Lehman made -- were able to seize and sell the collateral that Lehman had posted . 
Those sales drove down asset prices , inflicting huge losses on other institutions and fomenting fear as institutions grew ever more wary of dealing with one another . 
Second , Lehman 's collapse led to Reserve Primary Fund becoming the first sizable money market fund to `` break the buck '' and inflict capital losses on investors . 
That scared millions of people . 
Finally , some hedge funds that had Lehman as their prime broker -- the institution that holds their securities and cash and does their transactions -- could n't access their assets after the bankruptcy . 
Other funds began moving their prime brokerage accounts out of Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley , which as investment banks could n't use all the Federal Reserve 's emergency-borrowing programs . 
That put the two in a bind and forced them to become bank holding companies . 
These unexpected consequences of Lehman 's collapse help explain why U.S. regulators have been so solicitous of the 19 big `` stress test '' institutions . 
Who wants to close , say , Citi , and be responsible for a Lehman II ? 
Despite the huge stock market run-up the past three months , things are still far from cheery . 
The government 's rescue strategy seems to be the traditional `` play and pray '' of past crises . 
You play for time , pray that all the money being thrown at the markets and the economy will turn things around , and hope banks make enough profit to heal themselves . 
Or will we turn into another Japan , where banks and the economy were stagnant for a decade ? 
Ask me in a year . 
Meanwhile , an unhappy anniversary to all of us . 
Allan Sloan is Fortune magazine 's senior editor at large . 
His e-mail address is asloan@fortunemail.com . 
