Tuesday 5 July 2005 00.34 BST Coca-Cola has returned to Iraq after an absence of nearly four decades , triggering a cola war in a lucrative but potentially hostile market . 
Coke ended its 37-year exile last week by setting up a joint-venture bottling company to compete with Pepsi for 26 million consumers . 
The upsides for Coke include a thirst-inducing climate and burgeoning Islamic conservatism which has banned beer and other alcoholic drinks in much of the country . 
The downsides , besides Pepsi 's head start , are a raging insurgency and banditry which threaten supply routes , and a perception that Coca-Cola is linked to Israel and `` American Zionists '' . 
Coke withdrew from Iraq in 1968 when the Arab League declared a boycott because of business ties to Israel , leaving Pepsi to dominate the Middle East market for soft drinks . 
The boycott ended in 1991 , but sanctions and wars kept Coke out of Iraq . 
After a trickle of Coca-Cola imports from neighbouring countries , the company is attempting a proper comeback by launching a joint venture with a Turkish company , Efes Invest , and its Iraqi partner HMBS , which will reportedly bottle the Coke in Dubai and distribute it across Iraq . 
`` A local bottling company will employ local people to do this , '' a Coca-Cola spokesman said yesterday . 
`` This happens in most of the 200 countries in which we operate around the world , despite the perception of us as an American company . '' 
The response in Baghdad yesterday was mixed . 
One drink wholesaler , Abbas Salih , said the initiative was doomed . 
`` Coca-Cola does business with those who are shooting our brothers in Palestine , '' he said . 
`` How can we drink it ? '' 
Abu Ream , a shop owner in Baghdad , repeated a widespread conspiracy theory : `` If you hold up a Coke can to the mirror , the writing says ` No Allah ' , '' Mr Ream said . 
`` Or maybe ` No Mohammad ' . 
I ca n't remember which . '' 
But Mr Ream said since supplies became available two years ago he had sold more Coke than Pepsi . 
`` People like the taste better . 
And they like the novelty . '' 
Coca-Cola denies any political or religious bias . 
`` The myth is indeed sometimes perpetuated , but has no truth to it , '' the spokesman said . 
`` We are a local business that employs local people ... Our Palestinian bottler employs 250 Palestinians . '' 
After the 1990 invasion of Kuwait , sanctions led the Iraqi licence holder , Baghdad Soft Drinks , to replace the authentic Pepsi concentrate it had used with fakes smuggled from eastern Europe . 
Matters were not helped when Saddam Hussein 's son Uday bought 10 % of the company . 
But Baghdad Soft Drinks says Pepsi is rebuilding , with bottling operations in the capital and southern Iraq . 
In the west , Coke and Pepsi have been targeted as US symbols . 
Entrepreneurs have produced alternatives such as Mecca-Cola and Muslim Up . 
But in Iraq , hostility to the US is expressed more directly in attacks on US troops ; Sunni Arab insurgent sympathisers have no problem drinking and serving Pepsi . 
