cents BP executive says response to spill `` pretty effective '' cents Commit hara-kiri , suggests Louisiana congressman cents BP 's rivals say they would have acted differently cents Politicians mock BP plan 's dead expert and walruses Lamar McKay , chief executive of BP America , sworn in to congressional hearing . 
Photograph : Jonathan Ernst\/Reuters 10am ET : We 're live at the House of Representatives ' energy and environment subcommittee on Capitol Hill , where this morning top executives from oil companies are appearing to discuss the subject of , well , supposedly America 's energy future but in fact will be largely about the BP oil spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Just to make sure that the five executive are n't too comfortable today , the committee is tastefully showing a giant video screen with the famous live feed from the Deepwater Horizon 's riser gushing oil into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Marvin Odum , president , Shell Oil company of America First up , the congress members will read their opening statements . 
10.20 am ET : Chairman of the committee , Ed Markey of Massachusetts , is pulling no punches in his opening statement . 
It 's not going to be a fun day for these oil men . 
Markey has gone through the response plans submitted by the oil companies operating in the Gulf of Mexico . 
And he 's savage : `` The plans cite identical response capabilities and tout identical ineffective equipment . 
In some cases , they use the exact same words . '' 
In particular , Markey picks out the references to protecting walruses in the response plans . 
Walruses `` have not called the Gulf of Mexico home for three million years , '' Markey notes , dripping with sarcasm . 
He also points out that two other plans are so close to BP 's failed blueprint that they list a phone number for the same long-dead expert . 
Oh hey , Republican committee member Joe Barton , of Texas , attacks President Obama for criticising BP 's efforts to stop the spill and clean up the oil . 
Because , you know , BP really wants to fix this and we should n't be rude to them . 
10.30 am ET : Sad news : Tony Hayward , BP 's chief executive , will not grace Congress with his presence today . 
He 's busy cleaning walruses or something . 
Instead , the lucky BP exec who drew the short straw is Lamar McKay , the president and chairman of BP America . 
And he looks thrilled to be here . 
10.47 am ET : Fancy that , Republican congressman Roy Blunt repeatedly refers to BP as `` British Petroleum '' during his statement . 
Unrelated fact : Roy Blunt is running for a Senate seat in Missouri . 
11am ET : The executives are reading through their prepared statements to the committee . 
You can find all the statements , from oil execs and the politicians , here . 
11.13 am ET : Lamar McKay , the chief executive of BP America , is reading his statement : Before addressing the main topic of today 's hearing , I would like to reiterate the profound sorrow and deep regret that all of us at BP feel for the loss of life and the oil spill resulting from the explosion and fire aboard the Transocean Deepwater Horizon rig on April 20 . 
This is very personal , both to me and to BP . 
I am from Mississippi , and spent summers on the Gulf Coast growing up . 
I have many relatives and friends in the area . 
The Gulf Coast states have hosted BP and its heritage companies for decades . 
Thousands of our employees , contractors and their families call the Gulf Coast states home . 
I would like to make one thing very clear : BP will not rest until the well is under control and we discover what happened and why , in order to ensure that it never happens again . 
As a responsible party under the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 , we will carry out our responsibilities to mitigate the environmental and economic impact of this incident . 
As for the rest of his statement , in summary : we need to keep drilling for oil but we also do other stuff you know . 
Like natural gas and ... all sorts really . 
-LRB- Note McKay 's reference to the `` Transocean Deepwater Horizon rig '' right there . 
11.35 am ET : Hooray , the reading out of statements ends , and questioning and the fun begins . 
Ed Markey 's back on , and now he 's showing slides comparing the covers of oil spill response plan : `` The pictures are the same ! 
All that has changed is the color . '' 
Lots of shuffling of feet amongst the oil execs , who probably have n't felt this way since they were six years old . 
And Markey 's still going on about the Gulf of Mexico 's phantom walruses , which appeared in BP 's response plan but not , sadly , in the Gulf itself . 
`` There are not any walruses in the Gulf of Mexico , '' Markey points out , again , forcefully . 
`` It 's unfortunate that walruses were included , '' replies ExxonMobil 's chief executive Rex Tillerson . 
He looks like he means it and appears to avoid rolling his eyes . 
11.45 am ET : Markey is in top form . 
Now he 's ribbing the companies for their cut-and-paste oil response plans again : `` The only technology you seem to be relying on is a Xerox machine , '' he says with grim humor . 
11.50 pm ET : Markey is also hitting the oil execs for their inclusion , among their cutting and pasting , of an expert named Dr Peter Lutz , a professor of marine biology in Florida . 
BP listed Dr Lutz as a consultant in its 2009 disaster response plan and even included his contact details , including his phone number . 
Which is great , except that Dr Lutz inconveniently died . 
So he wo n't be answering the phone . 
-LRB- Maybe that explains why BP 's response has been so poor they are still waiting for Dr Lutz to get back to them ? -RRB- 
`` It seems to me when you included Dr Lutz 's phone number in teh plan , you have not taken the plan seriously , '' says Markey . 
Exxon 's Tillerson pulls on a suitably grave face in response , and intones that just because Dr Lutz 's happens to be dead , `` that does not mean the importance of his work died with him '' . 
Wow , that wins today 's award for chutzpah . 
Yes , while it 's true that Dr Lutz 's work lives on , his usefulness as a consultant is somewhat diminished by his death . 
Cue Monty Python Dead Parrot sketch . 
Noon ET : Now this is interesting : Rex Tillerson , chief executive of ExxonMobil , is subtly -LRB- and not very subtly -RRB- sticking the knife into BP 's back and twisting it . 
In summary , ExxonMobil would have done everything that BP did , except the opposite way around . 
Or , to put it another way , BP have been rubbish . 
`` Clearly there were some things going on at this well in the days and hours prior to the loss of control , '' Tillerson says , primly . 
I think the Twitter hashtag for that last answer from Tillerson would be #ExxondancingonBPsgrave Later , Henry Waxman , the chair of the full House energy and commerce committee , asked all the executives whether they thought BP made mistakes and what their companies would have done differently . 
Now you mention it , they do think BP may have made one or two minor horrendous errors . 
And they all would have done things differently . 
`` A number of the design standards that I would consider to be industry norms were not followed , '' says Tillerson , who clearly does n't believe in the adage about not kicking someone when they are down . 
In fact the Tillerson family motto seems to be : kick them harder . 
12.15 pm ET : More bad news for the Obama administration : a new poll by the Associated Press finds that a majority of Americans disapprove of how President Obama has handled the Gulf oil disaster although far more blame BP . 
Some 52 % say they do n't approve of Obama 's handling of the spill , while 83 % disapprove of BP 's performance . 
The silver lining for Obama is that it does n't seem to have affected his overall job performance rating it remains unchanged at 50 % . 
12.30 pm ET : Often , committee hearings such as this produce a new hero for the American people . 
Today one man has stepped forward : John Shimkus , Republican of Illinois . 
`` I have 3,000 followers on Facebook ! '' 
-LRB- Actually you have friends on Facebook , you have followers on Twitter , but hey . -RRB- 
He 's asked them to submit questions for him to ask . 
This is the terrifying face of the future of politics . 
Sadly , none of the questions are from a Sarah P of Alaska . 
12.36 pm ET : More competition for today 's chutzpah award , from Lamar McKay of BP America , in response to questioning about the inadequacy of BP 's response plan : `` I understand everyone 's frustration with how long this is taking , but the spill response has actually been pretty effective in terms of dealing with it underwater . 
It 's unfortunate we ca n't get it stopped at the source right now , we 're doing everything we can to do that . '' 
The technical term for such a statement in the oil industry is `` bollocks '' . 
Really , if McKay believes that to be true then BP 's senior management still have no grasp of the public anger towards them . 
To say that BP 's spill response `` has actually been pretty effective '' is a nonsense . 
Meanwhile , the excellent Kate Sheppard of Mother Jones is covering these hearings , and she 's got a piece up detailing how the oil executives have been careful to stress that Deepwater Horizon was an unfortunate one-off catastrophe -LRB- is n't that what everyone said about the first world war ? -RRB- 
and that drilling for oil needs to continue : The heads of four of the country 's largest oil companies told a House panel Tuesday morning that the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon and subsequent oil disaster was merely a fluke their companies operate safely and are adequately prepared to deal with any accidents that may occur . 
12.54 pm ET : Representative Bart Stupak you may remember him from such healthcare debates as the Stupak amendment has been laying into the oil companies for their identikit disaster plans . 
Stupak 's opening statement this morning was interesting , you can read it right here , but he 's noticed something different about ExxonMobil 's plan : I have been examining the oil spill response plan of ExxonMobil , the largest oil company in the United States . 
This document is over 500 pages long . 
In many respects , it is virtually indistinguishable from BP 's response plan and the response plans of the other major companies . 
But there is one major difference between ExxonMobil 's plan and the other response plans : the section dealing with the media . 
BP , Shell , ConocoPhillips , and Chevron have plans with short media relations sections . 
ExxonMobil has an entire 40-page appendix devoted to how to respond to the press . 
The media section in the ExxonMobil plan directs public affairs personnel to `` maintain on camera skill proficiency . '' 
Also , they need to ship in some walruses to cover up that whole `` no walruses in the Gulf of Mexico '' snafu . 
1.11 pm ET : Sorry for the delays to the liveblog , we had a software update going on that meant everything ground to a halt for a bit . 
So , like General Petraeus before another congressional committee today , let 's get back on our feet . 
1.19 pm ET : Wannabe senator Roy Blunt of Missouri is quizzing BP over how much cash it has on hand to meet the billions of dollars worth of claims and costs it faces . 
Interesting question , since in his address this evening President Obama is expected to announce he wants to BP to deposit several billion to cover it . 
Lamar McKay of BP America says he believes the the company can pay up but he says that he ca n't say how much BP has available right now . 
Also , McKay says no decision has been made on whether the company will pay its annual dividend to shareholders anytime soon . 
That would be worth $ 10bn . 
Interesting : McKay says no one at BP has been sacked as a result of the disaster yet , although some staff members have been placed on `` administrative leave '' . 
That 's a good subject for further questioning . 
1.29 pm ET : Democrat Jay Inslee from Washington observes that BP 's executive pay was $ 36m last year which is more than three times the company 's annual budget for research into how to reduce the risk of catastrophic blowouts . 
1.45 pm ET : Just to catch up , let 's not forget turncoat-loser Parker Griffiths of Alabama , the Democratic party congressman who switched to the Republican party over healthcare reform , and then got dumped from a great height in the primaries by Alabama 's Republican voters . 
Griffiths thinks the treatment of the oil executives by the nasty politicians has been `` disrespectful '' in the extreme . 
Griffiths goes on to lecture his colleagues for their `` childlike , petulant , accusatory questioning . '' 
But since both parties hate Griffiths , no one cares what he thinks . 
1.57 pm ET : Completely irrelevant , but does n't Lamar McKay of BP America look just like the vile Todd Packer from The Office -LRB- the US version -RRB- ? 
Thinly-related fact : Tony Hayward of BP was born in Slough , the site of the UK version of The Office . 
2.06 pm ET : There was some strong stuff coming from Lois Capps , a Democrat from California , who had the cunning plan of making McKay of BP eat his own words . 
First , she brought up some previous testimony of McKay from last year , in which he confidently stated : `` Today 's off-shore oil-drilling technology bears about as much resemblance to what was available in the 1960s as a rotary dial telephone does to an iPhone . '' 
Capps then showed photos of the types of booms used to clean up the oil spills off Santa Barbara -LRB- her district -RRB- back in in 1969 and the booms now being used in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Suffice it to say they look very similar . 
She asks : What 's BP 's plan to clean up the inevitable accidents from your offshore rigs , the rest of them that are operating out there , which are drilling in even harsher and more difficult conditions ? 
What is it going to look like , 10 , 20 , or 40 years from now , when there 's another huge spill , to see booms being lined up in the defense of our coasts ? 
Is that what we 're going to see then ? 
We will still be relying on thousands of workers mopping up beaches by hand ? 
McKay chunters on about better sub-sea prevention but Capps cuts off him off abruptly to point out that she 's talking about the effects on the surface on the environment . 
2.20 pm ET : Anthony Weiner of New York wants to discuss BP 's trustworthiness , or lack thereof . 
`` I do n't understand on any level why you guys should be in charge of anything . '' 
Good question , and one you should raise with President Obama , perhaps ? 
Weiner , though , has had enough : `` Why should there be any decision-making ability on your part at all here ? 
That 's one thing my Republican friends , who want to criticise the administration for not doing enough , maybe we agree on . 
Maybe we need to have BP involved a heck of a lot less , with anything to do with our environment , anything to do with our citizens . '' 
2.23 pm ET : Well that takes the prize for most bizarre statement of the day the remarks by Republican congressman Joseph Cao of Louisiana , whose congressional district borders on the Gulf of Mexico , to BP 's Lamar McKay : `` In the Asian culture , we do things differently . 
During the samurai days , we just give you a knife and ask you to commit hara-kiri . '' 
Congressman Cao is Vietnamese-American . 
Cao 's colleague , the veteran Republican from Florida 's sixth district Cliff Stearns , was n't quite so dramatic . 
He merely told McKay : `` I think you should be resigning as the CEO of BP America . '' 
Which is pretty mild by comparison . 
But he got a round of applause . 
2.39 pm ET : Chairman Markey brings this hearing-cum-root canal to a close , banging his gavel and declaring the Gulf oil spill to be `` the worst environmental disaster in our history '' . 
All in all , a hearing that produced heat rather than light , but that 's most often the case in these situations . 
What was interesting was seeing the other oil companies graciously allow BP to be hung out to dry , and declare that they would never have allowed such a thing to happen , other than when they were lamenting the awful luck and unfortunate , one in a million twist of fate that caused the spill . 
If I was a BP executive I 'd be tempted to send ExxonMobil a bouquet of dead flowers and a note saying `` Thanks for all your help , pal . '' 
But BP 's got bigger things to worry about . 
