BP spill gives Obama an opportunity to reform oil The BP oil spill gives Obama a chance in his Oval Office speech tonight to reform oil use , says Daniel J. Weiss President Barack Obama has made four trips to visit gulf state communities affected by the BP disaster and now plans to give his first-ever Oval Office speech to the nation this Tuesday evening to address the issue . 
This manmade calamity threatens the nation 's economy , health , and environment . 
This is also a crucial moment in the BP catastrophe , which threatens to swamp his domestic agenda . 
But it also provides an opportunity for President Obama to demonstrate leadership by tackling all the aspects of this crisis , including taking charge of the clean up , getting more help from BP , providing long-term public health and economic recovery , and adopting an oil - use and pollution-reduction reform agenda to minimize the likelihood of another catastrophe . 
Americans are legitimately frustrated and furious about the oil disaster , which has gone on for 55 days and counting . 
The public has grave concerns about BP 's inability to stop or slow the gusher of oil contaminating the gulf . 
Opinion polls also show that respondents have an unfavorable view of the government 's handling of the disaster . 
This is undoubtedly due to the government 's inability to get BP to staunch the flood of oil , even though BP has far more advanced technology and oil blow-out experience than the federal government . 
President Obama must use his speech to make a compelling and passionate case for comprehensive clean-up measures as well as an oil reform program . 
This is essential to galvanize public demand for immediate steps to reduce damage from the disaster , as well as more active support for longer-term oil use and pollution reductions . 
The president should also announce dramatic actions to respond to the oil crisis in the gulf , in the following ways , some of which he has already begun : Take charge of the clean up : Appoint the remaining commissioners to the Bipartisan Demand more help from BP : Stop BP , Transocean , and Halliburton from spending money on their own or American Petroleum Institute lobbyists , ads , or campaign contributions , and instead dedicate all funds to clean up and compensation Provide health and economic aid to people in the gulf region : Establish a Gulf Recovery Fund , a nongovernmental , nonprofit corporation designed to oversee long-term economic recovery in the affected states Prevent future blowouts and disasters : Adopt most of the protective safeguards for deepwater rigs required by other nations Create a federal research program to develop more reliable `` fail safe '' leak prevention hardware and oil containment technologies Reduce oil use and pollution : Implement fuel economy standards and other measures to produce a Power cars with electricity by enacting the Invoke the Trade Expansion Act to levy a small fee on imported oil and use that revenue for public transit , high-speed rail , and other clean infrastructure Adopt a shrinking limit on global warming pollution from oil-based transportation fuels , coal-fired power plants , and other very large sources These measures should be promptly adopted by BP , the administration , or Congress . 
The president may lack authority to enforce some of the measures aimed at BP . 
These efforts will require presidential `` jaw boning '' to convince BP to comply , such as when President John F. Kennedy convinced the steel industry to reverse its inflationary price increases . 
When President Obama took office , he inherited major problems , including a plunging economy , major industries on the brink of collapse , and two wars . 
The BP oil disaster 15 months into his term was not of his making , either , but was the result of the Bush-Cheney policies to let big oil police itself . 
Despite the fact that the BP oil disaster is '' Cheney 's Katrina , '' President Obama made it clear that he will `` ultimately take responsibility for solving this crisis . 
I 'm the president and the buck stops with me . '' 
Tuesday 's nationwide address provides an opportunity for President Obama to do more than take responsibility . 
He must firmly put the government -- and not BP -- in charge of all aspects of clean up and recovery . 
Many in Congress would prefer that the president deal with immediate aspects of the disaster , but basically continue business as usual . 
But he should ignore the special interests and Washington conventional wisdom . 
President Obama must use this moment to rally Americans to support a sweeping oil reform agenda that permanently changes the way big oil does business . 
This means building public demand for standards and investments that deeply cut the $ 1 billion per day spent on foreign oil , ending tax loopholes for big oil companies , and beginning to crack down on global warming pollution . 
An oil reform agenda would put America back in charge of its energy future . 
President Obama must use his inspirational skills to rally support for a 21st century clean energy agenda . 
The fate of the gulf -- and the rest of the nation -- depends on his success . 
