President to reassure US in televised address from Oval Office Tuesday 15 June 2010 16.27 BST Oil washes ashore in Alabama from the Deepwater Horizon spill . 
Affected beaches have been closed for swimming . 
The US president is to give a televised address to the country tonight , his first from the Oval Office during his presidency , to reassure Americans that the government is in control of the crisis . 
Obama 's spokesman , Robert Gibbs , said the president was poised to seize the handling of damage claims from BP , if necessary . 
He would also use the speech to identify a person to lead the recovery effort and discuss reducing the US 's reliance on fossil fuels and imported oil . 
`` We have to get an independent claims process , '' Gibbs told American television news shows . 
`` I think everyone agrees that we have to get BP out of the claims processes and , as I said , make sure that fishermen , hotel owners have a fast , efficient and transparent claims process so that they 're getting their livelihoods replaced . '' 
Asked by Good Morning America what Obama would do if BP refused , Gibbs said : `` The president has the legal authority to compel them to do so , and if they do n't , he will . '' 
The news came as BP 's credit rating was slashed by Fitch to just two notches above junk status , as the potential cost of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill continued to escalate . 
Federal authorities have granted the company permission to start burning oil and gas piped up from its broken well as part of a new plan to reduce the amount of oil leaking into the Gulf of Mexico . 
The method involves pumping oil from the busted wellhead to a special ship on the surface , where it will be burned off rather than collected . 
BP said it hoped to trap as much as 8.3 m litres -LRB- 2.2 m gallons -RRB- of oil daily by the end of June . 
The announcement comes as Obama is on the second day of a two-day trip to the region before he returns to Washington tonight for the broadcast . 
Speaking on CNN , Gibbs said the president would address : `` How do we challenge ourselves to create the type of energy approach that does n't increase our dependency on fossil fuels and foreign oil ? '' 
He said Obama also would touch on regulatory changes to try to prevent this sort of disaster from occurring again and would name someone to head the recovery effort . 
Obama would also discuss the next steps to contain the leak in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Gibbs said Obama intended to fulfil his pledge to restore the Gulf after a leak that has spilled oil for nearly two months , fouling US coastlines and killing birds , sea turtles and dolphins . 
`` This is a tremendously important time , '' Gibbs said . 
`` The president understands the challenges and will lay out a direct and clear plan to meet them . 
The president will outline ... a plan going forward to restore the Gulf not to where it was the day this accident happened but to restore this Gulf to where it was years ago , to increase the health and the vitality of the species there , the wildlife and the natural beauty that we all know is the Gulf of Mexico . '' 
Gibbs said BP 's containment efforts in the Gulf should be capturing about 90 % of the oil leaking from the well by the end of June . 
`` Right now what we have are physics problems . 
The top cap can only take so much . 
They 're adding additional lines ... that will bring more and more of that oil to the surface and out of the Gulf . '' 
