cents Fitch ratings agency concerned about short-term costs cents BP rating cut from AA to BBB cents Head of BP America to appear before Congress today Costs from the BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill continue to escalate . 
Photograph : Saul Loeb\/AFP\/Getty Images BP 's credit rating has been slashed by Fitch to just two notches above junk status , as the potential cost of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill continues to escalate . 
The ratings agency said it was concerned that the balance between long-term and near-term cost payments would become `` skewed much more heavily towards the near-term than previously anticipated '' if the escrow account was created . 
Fitch also said it was concerned that BP will find it hard to access the capital markets for funding while the full cost of the oil leak remains unclear . 
`` In addition , Fitch would be surprised if BP did not suspend quarterly cash dividend payments until the operational and financial impact of the incident is clearer , '' it added . 
Fitch 's downgrade could make it more expensive for BP to borrow , especially if the other ratings agencies follow its lead . 
The company has around $ 5bn of cash reserves , and has spent more than $ 1.6 bn fighting the spill . 
It came just a few hours before the head of BP America appears before the House of Representatives committee on energy and commerce , along with four other big oil firms . 
ExxonMobil , Chevron , ConocoPhillips and Shell are expected to distance themselves from BP by insisting that their own methods are safer . 
The energy and commerce committee attacked BP last night by accusing it of taking dangerous shortcuts when drilling the well , which has been spewing oil into the Gulf of Mexico for 55 days . 
The committee said its investigation into the disaster showed a series of mistakes were made in the weeks before the rig exploded . 
`` Time after time , it appears that BP made decisions that increased the risk of a blowout to save the company time or expense . 
If this is what happened , BP 's carelessness and complacency have inflicted a heavy toll on the gulf , its inhabitants , and the workers on the rig , '' said Henry Waxman and Bart Stupak , the two top Democratic congressmen on the committee . 
Waxman and Stupak made their claim in a letter to Tony Hayward , ahead of their showdown hearing with the BP chief executive on Thursday . 
The committee has already held several hearings into the oil spill , and are convinced they have uncovered crucial evidence that BP staff chose `` risky procedures '' . 
`` At the time of the blowout , the Macondo well was significantly behind schedule . 
This appears to have created pressure to take shortcuts to speed finishing the well , '' Waxman and Stupak wrote . 
They cited BP 's decision to use a cheaper type of steel casing in the well , even though its own review had shown this would offer less protection against a gas leak . 
The two congressmen also accused BP of ignoring advice from Halliburton , the contractor used to cement the well casing securely into the sea bed , that extra `` centralisers '' were needed to ensure that cementing was a success . 
They pointed to an email from a BP official that read : `` Who cares , it 's done , end of story , will probably be fine . '' 
Later today , Barack Obama will address the American people on the disaster . 
He is expected to say that the US must break its dependence on fossil fuels , and also reiterate his insistence that BP pays full compensation to those affected by the leak . 
