Syria crisis : Trapped civilians must be evacuated - UN The UN estimates that the conflict in Syria has left more than 10,000 people dead , mostly civilians The head of UN observers in Syria has urged warring parties to allow the evacuation of women , children , elderly and injured people from conflict zones . 
Maj Gen Robert Mood also admitted that `` attempts to extract civilians '' from the besieged city of Homs over the past week had been unsuccessful . 
Homs has reportedly been under heavy bombardment from government forces . 
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights has said over 1,000 families in Homs need to be evacuated . 
The Observatory said at least one person had died in Sunday 's violence in Homs ' Khalidiyeh district , and that 10 other deaths had been reported elsewhere in the country . 
In a statement , Gen Mood , the head of the UN Supervision Mission in Syria -LRB- UNSMIS -RRB- , said that both troops of President Bashar al-Assad and rebel fighters `` must reconsider their position and allow women , children , the elderly and the injured to leave conflict zones without any preconditions and ensure their safety '' . 
Activists say that the Khalidiyeh neighborhood of Homs has been among the worst hit `` This requires willingness on both sides to respect and protect the human life of the Syrian people , '' the Norwegian general added . 
Gen Mood 's demand comes a day after he said the UN observers would cease operations in Syria because of the escalating violence . 
The mission 's 298 military observers and 112 civilian staff were sent to Syria to verify the implementation of a peace plan devised by UN-Arab League special envoy to Syria Kofi Annan , which included a ceasefire . 
The move has been criticised by Syrian activists , with the opposition Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- warning of a looming massacre in Homs which it says is besieged by 30,000 troops and pro-regime militiamen . 
Videos uploaded to the internet by activists in the city 's al-Bayada and Ghouta districts appeared to show heavy damage to buildings and vehicles from bombardment in recent days . 
The SNC called on the UN Security Council to move swiftly to put the Annan plan into Chapter Seven , meaning that its implementation could be enforced . 
The UN Security Council 's five permanent members will consider the next steps for the observer mission when Gen Mood briefs them on the situation in Syria on Tuesday . 
The Syrian government has repeated its full support for the Annan plan , and blamed `` terrorists '' and their outside backers for escalating the violence and derailing the plan . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
