NEW YORK | Sun Jun 27 , 2010 11:13 am EDT NEW YORK -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Susan Spicer , one of New Orleans ' most prominent and highly regarded chefs , has sued BP Plc for damages to restaurants that have lost normal seafood supplies because of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
Spicer , who runs the restaurant Bayona in New Orleans ' French Quarter , is seeking class-action status on behalf of restaurants and others in the seafood industry that have suffered damage since the April 20 explosion of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig . 
In a complaint filed late Friday in New Orleans federal court , Spicer 's lawyer Serena Pollack said the restaurants depend heavily on the availability of local seafood . 
Because of the spill , they expect to lose customers because of lower tourism and convention business , contamination fears and significantly higher prices , the 18-page complaint said . 
`` Much of plaintiff 's business is based on the unique quality of Louisiana seafood , as well as the chain of delivery of that resource from the initial harvester -LRB- be it fisherman , oyster grower or shrimper -RRB- , '' Pollack wrote . 
`` Because this chain of delivery can not be maintained , plaintiff 's business has been , and continues to be , materially damaged . '' 
BP spokesman Mark Salt said the British company does not comment on litigation . 
Bayona opened in 1990 , and according to its website has since 1995 been one of New Orleans ' top five restaurants in the Zagat Survey . 
Spicer has received a James Beard Foundation award , and appeared as a judge on Bravo 's `` Top Chef '' and Food Network 's `` Iron Chef America . '' 
She has also opened the New Orleans restaurants Herbsaint and Cobalt . 
The lawsuit seeks compensatory and punitive damages from BP . 
It also names as defendants Transocean Ltd , which operated the rig ; Cameron International Corp , which provided a blowout preventer ; and a Halliburton Co unit that provided cementing services . 
More than 250 lawsuits have been filed over alleged from the oil spill , according to the Westlaw database . 
Westlaw is a unit of Thomson Reuters . 
The case is Bayona Corp v. Transocean Ltd et al , U.S. District Court , Eastern District of Louisiana , No. 10-01839 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Jonathan Stempel , editing by Maureen Bavdek -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
If you have never been there the cooking is amazing ! 
I can see why an esteemed Chef like Spicer is sueing Transocean and BP . 
`` Bon chance '' This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
