The Q4000 multi-purpose oil field intervention vessel -LRB- L -RRB- and the drillship the Discoverer Explorer -LRB- C -RRB- burn off material from the Deepwater Horizon wellhead near the disaster site June 24 , 2010 . 
The oil spill , which began on April 20 , has caused an economic and environmental disaster along the U.S. Gulf Coast , threatening fisheries , tourism and wildlife . 
Tropical depression Alex moved into the southwestern gulf , prompting the closure of two key Mexican oil ports , and was likely on Monday to regain tropical storm status , the U.S. National Hurricane Center said . 
Forecasters expect Alex to make landfall again as a hurricane early on Thursday between Brownsville , Texas , and Tuxpan de Rodriguez Cano in Mexico , sparing BP 's oil collection efforts in the Gulf . 
The British newspaper the Sunday Times reported that BP 's drilling of relief wells , intended to plug its leaking deep-sea well , is going more quickly than expected and the company could stop the flow of oil in mid-July . 
That would be about two weeks earlier than BP 's current public projection of early August . 
The newspaper cited sources with knowledge of the operation . 
A BP spokesperson declined to comment on the report and referred to a company statement on Friday that the two relief wells -- begun on May 2 and May 16 -- were estimated to take approximately three months to finish . 
Louisiana 's fragile wetlands have been hardest hit by the oil but Mississippi had escaped damage until Sunday , although some oil had tainted its barrier islands . 
Oil has also come ashore in Alabama and Florida 's Gulf coast . 
Oil from the spill hit two tourist beaches at Ocean Springs , about 10 miles east of Biloxi , Mississippi , and a beach used by fishermen close to an inland marsh . 
Mississippi state officials and the U.S. Coast Guard , who said they expect more oil to arrive , were waiting on BP contractors to start cleaning up . 
`` We can not clean up or catch the oil until BP gets here . 
They have all of our people , '' said Earl Etheridge , a spokesman for Mississippi 's Department of Environmental Quality . 
Alex , the first named storm of the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season , had sustained winds of 35 mph and was about 55 miles south-southwest of Campeche . 
The system was moving west-northwest at 9 mph . 
Even if it misses the spill area , large waves could hamper clean-up efforts from Louisiana to Florida from the spill . 
Shell Oil Co evacuated nonessential workers from production platforms and drilling rigs in U.S.-regulated areas of the Gulf oil fields on Saturday , anticipating Alex 's impact , and on Sunday shut subsea production at two platforms . 
Meteorologists predict a very active Atlantic hurricane season , which runs from June 1 to November 30 . 
The U.S. government estimates that up to 60,000 barrels of oil -LRB- 2.5 million gallons\/9 .5 million liters -RRB- per day are spewing from BP 's damaged well on the seabed about a mile below the surface . 
While awaiting the completion of the relief wells to finally plug the leak , BP has been using two oil collection systems to prevent some of the oil from its ruptured well from spewing into the sea . 
BP said on Sunday its crews had collected or burned off 22,750 barrels of oil on Saturday . 
Equipment going to the leak site this week could raise daily collection to 53,000 barrels , officials say , and a review is scheduled of a system that may boost it to 80,000 barrels . 
The oil spill was a topic at a weekend meeting in Canada of leaders of the Group of 20 world 's biggest economies . 
G20 sources said the summit communique included a reference to the spill and urged the sharing of best practices to protect marine life , prevent accidents and deal with the consequences when accidents occur . 
Shares of BP have been savaged since the crisis started and fell another 6 percent to a 14-year low on Friday . 
The costs to BP include but are not limited to a $ 20 billion compensation fund it set up under U.S. pressure . 
BP said it has paid out $ 2.35 billion so far in clean-up and compensation costs . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Going to any beach with oil on it is like chewing razor blades ! 
The oil is loaded with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons -LRB- PAHs -RRB- . 
The introduction of chemical dispersants increases the amount of carcinogens in the oil . 
The federal government should be passing out Material Safety Data Sheets -LRB- MSDS -RRB- . 
They are designed to provide both workers and emergency personnel or people on the beach picking up or walking on tar balls with the proper procedures for handling hazardous material . 
The oil is a toxic material . 
Some people who have breathed or touched mixtures of PAHs and other chemicals for long periods of time have developed cancer . 
Some PAHs have caused cancer in laboratory animals when they breathed air containing them -LRB- lung cancer -RRB- , ingested them in food -LRB- stomach cancer -RRB- , or had them applied to their skin -LRB- skin cancer -RRB- . 
We know this from an oil spill eight years ago in Buzzards Bay , Massachusetts . 
On April 27 , 2003 , eight years ago the Bouchard Barge B-120 hit an obstacle in Buzzards Bay , creating a 12-foot rupture in its hull and discharging an estimated 100,000 gallons of No. 6 oil . 
The oil is known to have affected an estimated 90 miles of shoreline , numerous bird species , and recreational use of the bay , such as shell fishing and boating . 
Why are all the efforts aimed at collecting oil from the well instead of just sealing it ? 
Additionally , the public has been told for weeks that `` all that can be done is being done , '' if that is the case , how are the efforts now being ramped up ? 
Does n't that imply they were not actually doing all they could to stop or contain the oil ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
