Anti-government rallies were held across Syria after Friday 's prayers The Arab League has sent an `` urgent message '' to the Syrian government , denouncing `` the continued killings of civilians '' taking part in protests . 
The league 's ministerial committee on the Syrian crisis also urged Damascus to `` take the necessary measures '' to protect civilians . 
The call came as at least 37 protesters were killed in Syria , activists said . 
The deaths took place mostly in Homs and Hama as protesters called for a no-fly-zone to be imposed , activists said . 
More than 3,000 people have died in the unrest since protests broke out in March . 
The government of President Bashar al-Assad says the unrest is being stoked by armed gangs and foreign extremists looking to stir up sectarian strife . 
Foreign journalists have been largely prevented from reporting from the country , making it difficult to confirm events on the ground . 
On Saturday there were reports of Syrian tanks and heavy machineguns pounding areas of Homs . 
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights also said at least 17 soldiers had been killed late on Friday in attacks by army deserters . 
The Arab League 's committee on Syria issued its statement on Friday . 
It said that the committee would meet Syrian officials on Sunday in Qatar to try to reach `` serious results '' on a way to end the crisis . 
The ministers also said that they had held `` frank and friendly '' talks with President Assad on Wednesday . 
The BBC 's Jon Leyne , in Cairo , says the league is trying to bring the government and opposition together for a national dialogue but there is a deadline of Monday for the initiative to succeed . 
After that the Arab League might consider expelling Syria - something that would dramatically increase pressure on President Assad , our correspondent adds . 
On Friday , protesters in Syria called for international protection from Nato whose war planes played a vital role in the overthrow of former Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
`` God , Syria , we want a no-fly zone over it , '' protesters shouted in the Bab Tadmur neighborhood of Homs , while others carried banners demanding international protection , Reuters reports . 
In the restive Balaa neighborhood , around 20,000 people marched calling for the fall of President Assad 's regime , AFP news agency reported , quoting activists . 
An armed insurgency has emerged over the past few weeks around the city , home to one million people and some 140km -LRB- 85 miles -RRB- north of Damascus , the news agency reports . 
Dozens of young protesters marched in Damascus 's Barzeh neighborhood , the observatory said , adding that 40 were arrested . 
Internet and communications services were reportedly disrupted in parts of the capital , as well as in Homs . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
