BP must give answers on oil well , US government says The new cap should make a more secure seal over the leaking wellhead BP has been given 24 hours to answer questions on the Gulf of Mexico oil spill , the US government 's incident commander said . 
Adm Thad Allen sent a letter to the oil giant 's managing director saying the company must hand over `` detailed plans and timelines '' on stopping the leak . 
The information is needed before BP is allowed to change caps on the oil well . 
Meanwhile , a court has rejected the government 's bid to restore an offshore deepwater oil drilling moratorium . 
The federal appeals court in Louisiana denied the Obama administration 's request that a lower court 's June order lifting the six-month moratorium be stayed pending appeal . 
The three-judge panel wrote that the government had `` made no showing that there is any likelihood that drilling activities will be resumed pending appeal '' . 
Further hearings on the issue are expected . 
The ruling came as BP said its operation to drill a new relief well to stop the Deepwater Horizon leak was ahead of schedule . 
The new cap BP intends to install should make a more secure seal over the wellhead . 
The company also plans to connect a third containment ship to capture more oil . 
BP began drilling two relief wells to stop the Deepwater Horizon leak in May But while the caps are being changed , the rate at which oil is spilling out of the leak will increase . 
And if the third containment ship , the Helix Producer , has not been connected when the change of caps is made , there will only be one vessel capturing oil . 
BP 's latest moves also are part of efforts to create a system for tackling the leak that is prepared for potential hurricanes . 
The US National Hurricane Center issued a warning on Wednesday about a tropical depression which has formed in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Stormy weather has already disrupted efforts to contain the oil which has been leaking from the site of the Deepwater Horizon rig since April . 
Adm Allen stressed the critical nature of this period of the response effort in his letter to BP Managing Director Bob Dudley , as well as demanding information on five key points : An outline detailing production by the Helix Producer and mounting of the new cap A plan for resuming the recovery at the riser if mounting the new cap fails A plan for pressure testing the well and transitioning from fully collecting oil from the cap to `` shutting in the well '' A plan outlining the management of oil reaching the water 's surface A timeline for the completion of the relief wells . 
BP says its operation to drill a relief well to stop the Gulf of Mexico oil leak is `` slightly ahead of schedule '' . 
Adm Allen confirmed this during a press conference on Thursday . 
Crews expect to reach the Deepwater Horizon well roughly 18,000 ft -LRB- 5,500 m -RRB- below sea level and drill into its casing in seven to 10 days ' time . 
But crews will not know how much time it will take to stop the leak until they reach the well . 
Adm Allen said if the oil was leaking out through different parts of the well , it would probably take until the middle of August to stop the gushing oil with mud and cement . 
`` If you have to exhaust all means for the ways that hydrocarbons are coming up the pipe , then that puts you into middle August , '' he said . 
Adm Allen added that if the oil was only traveling up the well 's central casing , BP might be able to stop the flow sooner . 
The company began drilling the first of two relief wells on 2 May and the second on 16 May . 
BP is facing massive clean-up costs and compensation claims as a result of the Gulf of Mexico oil leak . 
As a result , the company has said it will look at selling some assets and attracting new investment . 
The US government has been highly critical of BP 's handling of the oil leak . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
