BP began drilling two relief wells in May BP says its operation to drill a relief well to stop the Gulf of Mexico oil leak is `` slightly ahead of schedule '' . 
A spokeswoman for the company told the BBC it was `` ahead of the original schedule of completion in August '' . 
Asked about comments made by Bob Dudley , the man in charge , that finishing by 27 July was possible , she emphasised the caveats in what he said . 
Mr Dudley said completion between 20 and 27 July was possible but only `` in a perfect world with no interruptions '' . 
In his interview with the Wall Street Journal newspaper earlier this week , Mr Dudley added that such a `` perfect case '' was threatened by the hurricane season in the region and was `` unlikely '' . 
The US National Hurricane Center issued a warning in the early hours of Wednesday about a tropical depression which has formed in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Tropical storms could disrupt efforts to contain oil which has been leaking from the site of the Deepwater Horizon rig since April . 
Although the depression is not predicted to become a major hurricane , tropical storm warnings were issued for the Texas and Mexico coastlines . 
BP is facing massive clean-up costs and compensation claims as a result of the Gulf of Mexico oil leak . 
Spokeswoman Sheila Williams repeated Mr Dudley 's caveats about whether the relief well could be completed by 27 July , saying such an outcome would only be possible without delays or interruptions caused by hurricanes or unforeseen problems . 
She also said that as the drilling for the relief well got deeper and closer to the leaking pipe the operation would become `` more delicate and technically difficult '' . 
Since the oil started leaking BP has tried a number of different ways to plug the well , including a failed `` top kill '' procedure which tried to staunch the flow by pumping huge quantities of mud into the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- that sits on the seabed . 
The company began drilling for the first of two relief wells on 2 May , and for a second on 16 May . 
The US government has been highly critical of BP 's handling of the oil leak . 
Congressmen have accused Chief Executive Tony Hayward of not taking responsibility for the disaster , while questioning him about alleged cost-cutting measures that could have contributed to the explosion and leak . 
On Wednesday the US government asked BP to tell it of any major asset sales or merger deals in advance , as it continues to keep a close eye on the oil giant . 
The highly unusual request was made in a letter from the US Department of Justice , dated 23 June . 
BP told the BBC it had yet to respond to the letter . 
In its most recent update , BP said the oil leak had now cost it $ 3.12 bn -LRB- # 2bn -RRB- , though the total cost is forecast by analysts to be tens of billions of dollars . 
As a result , the company has said it will look at selling some assets and attracting new investment . 
Mr Hayward visited Abu Dhabi on Wednesday , with media reports speculating he was in the region to entice wealthy investors . 
BP said Mr Hayward 's visit was routine . 
Speculation has grown in recent days about potential investors in BP , including the Kuwaiti Investment Authority , China 's PetroChina and the US oil giant Exxon Mobil . 
These reports , as well as statements from BP saying the company had no plans to issue new shares , have helped the company 's share price to rally this week - including a 5 % rise on Wednesday . 
But despite the bounce , BP 's shares have almost halved in value since the Deepwater Horizon explosion on 20 April . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
