BP oil spill : US scientist retracts assurances over success of cleanup NOAA 's Bill Lehr says three-quarters of the oil that gushed from the Deepwater Horizon rig is still in the Gulf environment while scientists identify 22-mile plume in ocean depths Bill Lehr , a senior scientist at the NOAA , appeared before Congress to repudiate an earlier report he wrote , which suggested the majority of the oil had been captured . 
Photograph : Chip Somodevilla\/Getty Images White House claims that the worst of the BP oil spill was over were undermined yesterday when a senior government scientist said three-quarters of the oil was still in the Gulf environment and a research study detected a 22-mile plume of oil in the ocean depths . 
Bill Lehr , a senior scientist at the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- departed from an official report from two weeks ago which suggested the majority of the oil had been captured or broken down . 
`` I would say most of that is still in the environment , '' Lehr , the lead author of the report , told the house energy and commerce committee . 
The growing evidence that the White House painted an overly optimistic picture when officials claimed two weeks ago the remaining oil in the Gulf was rapidly breaking down fuelled a sense of outrage in the scientific community that government agencies are hiding data and spinning the science of the oil spill . 
No new oil has entered the Gulf since 15 July , but officials said yesterday the well is unlikely to be sealed for good until mid-September . 
Under questioning from the committee chair , Ed Markey , Lehr revised down the amount of oil that went into the Gulf to 4.1 m barrels , from an earlier estimate of 4.9 m , noting that 800,000 barrels were siphoned off directly from the well . 
By some estimates , as much as 90 % of the oil was unaccounted for . 
Lehr said 6 % was burned and 4 % was skimmed but he could not be confident of numbers for the amount collected from beaches . 
The NOAA has been under fire from independent scientists and Congress for its conclusions and for failing to explain how it arrived at its calculations . 
The agency has failed to respond to repeated requests from Congress to reveal its raw data and methodology . 
Markey told Lehr the agency report had given the public a false sense of confidence . 
`` You should n't have released it until you knew it was right , '' he said . 
`` People want to believe that everything is OK and I think this report and the way it is being discussed is giving many people a false sense of confidence regarding the state of the Gulf , '' Markey said . 
Lehr said the agency would release all supporting data in two months . 
But the impression of stonewalling has damaged the credibility of the Obama administration in the scientific community . 
`` That report was not science , '' said Ian MacDonald , an ocean scientist at Florida State University who has studied the Gulf for 30 years . 
He accused the White House of making `` sweeping and largely unsupported '' claims that three-quarters of the oil in the Gulf was gone . 
`` I believe this report is misleading , '' he said . 
`` The imprint will be there in the Gulf of Mexico for the rest of my life . 
It is not gone and it will not go away quickly . '' 
MacDonald went on to warn of a tipping point from which the wildlife and ecosystem in the Gulf could not recover . 
Meanwhile , in the Science article , experts from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute mapped a 22-mile plume of oil droplets from BP 's well , providing the strongest evidence so far over the fate of the crude . 
`` These results indicate that efforts to book-keep where the oil went must now include this plume , '' said Christopher Reddy , one of the Woods Hole team . 
The report also said the plume was very slow to break down by natural forces . 
`` Many people speculated that subsurface oil droplets were being easily degraded , '' said Richard Camilli , the lead author of the paper . 
`` Well , we did n't find that . 
We found it was still there . '' 
The scientists zig-zagged for hundreds of miles across the ocean to track the plume , taking 57,000 readings of its chemical signature during a 10-day research voyage at the end of June . 
The Woods Hole effort reinforces earlier reports from research voyages by scientists from the University of Georgia and Texas A&M University who detected the presence of deepwater plumes of oil . 
This week , University of South Florida scientists reported oil in amounts that were toxic to critical plankton on the ocean floor far east of the spill . 
Those findings have not been reviewed by other scientists . 
According to the Woods Hole findings , the deepwater plume is 22 miles long or about the length of Manhattan 1.2 miles wide and 650ft high . 
It noted that the plume was not made up of pure oil but included toxic oil compounds including benzene and xylene . 
Yesterday 's testimony and the Science article put the White House and government scientific agencies increasingly out of step with independent scientists . 
It also raises new questions about the administration 's decision to use nearly 2m gallons of a chemical dispersant Corexit to break up the oil . 
The NOAA chief Jane Lubchenco , herself an ocean scientist , had played down the first reports of oil in the ocean depths . 
MacDonald and other scientists have accused NOAA of discouraging them from making public their findings about lingering oil in the deepwater . 
A NOAA spokeswoman said last night that the Woods Hole voyage was in late June , while the broken BP well was still spewing oil . 
`` It 's not necessarily an indication of where we are today '' she said . 
A NOAA team reported two weeks ago that just over a quarter of oil remained in the Gulf as a light sheen on the surface or degraded tar balls washing ashore . 
A version appeared on p19 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 02.00 BST on Friday 20 August 2010 Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
