The spill damaged wildlife and livelihoods along the US Gulf Coast The Obama administration blocked government scientists ' efforts to inform the public of worst case scenarios , a draft report said . 
But spokesman Robert Gibbs said the White House had not tried to block `` the most accurate and timely information '' . 
The commission was appointed by President Barack Obama . 
The explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig on 20 April killed 11 workers , and led to the pollution of hundreds of miles of shoreline and disruption of tourism and fishing before the leaking well was capped on 15 July . 
In preliminary findings released on Wednesday , the National Oil Spill Commission said officials were too optimistic about handling the disaster , one of the worst in US history . 
In a briefing for journalists on Thursday , Mr Gibbs said the draft `` has not necessarily been signed off by members of the commission '' . 
The report suggests the White House was directly involved in controlling information from the spill . 
The report says that during the crucial first 10 days of the oil spill the government 's response `` seemed to lag '' - and that coastguard officials were `` overly-optimistic '' in believing BP could handle the incident . 
Government scientists are accused of first underestimating the amount of oil pouring into the Gulf and then overestimating the quantity which had evaporated or otherwise been removed from the sea . 
The report says the president 's adviser on energy policy , Carol Browner , stated wrongly on American television that three-quarters of the oil had `` gone '' , and that the White House blocked a request by officials to make public a worst-case scenario for the scale of the leak . 
The panel , which cited interviews with government officials , said that in late April or early May , the White House budget office had denied a request from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- NOAA -RRB- to make public its worst-case estimate of how much oil could leak from the Macondo well . 
But the White House said in a statement that Interior Secretary Ken Salazar and Thad Allen , the retired Coast Guard admiral in charge of the response , had told the public the worst-case scenario could be more than 4.2 million gallons per day . 
BP 's drilling permit for the well said 6.8 million gallons could pour from the well during the worst-case scenario . 
NOAA and the Coast Guard later received an updated worst-case scenario just after the spill had begun , putting the estimate at 2.7 million to 4.6 million gallons per day . 
The National Oil Spill Commission report says those numbers , which were used as the basis for the administration 's spill response , were never made public - though they appeared on an internal Coast Guard situation report . 
The report also says the federal government used too much boom to stop the oil from spreading - especially in the US state of Louisiana , where directions went out to `` keep the parishes happy '' . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
