PARIS | Wed Oct 26 , 2011 7:09 am EDT PARIS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad will almost certainly fall under the pressure of protests and sanctions , but it will take time due to the complexity of internal and regional politics , French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said on Wednesday . 
With a crackdown on pro-democracy protests in Syria now seven months old , Western powers including France are relying on a combination of sanctions and diplomatic pressure to weaken Assad 's hold on power . 
The European Union widened sanctions against Assad and the Syrian state after China and Russia blocked an attempt by Western powers to bring about a U.N. Security Council resolution condemning violence against protesters . 
`` It 's true that in New York -LRB- at the United Nations -RRB- we were blocked , and that is a stain on the Security Council , which said almost nothing about this barbaric repression , '' Juppe said on France Inter radio . 
`` This will end with the fall of the regime , it is nearly unavoidable , but unfortunately it could take time because the situation is complex , because there is a risk of civil war between Syrian factions , because surrounding Arab countries do not want us to intervene . '' 
Assad , who says his government is serious about political reform , will meet an Arab League committee in Damascus on Wednesday . 
The six-nation committee includes Algeria , Oman , Sudan and Yemen -- countries seen as sympathetic to Syria . 
Juppe said that while most Arab nations opposed action against Syria , Turkey was moving closer to the Western position and had begun to exert pressure on the Syrian government to stop the crackdown . 
After months of clashes between protesters and security forces , which have killed 3,000 people , according to a U.N. estimate , Syrian army deserters have formed the beginnings of an armed insurgency against the state . 
Opposition abroad to the Syrian government has begun to coalesce under the Syrian National Transition Council . 
France has stopped short of recognizing the body , but signaled its support earlier this month when Juppe shook hands with its leader in Paris . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Oct 26 , 2011 8:07 am EDT -- Report as abuse This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
