AMMAN | Wed Oct 26 , 2011 6:33 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - At least 20 people died in clashes and strikes paralyzed parts of Syria on Wednesday as President Bashar al-Assad held an inconclusive meeting with Arab ministers seeking to end months of violence . 
Nine soldiers were killed by armed rebels and 11 civilians were killed by army gunfire , residents and anti-Assad activists said , as little emerged from a closely watched meeting between Assad and members of an Arab League committee on Syria . 
The delegation leader , Qatari Prime Minister Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani , said the talks had been `` cordial and frank '' and that the ministers would meet Syrian officials again on October 30 in either Doha or Damascus . 
Down the hill from where the envoys met Assad at the `` Palace of the People , '' the authorities organized a rally to show support for the president , who inherited power from his late father 11 years ago . 
But with armored assaults on cities and towns failing to end seven months of protests against 41 years of Assad family rule , international pressure on the president continued to grow . 
The United Nations says his crackdown has killed 3,000 people , although Syria says hundreds of security personnel have been killed by armed groups trying to foment sectarian conflict . 
Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu , who met Qatar 's Emir Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani on Wednesday , said his country was consulting with Arab League members to push Syria to `` pull troops from cities and end its cruel treatment of its people . '' 
`` There are measures that have been taken and activated in this regard so that the Syrian government ends its aggression against its people , but these do not include any sanctions that could hurt the Syrian people , '' Davutoglu said after talks in Amman with King Abdullah and senior Jordanian officials . 
Turkish officials who spoke on condition of anonymity say the sanctions , which were announced last month without details , will affect military , banking and energy ties , among others . 
The United States and the European Union have already imposed sanctions on Syria 's small , but key , oil sector , which is linked to the Assad family and their friends . 
In the million-strong city of Homs , a hotbed of opposition to Assad , residents and activists said a general strike kept most workers at home and shops shut . 
One resident said armed opponents of Assad had enforced the strike . 
Firing by soldiers , which killed 11 people across Syria on Wednesday , also kept people indoors . 
In the town of Hamrat , north of Homs , suspected army deserters killed nine soldiers in an attack on a bus with a rocket-propelled grenade , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said . 
It was the latest incident in an armed insurgency emerging alongside the campaign of street protests . 
`` This will end with the fall of the regime . 
It is nearly unavoidable , '' French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said . 
`` But unfortunately it could take time because the situation is complex , because there is a risk of civil war between Syrian factions , because surrounding Arab countries do not want us to intervene , '' he told French radio . 
In Umayyad Square in central Damascus , tens of thousands of people gathered for what has become a weekly show of support for Assad organized by authorities . 
State television showed them waving Syrian flags and portraits of the president , saying they were rallying under the slogan `` Long live the homeland and its leader . '' 
The rally took place before the envoys from six Arab nations arrived in Damascus for talks with Assad following a call on October 16 for the opposition and government to hold a dialogue within 15 days at the League headquarters in Cairo . 
`` What is hoped is that the violence will end , a dialogue will start and reforms will be achieved , '' Arab League Secretary General Nabil Elaraby said . 
The delegation was led by Qatar and included Egypt , Algeria , Oman , Sudan and Yemen . 
Assad 's government says it is serious about political reform , and that militants are trying to wreck it . 
The opposition says Assad has no intention of relaxing his grip on power , pointing to an increase in killings , torture , arrests and assassinations . 
Human Rights Watch said the Arab mission should demand that Syria allow in independent civilian monitors . 
`` The only way to make sure civilians are protected is to have on-the-ground monitors whose presence would inhibit abuse by the security services , '' HRW Middle East director Sarah Leah Whitson said . 
Assad is from the minority Alawite sect in a mostly Sunni Muslim country . 
Sensitive to the reverberations if he were to fall , leaders of mostly Sunni nations across the Middle East have been cautious about criticizing him or taking action , as many struggle to deal with their own unrest . 
In Homs , residents said public employees took part in the strike for the first time , and only a few food shops were open . 
Video posted on the Internet showed shuttered shops on both sides of a main street in the nearby region of Houla . 
In Deraa the impact was reportedly even greater . 
`` There is total closure . 
The streets of Deraa are empty , even the few butcher 's shops and pharmacies that were open are now closed , '' said Jasem Masalmeh , a resident of the provincial capital . 
Syria has excluded most foreign media , making it difficult to verify accounts from activists and authorities . 
