Your browser 's settings may be preventing you from commenting on and viewing comments about this item . 
See instructions for fixing the problem . 
Thursday , November 13 , 2008 ; Page A23 The Bush administration initially was n't enthusiastic about this weekend 's meeting of the Group of 20 nations to discuss the global financial crisis . 
But the summit is going to happen anyway , and maybe that 's the real point . 
Having fouled the global economic nest , America must now work with other nations to clean it up . 
The meeting is intended to send reassuring signals to global financial markets that a coordinated global rescue and recovery are on the way . 
And good luck with that ! 
The danger is that the hastily organized summit , hosted by a lame-duck U.S. president , will also convey a subliminal message of discord over the future of the global economy . 
The summit will mark several important , but potentially bumpy , transitions : the arrival of China as a co-manager of global prosperity ; the new assertiveness of Europe in arguing for its own , Brussels-style transnational approach to financial regulation ; and the growing anger of developing economies such as Brazil , which feel caught in a downturn for which they had no responsibility . 
This gathering of 20 nations is a reminder , above all , that the smaller club of rich nations known as the Group of Eight has failed to stop the financial disaster . 
`` This crisis has made all participants in the system more equal , '' says Antonio Patriota , Brazil 's ambassador to the United States . 
Anger toward America for creating the financial contagion is a powerful , if largely unstated , theme . 
During a conference call Monday among G-20 members to prepare for the summit , there were complaints about `` the speculation and deregulation in the U.S. that became this market tsunami , '' according to one participant . 
What 's frustrating is that even as the summiteers debate big , woolly issues of financial architecture , the global economy remains crippled by nettlesome technical problems . 
Financial institutions are continuing to sell assets in a falling market to meet capital requirements or other rules . 
These `` pro-cyclical '' practices are reinforcing the downward spiral , and the G-20 's penchant for rule-making and regulation may make the pro-cyclical problem worse . 
`` Maybe we have turned a corner , but it 's a corner in an octagon , '' the worried chief executive of one leading global hedge fund told me this week . 
The godfather of the summit is French President Nicolas Sarkozy , who is in his last months in the rotating presidency of the European Union . 
He paid a quickie visit to Camp David to lobby President Bush personally for the summit and prodded other European nations to support a far-reaching package of new regulations . 
Administration officials chafed at Sarkozy 's campaign , but in the crisis atmosphere they decided not to fight it . 
The French have been lobbying for a draft resolution endorsed last Friday by European leaders in Brussels that calls for global supervision of rating agencies , convergence of accounting standards , coordination of financial oversight across national boundaries , `` codes of conduct to avoid excessive risk-taking in the financial sector , '' and , finally , a leading role for the International Monetary Fund in overseeing the recovery and regulation package . 
The French want another summit in 100 days to ratify these measures , with the blessing of President Obama . 
Bush administration officials support some items in this package , but they are wary of the unintended consequences of new regulations -- particularly ones that are rushed through during a crisis . 
The big need right now , many analysts argue , is for fiscal stimulus on the model of China 's massive $ 586 billion package announced this week , rather than a new regulatory architecture . 
A simpler set of reforms would address the practical reasons why , months into the crisis , financial institutions are still being forced to sell at distressed prices . 
One example is the so-called Basel II capital standards for banks , published in 2004 by the Bank for International Settlements . 
Though intended to provide a cushion for hard times , these standards are now forcing banks to liquidate assets to raise capital . 
Instead , it 's argued , the BIS should adopt a countercyclical approach in which banks post more capital during good times and then draw it down when the economy declines . 
Similar countercyclical measures are needed for rules that affect insurance companies and other big players -- so that their forced selling does n't exacerbate the crisis . 
This weekend 's gathering has been billed as a new Bretton Woods . 
But as one commentator has noted , that epochal 1944 conclave took three years to prepare , whereas this one has taken about three weeks . 
Even for a world that 's angry with America , it makes sense to build the new financial framework more carefully . 
The writer is co-host of PostGlobal , an online discussion of international issues . 
His e-mail address is davidignatius@washpost.com . 
