Saturday 's financial summit in Washington will be a good thing in itself : After years of `` G-7 '' and `` G-8 '' meetings , the new `` G-20 '' format will give most of the key emerging economies seats at the world 's top table . 
The summit could be even better if it spurs governments to pass stimulus packages : Already , China has announced a gargantuan infrastructure spending program that should soften a global recession . 
But the tricky challenge for the summit is to make global finance safer . 
To understand how headway could be made on that , it helps to think about finance as you might think about car insurance . 
Car insurance makes driving possible by pooling the cost of crashes . 
If I had to pay out of pocket any time I had an accident , I might never get behind the wheel ; I would want to have 80 grand in the bank in case I totaled someone 's Mercedes . 
But since the number of expensive cars that get smashed is actually quite small , I can deal with this risk cheaply by sharing it with other drivers . 
We all pay $ 5 weekly into the Mercedes fund , and suddenly there 's no need for vast sums in the bank . 
I 'm so much better off that I 'm visiting the Mercedes showroom . 
The most famous financial summit , the Bretton Woods gathering of 1944 , built upon this principle . 
Just as uninsured drivers need big savings to prepare for car crashes , uninsured nations need big savings to prepare for financial crashes . 
So the Bretton Woods architects created financial insurance in the form of the International Monetary Fund . 
Countries pooled savings that they would otherwise have kept in their central banks ; when a financial crisis struck , the IMF 's kitty was used to help afflicted members . 
The need for countries to hold savings in the form of central bank reserves was wonderfully reduced . 
Governments could allow their people to keep more of their money -- and take it to car showrooms . 
It is now time for a radical update of the Bretton Woods insurance scheme . 
The volume of capital flooding through the world 's system has increased exponentially , which makes crashes more costly . 
But the IMF 's kitty has not kept up . 
In 1990 , when the stock of cross-border portfolio investment stood at $ 171 billion , the IMF had $ 36 billion of lendable resources . 
Today , with cross-border portfolios at upward of $ 3 trillion , the IMF has a $ 201 billion war chest . 
The challenge has grown by a factor of 18 while the remedy has grown only sixfold . 
To restore the 1990 status quo , government commitments to the IMF should be tripled -- and if you take into account the vast growth of cross-border derivatives , an even larger expansion is needed . 
Because of the IMF 's relative decline , even the best-run nations face unacceptable risks . 
A decade ago , when a country such as Brazil experienced a financial crisis , it was possible to blame bad Brazilian policy . 
But in the past few years , Brazil has done just about everything right , and yet it has still been whiplashed . 
Capital that flooded into the country during the good years promptly flooded out again because of a freak event abroad : No-doc loans in the United States rear-ended Brazil 's economy . 
Over the past three months , the Brazilian stock market has fallen 37 percent , and the currency is down 30 percent against the dollar . 
If we had a bigger IMF , Brazil and similarly hit countries would borrow IMF dollars to replace the ones withdrawn by bankers who crashed their subprime go-karts . 
But the IMF lacks a sufficient emergency fund to deal with all the Brazils of the world . 
In the short term , this may mean that the credit crunch will hit emerging economies harder than it should -- and that the global recession will be worse than it needs to be . 
But the long-term consequences could be equally significant . 
In the absence of a larger IMF , Brazil and its equivalents have two options . 
They can plan to rely on powerful central banks for emergency loans -- during this crisis , the U.S. Federal Reserve has provided $ 30 billion apiece to Brazil , South Korea , Singapore and Mexico . 
The problem is that financing from a central bank may come with political conditions . 
That might sound fine if the central bank is the Fed . 
But what if it 's the People 's Bank of China , which has more than enough reserves to play the IMF surrogacy game ? 
A weak IMF could hand a powerful foreign policy tool to China . 
The other option for countries such as Brazil is to self-insure -- to be a driver with an $ 80,000 bank account . 
Again , this is already beginning to happen : After the IMF imposed unpopular conditions on crisis countries a decade ago , many emerging economies built up their reserves to avoid repeating that experience . 
But this every-country-for-itself reserve accumulation is not only wasteful . 
The savings that pile up in central bank vaults will largely take the form of dollar bonds -- that is , lending to Americans . 
If the past few years are any guide , the resulting whoosh of capital into the United States will inflate the next bubble . 
The Bush administration says the IMF is fine for now , and it sees no need for an expansion . 
But the Obama team will soon have its hands on the controls . 
A bigger IMF should be on its agenda . 
