By the CNN Wire Staff Rebels are seeking the ouster of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi Fighting started with anti-government demonstrations and escalated into a civil war International leaders accuse Gadhafi 's regime of committing human rights violations Libyan officials repeatedly accuse NATO of killing civilians -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Fighting in Libya started with anti-government demonstrations in February and escalated into a nationwide civil war . 
For months , rebel fighters -- who have controlled the eastern city of Benghazi and other areas -- have been trying to move closer toward Tripoli , in the west . 
They are seeking the ouster of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , who has ruled Libya for 42 years . 
International leaders have accused Gadhafi 's regime of committing human rights violations and killing civilians . 
Libyan officials have repeatedly accused NATO of killing civilians in airstrikes . 
Here are some key points CNN has reported in the conflict . 
Three days after the fall of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak , calls go out on Facebook for peaceful demonstrations in Libya against leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
The Libyan leader , who has ruled over the country for more than four decades , voiced support for Mubarak during the Egyptian crisis . 
About 200 demonstrators protesting the arrest of a human activist take to the streets in the coastal city of Benghazi , witnesses say . 
Several of them are arrested amid confrontations with police . 
A highly placed source close to the Libyan government tells CNN , `` There is nothing serious here . 
These are just young people fighting each other . '' 
Libyan state television shows images of men chanting pro-Gadhafi slogans , waving flags and singing around the Libyan leader 's limousine as it creeps through Tripoli . 
In Benghazi , human rights groups and protesters claim they 're under attack by pro-government security forces . 
Among the tens of thousands of protesters who take to the streets , at least 20 people are killed and 200 are wounded , according to medical sources . 
Protests continue to turn violent , however the death and injury toll is unclear . 
In Benghazi , witnesses report bloody clashes with soldiers firing tear gas and bullets . 
Witnesses say protests have erupted in cities across the country . 
Human Rights Watch reports that 84 people have been killed in Libyan demonstrations since February 15 . 
Violence surges in Benghazi where a witness says protesters have taken control of the city and much of Tripoli . 
Gadhafi 's son Saif al-Islam Gadhafi appears on state television to warn demonstrators that the country could fall into civil war if their protests do not subside . 
The Libyan newspaper Quryna reports that the country 's justice minister has resigned to protest what he calls a `` bloody situation and use of excessive force '' by security forces against protesters . 
Gadhafi appears on television to dispel rumors that he has fled the country , vowing he will never leave Libya , and `` will die as a martyr at the end . '' 
The United Nations Security Council issues a statement saying it `` condemned the violence and use of force against civilians , deplored the repression against peaceful demonstrators and expressed deep regret at the deaths of hundreds of civilians '' in Libya . 
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon condemns what he calls `` egregious violations '' of human rights as Libya tries to crush an ongoing revolt , telling reporters that those who have shed `` the blood of innocents '' must face punishment . 
U.S. President Barack Obama signs an executive order freezing Moammar Gadhafi 's assets . 
The United Nations Security Council imposes sanctions against Libya , including an arms embargo , asset freeze and travel bans for Gadhafi and his associates . 
It also refers Gadhafi to the International Criminal Court for alleged crimes against humanity . 
The opposition movement announces that it has picked a leader : former Justice Minister Mustafa Abdul Jalil . 
The European Union bans the sale of arms and ammunition to Libya and freezes the assets of Gadhafi and five members of his family , while imposing a visa ban on Gadhafi and 15 other people tied to the regime 's crackdown . 
The United Nations General Assembly adopts a resolution to oust Libya from its seat on the 47-member Human Rights Council . 
NATO begins round-the-clock surveillance flights of Libya as it considers various options for dealing with escalating violence there . 
The United Nations Security Council votes to impose a no-fly zone over Libya and take `` all necessary measures '' to protect civilians . 
The resolution is approved with 10 votes , including those of the United States and the United Kingdom . 
There are no opposing votes on the 15-member council , but China , Russia , Germany , India and Brazil abstain . 
Germany says it is concerned about a protracted military conflict . 
Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa says the country has decided on `` an immediate cease-fire and the stoppage of all military operations . '' 
But sources inside Libya say violence continues . 
French , British and American military forces begin the first phase of operation `` Odyssey Dawn , '' aimed at enforcing the no-fly zone . 
More than 110 Tomahawk missiles fired from American and British ships and submarines hit about 20 Libyan air and missile defense targets , U.S. Vice Adm. William Gortney says at a Pentagon briefing . 
The operation is meant `` to deny the Libyan regime from using force against its own people , '' Gortney says . 
Gadhafi , speaking on Libyan state TV , says the U.N. charter provides for Libya 's right to defend itself in a `` war zone . '' 
Weapons depots will be opened , he says . 
`` All you people of the Islamic nations and Africa , and Latin America and Asia , stand with the Libyan people in its fight against this aggression , '' Gadhafi said . 
NATO agrees to take command of the mission enforcing a no-fly zone over Libya . 
A Libyan woman with bruises all over her body bursts into a Tripoli hotel housing international journalists , shouting that she was taken from a checkpoint and held for two days while 15 of Gadhafi 's militiamen beat and raped her . 
`` Look at what Gadhafi 's brigades did to me , '' Eman al-Obeidy says before government officials and hotel staff whisk her outside to car and drive her away . 
She is not heard from for more than a week . 
The Libyan government says al-Obeidy is mentally ill and drunk . 
Officials call her a prostitute . 
Later , the government changes its story and says the men accused of raping al-Obeidy are being investigated , but the suspects , in turn , file counter-charges for slander . 
Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa arrives in the United Kingdom and tells the government there that he has resigned . 
NATO announces that it has begun Operation Unified Protector in Libya , including an arms embargo , a no-fly zone , and `` actions to protect civilians and civilian centers . '' 
Gadhafi urges U.S. President Barack Obama to end the NATO bombing of his war-torn country , making an appeal in a letter to the American president . 
Gadhafi asks Obama to stop what he calls the `` unjust war against a small people of a developing country , '' adding that those in the opposition are terrorists and members of al Qaeda , the official said . 
In a speech , Gadhafi urges NATO to negotiate an end to airstrikes , accusing the international coalition of killing civilians and destroying the nation 's infrastructure in a bid to take over its oil production . 
NATO launches a missile attack on a house in Tripoli . 
The attack kills one of Gadhafi 's sons , Saif al-Arab Gadhafi , and several of his grandchildren . 
Al-Obeidy , who garnered worldwide attention for her vocal rape allegations against Gadhafi 's regime , says she has fled Libya , fearing for her safety . 
She tells CNN that she has crossed into Tunisia with the help of a defecting military officer and his family . 
A month later , she finds temporary sanctuary in Qatar before being deported back to Libya . 
The European Union opens an office in the rebel-held Libyan city of Benghazi . 
Several countries , including Spain and Germany are among the country 's that recognize the opposition Transitional National Council as Libya 's legitimate representative . 
NATO announces that it is extending its mission in Libya for 90 days . 
Libya 's oil minister defects to Italy and tells CNN he left because the suffering of the country 's people had become unbearable . 
South African President Jacob Zuma lashes out at NATO , arguing that the organization is misusing the United Nations resolution meant to protect civilians `` for regime change , political assassinations and foreign military occupation . '' 
The International Criminal Court issues arrest warrants for Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi , his son Saif al-Islam Gadhafi , and his brother-in-law Abdullah al-Sanussi . 
The warrants are `` for crimes against humanity , '' including murder and persecution , `` allegedly committed across Libya '' from February 15 through `` at least '' February 28 , `` through the state apparatus and security forces , '' the court says in a news release . 
The United States and the United Kingdom join countries recognizing the Transitional National Council as `` the legitimate governing authority '' in Libya . 
After being granted asylum in the United States , al-Obeidy arrives in New York , then boards a flight to the destination where she will reside . 
Her arrival in the United States comes after she spends 54 days in a U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees facility in Romania . 
Rebel leaders announce that the commander of Libya 's rebel army was assassinated in Benghazi along with two senior officers , just hours after claiming big successes on the battlefield . 
Libyan Transitional National Council Chairman Mustafa Abdel Jalil dismissed the rebels ' 14-member executive board , a spokesman for the council says . 
Gadhafi urges Libyans to fight opposition forces and `` cleanse this sweet and honorable land . '' 
In a speech broadcast on state television , Gadhafi says : `` The strikes will be over and NATO will be defeated . 
Move always forward to the challenge ; pick up your weapons ; go to the fight in order to liberate Libya inch by inch from the traitors and from NATO . 
Be prepared to fight if they hit the ground . '' 
Col. Roland Lavoie , a spokesman for NATO 's military operation , tells reporters that `` anti-Gadhafi forces are now assuming control of the key approaches to Tripoli . '' 
A spokesman for the Gadhafi government offers a different view . 
`` We are doing very well , '' spokesman Musa Ibrahim says . 
Libyan Prime Minister al-Baghdadi al-Mahmoodi says the military is `` powerful enough to finish this battle '' to its advantage , but warned that the cost would be too high , calling again for dialogue to resolve the crisis peacefully rather than militarily . 
Meanwhile , a brother of Moussa Ibrahim , the spokesman for the government in Tripoli , was killed Thursday night by NATO aircraft , a Libyan government official said . 
U.S. officials say Gadhafi may be making preparations for a `` last stand '' in Tripoli as a month-long NATO air campaign continues amid reports of rebel advances . 
Libyan rebels have taken their fight inside Tripoli , home to the embattled Libyan leader , a rebel spokesman says . 
Government spokesman Musa Ibrahim insists that all is safe and well . 
He says that the Libyan capital remains under government control . 
Libyan officials reject rebel claims that Gadhafi is seeking refuge for his family , saying that neither the leader nor his wife and children plan to leave the country . 
Faithi Baja , political affairs chief for the rebels ' Transitional National Council , said in a video statement that the rebel fighters ' freshly launched operation inside Tripoli is `` going easily '' and that they are inching toward Gadhafi 's Bab al-Azizia compound . 
But Saif al-Islam Gadhafi , a son of the country 's ruler and a top official in his regime , insisted on Libyan state-run television that the rebels were losing every battle . 
