CNN Student News - 8\/22\/11 The daily transcript is a written version of each day 's CNN Student News program Use this transcript to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary Download PDF maps related to today 's show : THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT . 
CARL AZUZ , CNN STUDENT NEWS ANCHOR : Hey , and thank you for joining us ! 
I 'm Carl Azuz , launching you into CNN Student News ! 
If you were with us last week , it 's great to have you back . 
If this is your first day , welcome to our 2011-2012 coverage . 
First Up : Crisis in Libya AZUZ : First up today , two very different views on how the civil war is going in the north African nation of Libya . 
This conflict started months ago . 
Longtime leader Moammar Gadhafi and his forces are fighting against rebels who want Gadhafi out . 
Other countries are involved in this , too , as part of a NATO mission to protect Libya 's civilians . 
There were reports that hundreds of people were killed yesterday during fighting in and around the Libyan capital , Tripoli . 
The rebels say they 're making significant progress , advancing toward Gadhafi 's headquarters . 
But the Libyan government says the rebels are losing every battle . 
Colonel Gadhafi went on the radio Sunday , urging his supporters to continue their fight . 
A CNN crew that 's been in Libya for weeks said this weekend 's fighting in Tripoli seemed to be the most intense fighting yet in the capital city . 
AZUZ : Violence increasing in another conflict , meanwhile , this one in the Middle East . 
It started with a series of attacks on Israeli civilians and soldiers on Thursday , and it 's turned into days of fighting between Israelis and Palestinians . 
These two groups have clashed for decades . 
And two regions -- Gaza and the West Bank -- have traditionally been at the center of those clashes . 
At least eight Israelis were killed in the attacks on Thursday . 
Israel then launched air strikes against what it called `` terrorist targets '' in Gaza . 
And in response , say Israeli officials , around 100 rockets have been fired into Israel . 
You can see some of the damage from those in this video . 
Israel 's government says it will respond to any attempt to harm Israeli civilians or soldiers . 
Palestinian officials are urging Israel to stop what it calls the `` unjustified aggression '' against the Palestinians in Gaza . 
STAN CASE , CNN STUDENT NEWS : Is this legit ? 
Storms in the Atlantic Ocean are given names when they become hurricanes . 
They get names when they are classified as tropical storms , which is one level below a hurricane . 
AZUZ : The 9th storm to get a name might be the first hurricane of the 2011 Atlantic season . 
Forecasters predict that Tropical Storm Irene is picking up strength as it moves toward islands in the Caribbean Sea . 
On Sunday afternoon , Irene had wind speeds around 50 miles per hour . 
Wo n't be considered a hurricane until those wind speeds reach 74 miles per hour . 
Experts think that could happen very soon . 
Officials announced hurricane warnings for Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic yesterday . 
Some predictions estimated that Irene could dump up to 20 inches of rain on parts of the Dominican Republic . 
There 's concern that heavy rain could trigger mudslides there ; that has happened before . 
AZUZ : Vice President Joe Biden has finished a trip to China . 
But this was the scene when he arrived in the country last Wednesday . 
He was there for five days meeting with Chinese leaders , and the biggest issue discussed during his visit was the U.S. economy . 
China has bought more U.S. debt that any other foreign country . 
So , officials there are concerned about America 's ability to manage that debt . 
During one speech , Vice President Biden explained why it 's important for the U.S. to protect Chinese and American investors . 
U.S. VICE PRESIDENT JOE BIDEN : I read that some Chinese are concerned about your safety of your investments in American assets . 
But please understand no one cares more about this than we do , since Americans own 87 % of all our financial assets and 69 % of all our treasury bonds , while China owns 1 % of our financial assets and 8 % of our treasury bills , respectively . 
AZUZ : All right , shifting gears now . 
About 1.6 billion people -- just over a fifth of the world 's population -- are Muslim . 
And we 're in the middle of the most sacred time on the Muslim calendar . 
It 's called Ramadan , and it lasts for an entire month . 
Although there are disagreements about when exactly that month starts . 
Dan Gilgoff explains that -- and more -- about this observance . 
DAN GILGOFF , CNN.COM RELIGION EDITOR : Ramadan is the Islamic month of fasting . 
It 's meant to be a month of reflection , prayer and charity , detachment from worldly affairs . 
A month of purification . 
It 's one of the 5 pillars , or duties , of Islam . 
Ramadan is believed to be the month during which the prophet Mohammed started receiving the divine revelation , the Quran , or the Muslim holy book , from God , or Allah . 
And so , the most holy night during Ramadan -- and of the entire Islamic year -- is called the night of power , and that 's the night which it is believed that Allah did start to reveal the text of the Quran to the prophet Mohammed in the year 610 . 
Ramadan is the ninth month of the Islamic calendar . 
And the Islamic calendar operates according to the lunar cycle , the cycle of the moon . 
And so every year , Ramadan moves up around 11 days earlier than the previous year . 
It 's supposed to begin with the sighting of the first new moon of that cycle . 
And every year , there are debates about when that first new moon becomes visible , so that various countries believe that they see the first new moon on various days and Ramadan will begin on different days in different countries . 
The fast is broken each night with what 's called the iftar meal , and it 's a meal that 's often times communal or banquet-style meal that 's eaten in a mosque . 
The fast each night is often broken with dates , which is believed to have dated to the time of Mohammed . 
Every year during Ramadan the international sale of dates just skyrockets . 
The month of Ramadan ends with the holiday called Eid ul-Fitr . 
It 's often simply just referred to as Eid . 
It is the start of the next lunar month after Ramadan . 
It 's a break the fast holiday that 's marked by a lot of celebrations and feasting with friends and families . 
A lot of mosques hold carnivals for a couple of days after Ramadan ends . 
TOMEKA JONES , CNN STUDENT NEWS : Time for the Shoutout ! 
What historic figure once said , `` out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope '' ? 
If you think you know it , shout it out ! 
Was it : A -RRB- Queen Elizabeth II , B -RRB- Martin Luther King Jr. , C -RRB- John F. Kennedy or D -RRB- Mahatma Gandhi ? 
You 've got three seconds -- GO ! 
That phrase was part of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. 's famous `` I Have a Dream '' speech in 1963 . 
That 's your answer and that 's your Shoutout ! 
AZUZ : When Dr. King gave that speech , he was standing on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial . 
Now , the civil rights leader will have his own memorial in the nation 's capital . 
The dedication ceremony being scheduled for next week . 
But we 've got a little virtual tour for you right now . 
The entrance , with the two stones that have been separated , is meant to symbolize the mountain of despair that Doctor King was talking about . 
And the single boulder inside is meant to be the stone of hope . 
There 's also an inscription wall inside the memorial featuring more than a dozen of Dr. Martin Luther King 's most famous quotations . 
AZUZ : Dr. King will join the other famous Americans who have memorials in Washington , D.C. . 
The question we 're asking on our blog is who else do you think should be honored with a national memorial ? 
Tell us your choices and your reasons why . 
We 're looking forward to your ideas . 
But please remember , it 's first names only on the blog . 
AZUZ : This Ohio mailman is used to delivering greetings to people on his route . 
Last week , he was the one getting the special greetings from all of them . 
That is because he was back home and delivering mail after spending a year serving in the Army National Guard in Afghanistan . 
Rob Lustig said he was overwhelmed by the homecoming . 
ROB LUSTIG , MAILMAN , AFGHAN WAR VETERAN , ARMY NATIONAL GUARD : I ca n't keep a smile off my face , because every time I look around there 's another sign . 
How are you doing ? 
I just want to thank my customers for the support and the balloons and their generosity and thoughtfulness . 
It makes me feel good . 
AZUZ : Makes us feel good , too . 
We 're going to stay in Ohio for today 's Before We Go segment and visit a national food festival . 
But these contestants are n't bobbing for apples . 
They 're bobbing for burgers ! 
And they 're doing it in a kiddie pool filled with ketchup . 
It 's just one of the competitions at the National Hamburger Festival . 
Another event : the hamburger eating contest . 
The winner there gobbled up a quarter pounder and 10 patties in five minutes . 
AZUZ : A victory like that deserves a patty on the back . 
It looks like there 's an a-bun-dance of fun going on there . 
We just hope you 'll ketchup with us tomorrow for more CNN Student News tomorrow . 
Man , these puns are making me hungry . 
I 'm Carl Azuz . 
Have a great day . 
