Whatever you do don t call BP by its former name , British Petroleum . 
The multinational oil company dropped its full name almost a decade ago for the less geographically specific BP . 
Those two letters are now synonymous with ecological disaster . 
Perhaps BP should stand for Bad Publicity . 
Nationwide consumer boycotts are underway . 
While it s difficult to gauge their overall economic impact on the oil giant , a BP wholesale distributor in Fort Myers , Florida said local sales are down 20 percent . 
Edison Oil , VP Patrick Eakins , believes angry BP customers are taking their business elsewhere . 
Another measure of BP s public relations problem is its stock price . 
Since the disaster , the company s valuation dropped 75 billion dollars . 
In a statement to Fox News BP said we re not really focused on public relations , adding the focus is on fighting this thing offshore , fighting it in the seabed , and keeping people informed . 
Despite downplaying PR concerns , BP has hired Anne Wolmack Kolton , the former head of Public Affairs for the US Department of Energy , and Dick Cheney s former campaign spokeswoman . 
In her new job at BP , Kolton will deal with the media . 
Some public relations experts say BP is a text book example of what not to do in the aftermath of a corporate crisis . 
Experts said significant mistakes included low balling the size of the spill and trying to pull the plug on a real time video feed showing oil gushing into the Gulf . 
Last week , BP s CEO , Tony Hayward said that no one wants this thing over more than I do . 
I d like my life back . 
Hayworth failed to mention the families of the 11 men who died when the Deepwater Horizon rig burst into flames . 
BP s CEO has since apologized to relatives of the dead . 
In a statement posted on Facebook , Hayward acknowledged making a hurtful and thoughtless comment . 
Hayward s critics said throughout the crisis he has made a number of other public relations blunders . 
Soon after oil began spewing into the Gulf , Hayward pointed the finger of blame at other corporations telling the BBC this was not our drilling rig and not our equipment . 
It was not our people , our system or our processes . 
As for the size of the problem he famously said the Gulf of Mexico is a very big ocean . 
The amount of volume of oil and dispersant we are putting into it is tiny in relation to the total water volume . 
Later , Hayward would describe oil containment as extraordinarily successful and claiming there would be very , very modest environmental impact . 
Public Relations expert Michael Gordon , who during the Clinton administration served as spokesman for Attorney General Janet Reno , said if he were running BP s PR machine the first thing he would do is publicly silence Hayward . 
Gordon added I d be surprised , if -LRB- Hayward -RRB- had a job a year from now . 
While Gordon and other BP critics said the company s failed PR efforts made a bad situation worse , not everyone agrees . 
Author and crisis management consultant Eric Desenhall said when you are dealing with legitimate outrage the company is going to be criticized for everything it does . 
Desenhall compares BP to a doctor who has to tell the family the patient has died . 
He said in those situations they always say the doctor is cold and terrible . 
According to Desnehall the way for BP to repair its image is to stop the leak and clean up the mess . 
He said in the oil business , the best PR is no PR . 
FOX News covers the action from all the angles . 
Get constant updates from our in-the-field reporters and producers and read stories you 'll only see here . 
