June 1 : Contract workers from BP ferry oil-soaked waste in a marsh near Pass a Loutre , La. 2010 Getty Images PORT FOURCHON , La. -- As submersible robots made another risky attempt to control the underwater Gulf oil gusher , the crude on the surface spread , closing in on Florida . 
BP 's stock plummeted and took much of the market down with it , and the federal government announced criminal and civil investigations into the spill . 
The stakes could n't be higher . 
After six weeks of failures to block the well or divert the oil , the latest mission involved using a set of tools akin to an oversized deli slicer and garden shears to break away the broken riser pipe so engineers can then position a cap over the well 's opening . 
But it 's a big gamble : Even if it succeeds , it will temporarily increase the flow of an already massive leak by 20 percent -- at least 100,000 gallons more a day . 
That 's on top of the estimated 500,000 to 1 million gallons gushing out already . 
In Florida , officials confirmed an oil sheen about nine miles from the famous white sands of Pensacola beach . 
Crews shored up miles of boom and prepared for the mess to make landfall as early as Wednesday . 
`` It 's inevitable that we will see it on the beaches , '' said Keith Wilkins , deputy chief of neighborhood and community services for Escambia County . 
Florida would be the fourth state hit . 
Crude has already been reported along barrier islands in Alabama and Mississippi , and it has impacted some 125 miles of Louisiana coastline . 
More federal fishing waters were closed , too , another setback for one of the region 's most important industries . 
More than one-third of federal waters were off-limits for fishing , along with hundreds of square miles of state waters . 
Fisherman Hong Le , who came to the U.S. from Vietnam , had rebuilt his home and business after Hurricane Katrina wiped him out . 
Now he 's facing a similiar situation . 
`` I 'm going to be bankrupt very soon , '' Le , 53 , said as he attended a meeting for fishermen hoping for help . 
`` Everything is financed , how can I pay ? 
No fishing , no welding . 
I weld on commercial fishing boats and they are n't going out now , so nothing breaks . '' 
Le , like other of the fishermen , received $ 5,000 from BP PLC , but it was quickly gone . 
`` I call that ` Shut your mouth money , '' ' said Murray Volk , 46 , of Empire , who 's been fishing for nearly 30 years . 
`` That wo n't pay the insurance on my boat and house . 
They say there 'll be more later , but do you think the electric company will wait for that ? '' 
BP may have bigger problems , though . 
Attorney General Eric Holder , who visited the Gulf on Tuesday to survey the fragile coastline and meet with state and federal prosecutors , would not say who might be targeted in the probes into the largest oil spill in U.S. history . 
`` We will closely examine the actions of those involved in the spill . 
If we find evidence of illegal behavior , we will be extremely forceful in our response , '' Holder said in New Orleans . 
The federal government also ramped up its response to the spill with President Barack Obama ordering the co-chairmen of an independent commission investigating the spill to thoroughly examine the disaster , `` to follow the facts wherever they lead , without fear or favor . '' 
The president said that if laws are insufficient , they 'll be changed . 
He said that if government oversight was n't tough enough , that will change , too . 
BP 's stock nose-dived on Tuesday , losing nearly 15 percent of its value on the first trading day since the previous best option -- the so-called top kill -- failed and was aborted at the government 's direction . 
It dipped steeply with Holder 's late-afternoon announcement , which also sent other energy stocks tumbling , ultimately causing the Dow Jones industrial average to tumble 112 . 
If BP 's new effort to contain the leak fails , the procedure will have made the biggest oil spill in U.S. history even worse . 
`` It is an engineer 's nightmare , '' said Ed Overton , a Louisiana State University professor of environmental sciences . 
`` They 're trying to fit a 21-inch cap over a 20-inch pipe a mile away . 
That 's just horrendously hard to do . 
It 's not like you and I standing on the ground pushing -- they 're using little robots to do this . '' 
Since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on April 20 , eventually collapsing into the Gulf of Mexico , an estimated 20 million to 40 million gallons of oil has spewed , eclipsing the 11 million that leaked from the Exxon Valdez disaster . 
BP PLC 's Doug Suttles said that although there 's no guarantee the company 's latest cut-and-cap effort to close off the leak will work , he remained hopeful , but would n't guarantee success . 
Engineers have put underwater robots and equipment in place this week after a bold attempt to plug the well by force-feeding it heavy mud and cement -- called a `` top kill '' -- was aborted over the weekend . 
Crews pumped thousands of gallons of the mud into the well but were unable to overcome the pressure of the oil . 
The company said if the small dome is successful it could capture and siphon a majority of the gushing oil to the surface . 
But the cut and cap will not halt the oil flow , just capture some of it and funnel it to vessels waiting at the surface . 
The British oil giant has tried and failed repeatedly to halt the flow of the oil , and this attempt like others has never been tried before a mile beneath the ocean . 
Experts warned it could be even riskier than the others because slicing open the 20-inch riser could unleash more oil if there was a kink in the pipe that restricted some of the flow . 
Eric Smith , an associate director of the Tulane Energy Institute , likened the procedure to trying to place a tiny cap on a fire hydrant that 's blowing straight up . 
`` Will they have enough weight to overcome the force of the flow ? '' 
`` It could create a lot of turbulence , but I do think they 'll have enough weight . '' 
But BP 's best chance to actually plug the leak rests with a pair of relief wells but those wo n't likely be completed until August . 
The company has carefully prepared the next phase , knowing that another failure could mean millions more gallons spew into the ocean and lead to even more public pressure . 
And they say they have learned valuable lessons from the failure of a bigger version of the containment cap last month that was clogged with icelike slush . 
