LONDON | Wed Jun 22 , 2011 7:39 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Researchers studying autistic toddlers have discovered their brain activity appears to be out of sync at a very early stage -- a finding that sheds light on the biology of the condition and might help in earlier diagnosis . 
In research published in the journal Neuron , scientists in Israel used functional magnetic resonance imaging -LRB- fMRI -RRB- to look at the brains of sleeping toddlers and found that certain types of neural activity are disrupted in autistic children , but not in typical children or in others with delayed language development . 
`` What we looked at is how the activity is synchronized , '' Ilan Dinstein of Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel , who led the study , said in a telephone interview . 
`` And we found that the synchronization was different -- specifically in toddlers with autism and across the hemispheres -LRB- of the brain -RRB- in areas related to language and communication . '' 
Autism is a complex and mysterious brain disorder usually first diagnosed in early childhood . 
It is characterized by difficulties in social interaction , communication , and understanding other people 's emotions and behavior . 
Autism disorders are diagnosed in up to one in 100 children in the United States and Europe and affect four times as many boys as girls , but the condition is very often misdiagnosed and doctors are keen to find biological measures to help pinpoint diagnosis and make it more accurate . 
`` There 's a tremendous amount of misdiagnosis in many different forms , '' Dinstein said . 
`` A child that might seem autistic at one and a half years old may turn out at three years old to have language delay or some other developmental disorder . 
So one of the reasons to look for a biological measure is to clarify the issue of diagnosis very early on . '' 
The human brain is split into two separate hemispheres , which are mostly symmetrical in terms of anatomy and function . 
Dinstein explained neural activity continues even during sleep and in a typical brain , normally correlates to certain patterns . 
Scientists believe the strength of synchronization between functionally related areas in the right and left hemispheres may be a measure of how well the brain is working . 
Dinstein 's team recorded brain activity in sleeping toddlers with typical development , language delay , and autism . 
Their results showed a specific abnormality in synchronization between two brain areas commonly associated with language and communication in 70 percent of toddlers with autism , but only in a handful of the typically developing toddlers or those with language delay . 
Dinstein said that as a potential diagnostic tool , this biological measure was `` a first step . '' 
He said another useful aspect of this measure was its ability to be taken during natural sleep , bypassing potential problems of getting a very young child to cooperate with a test . 
ly\/lJhyOi Neuron , June 23 , 2011 . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
