LONDON | Wed Jun 22 , 2011 5:00 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syria could slip into civil war and spark regional conflict if there is no rapprochement between President Bashar al-Assad and an uprising against his autocratic rule , Assad 's dissident cousin said Wednesday . 
Ribal al-Assad , who lives in London , also said religious extremists were hijacking the three-month uprising , and that a corrupt inner circle was manipulating the president into resisting concessions to the protest movement . 
`` We have to choose . 
Either we have peaceful transitional change , or we might find ourselves in a regional war . 
A civil war and a regional war ... It could easily happen , '' he told Reuters in an interview in London . 
Ribal is the son of Rifaat al-Assad , Bashar 's uncle and a former military commander widely held responsible for crushing an Islamist uprising in 1982 against then president Hafez al-Assad , Bashar 's father . 
Many thousands of people were killed . 
Ribal , 36 , denies his father was involved and believes he was framed for what he says were his pro-democracy sentiments . 
Rifaat turned against the regime in the 1980s and lives in exile , while Ribal campaigns for democratic change from London . 
Ribal said Bashar still had allies in the region , such as Iran and the Lebanese Shi'ite militant group Hezbollah . 
`` You have to be pragmatic and practical . 
He 's there , the regime is there . 
You have to do the best to pressure them to sit round a table to have a national unity government ... Bashar has allies . 
He 's not alone , '' Ribal said . 
Assad , 45 , promised reform when he succeeded his father in 2000 , but has opted for a bloody crackdown on demonstrators campaigning to end his family 's four-decade grip on power . 
Rights groups say some 1,300 civilians have been killed . 
The threat of sectarian civil war is already apparent . 
Bashar 's family and many other members of his administration belong to Syria 's minority Alawite sect , while the majority of the population is Sunni Muslim . 
Sectarian tensions have already spilled into Lebanon , where at least three people were killed in a clash between Alawis and Sunnis in the northern city of Tripoli Friday . 
In Syria there are signs of sectarian cracks between Alawites and Sunnis in the army . 
Ribal , an Alawite , said Sunni extremists , who consider Alawites heretics , were trying to hijack the protest movement to start a sectarian war . 
That pushes Alawites who might otherwise defect closer to Assad 's administration , Ribal said . 
At the same time , members of Assad 's inner circle are blocking the prospect of real reforms called for by protesters . 
`` There are people in the regime who do not want to see any reforms happening in Syria . 
They know very well that reforms mean they would lose their interests , they would be brought to justice , '' Ribal said . 
`` At the same time you have people on the other side , like the Islamists and the extremists who are pushing for sectarian war , without calculating what a disaster it would be for Syria and the region , '' he added . 
Ribal , who lived in Syria till the age of nine , says he and his father have no political ambitions , despite having the support of `` millions '' in Syria . 
It is unclear how seriously the opposition movement takes him or his father . 
Monday Assad pledged reforms , including new laws on political parties and elections , but they were seen by opponents as too little , too late and too vague . 
`` The protesters still have n't seen anything ... He does n't need to set up a committee to abolish Article Eight of the constitution , which says the Baath Party is the leader of state and society . 
This could be done right away by presidential decree to show good will , '' Ribal said . 
If Assad can not make reforms , he should admit he is hostage to vested interests and side with the uprising , Ribal said . 
`` What Bashar has to know is that at the end of the day he will be blamed for everything because he 's the head of the government , the army , the Baath party , '' he added . 
`` If he ca n't stand up to those people , he has to come out and say ` I 've tried to do reforms since I came to power , but the people around me have not let me . 
I need you to help me . 
I 'm stepping down and taking the side of the people ' . '' 
-LRB- The following story was corrected in the 10th paragraph to make clear clash was in Lebanon , not Syria -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
