LOS ANGELES | Wed Jun 22 , 2011 3:20 pm BST LOS ANGELES -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Fast-food chain Jack in the Box has pulled toys from its kids ' meals , a spokesman told Reuters on Tuesday . 
The move , which managers at Los Angeles outlets said took effect on Thursday , comes as fast-food companies are under pressure to stop using toys to market children 's meals that are high in calories , sugar , fat and salt . 
Lawmakers in San Francisco and nearby Santa Clara County have passed laws that will require kids ' meals to meet certain nutritional standards before they can be sold with toys . 
`` While we 've been aware of efforts to ban the inclusion of toys in kids ' meals , that did not drive our decision , '' Jack in the Box spokesman Brian Luscomb said . 
`` Our advertising and promotions have focused exclusively on the frequent fast-food customer , not children , '' added Randy Carmical , also a Jack in the Box spokesman . 
Carmical said the San Diego-based company has been more focused on the food in its meals for children , such as grilled cheese sandwiches or grilled chicken strips . 
The company pulled toys from the meals when it began offering parents the option of substituting sliced apples with caramel sauce as an alternative to French fries , he said . 
`` We believe that providing these kinds of options is more appealing to a parent than packaging a toy with lower-quality fare , '' Carmical said . 
The Jack in the Box decision won praise from organizations and advocates critical of the fast-food industry . 
`` It 's terrific that Jack in the Box has taken this step , '' said Margo Wootan , nutrition policy director at the Center for Science in the Public Interest . 
`` It 's really a monumental step that I hope their competitors will emulate . '' 
CSPI in December sued McDonald 's Corp , the world 's largest hamburger chain , to stop it from using Happy Meal toys to lure children into its restaurants . 
Consumer and health advocates are using the announcement to put pressure on McDonalds , Burger King , Taco Bell and other fast food chains that still include toys in kids ' meals . 
Lobbyists for fast-food companies are fighting anti-obesity laws by asking U.S. state legislators to remove restaurant marketing from local governments ' regulatory menu . 
Toy giveaways make up more than half of the marketing expenditures in the fast-food industry , according to Wootan , with $ 360 million spent annually to put toys in kids meals . 
Jack in the Box has about 2,200 restaurants across the United States , where it is the fifth-largest hamburger chain . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
