The UK has presented a draft UN resolution condemning Syria 's suppression of protests Mr Hague said the violence was `` unacceptable and must stop '' . 
Protests against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad began in February and have spread across the country , with thousands fleeing into Turkey . 
In a statement , Mr Hague said he remained `` deeply concerned by the very serious situation in Syria '' . 
`` The Syrian government must allow immediate and unconditional access to the ICRC -LRB- International Committee of the Red Cross -RRB- and other humanitarian agencies . 
There is no excuse for denying this access , '' he said . 
`` We will continue to work with our international partners , including in the UN , to condemn the repression in Syria and call for the Syrian government to meet their people 's legitimate demands . '' 
Earlier , he told Sky News connections between Syria and its ally Lebanon made it `` impossible '' for Lebanon to take a clear position on the resolution . 
Mr Hague also ruled out military action , saying there was `` no prospect '' of the UN authorising air raids . 
The European Union and the US have warned Syria that government sanctioned violence was creating a humanitarian crisis . 
But Mr Hague told Sky News ' Murnaghan program : `` There is no prospect of getting through the UN a resolution such as the UN resolution 1973 on Libya . 
It is time for the security council to make a clear statement '' End Quote William Hague Foreign Secretary `` In the case of Libya there was a clear call from the Arab League for action , and that was a transformative intervention by the Arab League , there is no such call in the case of Syria . 
`` And indeed Lebanon is the Arab country that is represented on the UN Security Council at the moment , and the interconnections between the Lebanese government and the Syrian government have made it impossible for Lebanon to take a clear position on this , on the UN Security Council . '' 
Mr Hague said Russia and China , who fear it could be the first step towards military intervention , had also strongly opposed the resolution . 
The UK and France last week presented a draft UN resolution condemning Syria 's suppression of protests . 
Backed by Germany and Portugal , it condemns the systematic violation of human rights in Syria and demands an immediate end to violence , and access for humanitarian workers . 
He said : `` I do believe it is time for the security council to make a clear statement of the kind that we 're advocating . '' 
Meanwhile , International Development Secretary Andrew Mitchell told the BBC 's Andrew Marr Show his department had been in touch with the International Red Cross about the humanitarian situation on the Turkish-Syrian border . 
`` Britain will give strong humanitarian support in terms of shelter and medicines and food , not least from our stores not too far away in Dubai . 
`` But the key thing is to stop the repression which is causing very large numbers of people to cross the border . 
If it continues , there could be an enormous exodus from Syria so we call on the Syrian government to stop this . 
`` Of course at the United Nations , Britain and others are seeking to get a resolution to put further pressure on the Syrian regime , '' he said . 
Syrian government forces have continued to advance north as part of a widespread government crackdown , state media reports . 
Human rights groups say more than 1,000 people have been killed since protests began in February against the rule of President Bashar al-Assad . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
