By PJ Crowley Former US Assistant Secretary of State The narratives used were quite familiar : defending the status quo , supporting the aspirations for revolutionary reform and demanding responsible governance in accordance with international norms . 
But the key players - the United States , Russia and the Arab League - had all traded places . 
As if in the midst of a game of musical chairs , they were all advancing policy prescriptions markedly different than those held in previous decades , even in previous months . 
During most of the Cold War the United States was , by and large , the staunch defender of the status quo and supported existing governments regardless of how autocratic , corrupt or unpopular , as long as they sided with the `` free '' world . 
All options were binary . 
The watchword was stability . 
Knowns trumped unknowns , as Donald Rumsfeld might say , whether known or not . 
The US pushed political transformations everywhere else . 
But in the Middle East there were always more compelling priorities : the need for stable governments to offset revolutionary Iran ; fears of weapons of mass destruction -LRB- Iraq was about democracy only when the WMD went missing -RRB- ; energy markets to reassure ; and then terrorism to contain . 
Reform , let alone genuine democracy , was an aspiration , but would follow other developments , such as Middle East peace . 
Hillary Clinton has spoken about the importance of respecting the aspirations of the Syrian people To its credit , as the dictatorial dominos wobbled across the region , there was a brief hesitation and then a dramatic shift . 
US policy left its traditional walled compound , moved to the street and embraced the unknown -LRB- except in Bahrain where , because of Iran , the binary logic still holds -RRB- . 
Now Russia is the great defender of the status quo . 
One reason for that is commercial : Russia resents the fact that every time the UN is asked to take action , it is asked to pay the piper , especially the forfeiture of lucrative contracts involving Moscow 's shrinking armaments industry . 
Russia has been losing market share and influence in the Middle East since the end of the Cold War , notably in Iran -LRB- where Russia has actually been responsive to nuclear and weapons concerns -RRB- , Iraq -LRB- now buying American -RRB- , and Libya -LRB- which will undoubtedly shop in the future in Europe or the United States -RRB- . 
Syria is a last bastion and Moscow has drawn its line in the sand . 
Moscow has been an Assad family friend for decades and a major investor in Syria . 
Outgoing Russian President Dmitry Medvedev signed a lucrative arms deal with Syria in 2010 . 
Hence , Russia has made it clear it will run cover for its valued client , for as long as it can , blocking significant action beyond diplomatic rhetoric . 
Friends do n't let friends get overthrown , especially after Libya . 
As Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said this week from Australia , `` Regime change is not our profession . '' 
Russia was caught off guard in March 2011 by the unprecedented and bold Arab League call for a humanitarian intervention to protect the Libyan people . 
Experts fear the violence in Syria may tip into a protracted struggle or civil war Like China , it is no fan of the concept of a `` responsibility to protect '' and resists any notion that the international community can intervene in the sovereign affairs of nation states . 
If Libya is a model of effective multilateral action , Russia will exercise its veto if necessary to ensure it does n't happen again - or at least any time soon . 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke at the UN this week about the aspirations of the Syrian people . 
`` Syria belongs to 23 million people , '' she said , `` not to one man or his family . '' 
Russia does not have an aspirational foreign policy . 
Its real focus right now is the political fortunes of Vladimir Putin , not Bashar al-Assad . 
Unexpected and unwelcome protests in Russia have challenged the legitimacy of Mr Putin 's arranged plan to return to the presidency for presumably another 12 years . 
Any UN resolution that appears to advocate term limits , much less regime change , will strike Russia too close to home . 
Of all the positional shifts , arguably the most remarkable is that of the Arab League , historically a steadfast supporter of non-interference in the internal affairs of other states , most notably its fellow members . 
The call for Mr Assad to give way is out of character , but reflects the pressure these conservative governments feel to respond in a meaningful way to the clear regional call for change . 
For the Arab League , Libya was a relatively easy lift - no-one liked Gaddafi and his antics . 
Libya was always a fringe regional player . 
Syria , on the other hand , is part of the region 's center . 
One factor behind the Arab League 's shift is personal : Bashar al-Assad has ignored the advice of his peers repeatedly over the past several months , declining to present even the pretence of co-operation with the Arab League observer mission . 
Another consideration is containment . 
The expanding influence of Iran , with Syria 's help , is a major concern among the Sunni-dominated governments in the neighborhood . 
Whether Syria is yet a civil war , it is already a proxy war in the struggle between Iran and Saudi Arabia for ascendancy in the Gulf . 
A final factor is dynamic of the Arab awakening . 
The Arab League , like the US , has begrudgingly recognized that the status quo is unsustainable . 
All governments have taken some steps - modest in most cases - towards reform . 
Regional leaders are acutely aware of Mr Assad 's boast a year ago that the Arab Spring wo n't visit Syria . 
They all know deep down that this is fundamentally not about foreign conspiracies . 
They recognize in some way that they can no longer take their legitimacy to govern for granted . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
