KHARTOUM | Wed May 4 , 2011 7:39 pm EDT KHARTOUM -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Sudan has deployed troops at the Libyan border to prevent arms smuggling to rebels in Darfur and closed the Libyan consulate in the troubled region , a government official said Wednesday . 
Sudan shares an almost 400-km-long -LRB- 240-mile -RRB- border with Libya where a civil war against leader Muammar Gaddafi has split the desert state into a government-held western area around the capital Tripoli and an eastern region held by rebels . 
`` We deployed troops at the border to Libya because we are worried about arms smuggling -LRB- to rebels -RRB- , '' Khalid Musa , spokesman for the Sudanese foreign ministry , said . 
Sudan closed the Libyan consulate in al-Fasher in Darfur and asked staff to leave within 48 hours after Libya had closed the Sudanese consulate in the eastern town of al-Kufrah , Musa said . 
`` We summoned the Libyan ambassador for an explanation why the consulate was closed but his answer came too late and was not satisfactory so we closed the Libyan consulate , '' he said . 
There is little love lost between Gaddafi and Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Bashir , who was indicted by the International Criminal Court for genocide and other war crimes in Darfur . 
Relations were strained between Libya and Sudan after Gaddafi agreed to offer refuge to Darfur rebel Justice and Equality Movement chief Khalil Ibrahim , who had left peace talks in Qatar to return to fighting in Darfur . 
Last year , Libya promised to curb any Darfur rebel attacks . 
Gaddafi hosted and helped insurgents early in the Darfur conflict , which began in 2003 when mostly non-Arab rebels took up arms , accusing Khartoum of neglect . 
Sudan 's counterinsurgency campaign drove more than 2 million Darfuris from their homes , sparking one of the world 's worst humanitarian crises that the United Nations estimates has killed as many as 300,000 people . 
-LRB- Reporting by Ulf Laessing , Editing by Michael Roddy -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
