Oil spill map : What 's at stake ? 
Watch the oil spill 's path since May 2 and view how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
See the major forms oil takes on upon water contact . 
See the vibrant ecosystem that thrives on the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico . 
Thursday , May 20 , 2010 ; 4:41 PM BP said Thursday that it is now capturing 5,000 barrels a day of crude oil and 15 million cubic feet of natural gas from a leaking pipe at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico , the first official admission that earlier estimates of the amount of oil spilling into sea were too small . 
The amount of oil being captured is only a portion of the total because the company is catching oil from only one of two leaks . 
BP has also released a video that shows additional unquantified amounts of oil continuing to spurt out of the damaged pipe where the company is capturing oil through a new tube insertion . 
The smaller of the two leaks continues to spill unobstructed and accounts for 15 percent of the total flow , BP officials reiterated Thursday . 
Separately , the Environmental Protection Agency informed BP officials late Wednesday that the company has 24 hours to choose a less toxic form of chemical dispersants to break up the oil spill and must apply the new form of dispersants within 72 hours of submitting the list of alternatives . 
The move is significant , because it suggests federal officials are now concerned that the unprecedented use of chemical dispersants could pose a significant threat to the Gulf of Mexico 's marine life . 
BP has been using two forms of dispersants , Corexit 9500A and Corexit 9527A , and so far has applied 600,000 gallons on the surface and 55,000 underwater . 
On Thursday BP ordered 60,000 gallons of Dispersit -- a less-toxic dispersant preferred by many environmentalists and lawmakers -- according to Rep. Jerrold Nadler -LRB- D-N.Y. -RRB- . 
Estimates of the amount of oil spilling into the Gulf of Mexico have varied widely . 
BP originally estimated that 1,000 barrels a day were leaking into the sea , but days later the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration upped the estimate to 5,000 barrels a day based on measurements of the surface area and thickness of the spill , which was estimated in microns or millimeters in many places . 
Some reputable private experts have said that the actual figure could be five times the NOAA figure . 
`` It was always made clear that this was a ballpark estimate , '' said Andrew Gowers , head of BP group media . 
BP says that the actual figure would n't change their response , which is to do as much as they can to stop the leak , keep the spill offshore and clean up areas where oil lands . 
But some environmentalists say that knowing the actual amount would help determine strategies for cleanup . 
Meanwhile , the EPA 's order to change dispersants posed a new challenge for BP , which has been applying the chemicals both at the surface and at the sea floor near the damaged pipe . 
`` Dispersants have never been used in this volume before , '' said an administration official who spoke on condition of anonymity before the decision was formally announced . 
`` This is a large amount of dispersants being used , larger amounts than have ever been used , on a pipe that continues to leak oil and that BP is still trying to cap . '' 
The new policy applies to both surface and undersea applications , according to sources , and comes as the EPA has just posted BP 's own results from monitoring the effect that underwater application of chemical dispersants has had in terms of toxicity , dissolved oxygen and effectiveness . 
An EPA official said the agency would make an announcement on the matter later Thursday . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
