Oil spill map : What 's at stake ? 
Watch the oil spill 's path since May 2 and view how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
See the major forms oil takes on upon water contact . 
See the vibrant ecosystem that thrives on the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico . 
Thursday , May 20 , 2010 ; 10:13 AM The Environmental Protection Agency informed BP officials late Wednesday that the company has 24 hours to choose a less toxic form of chemical dispersants to break up its oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , according to government sources familiar with the decision , and must apply the new form of dispersants within 72 hours of submitting the list of alternatives . 
The move is significant , because it suggests federal officials are now concerned that the unprecedented use of chemical dispersants could pose a significant threat to the Gulf of Mexico 's marine life . 
BP has been using two forms of dispersants , Corexit 9500A and Corexit 9527A , and so far has applied 600,000 gallons on the surface and 55,000 underwater . 
`` Dispersants have never been used in this volume before , '' said an administration official spoke on condition of anonymity because the decision has n't been formally announced . 
`` This is a large amount of dispersants being used , larger amounts than have ever been used , on a pipe that continues to leak oil and that BP is still trying to cap . '' 
The new policy applies to both surface and undersea application , according to sources , and comes as the EPA has just posted BP 's own results from monitoring the effect that underwater application of chemical dispersants has had in terms of toxicity , dissolved oxygen and effectiveness . 
The EPA declined to comment on the matter . 
After BP conducted three rounds of testing , federal officials approved the use of underwater dispersants late last week , but environmentalists and some lawmakers have questioned the potential dangers of such a strategy . 
On Monday , Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
sent a letter to EPA administrator Lisa P. Jackson questioning the approach , given that Britain banned more than a decade ago some formulations of the dispersant , Corexit , that is now being used . 
In the letter , Markey warned , `` The release of hundreds of thousands of gallons of chemicals into the Gulf of Mexico could be an unprecedented , large and aggressive experiment on our oceans , and requires careful oversight by the Environmental Protection Agency -LRB- EPA -RRB- and other appropriate federal agencies . '' 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
