THE OBAMA administration has announced that three-fourths of the oil that leaked into the Gulf of Mexico from BP 's Macondo well is contained -- evaporated , skimmed , collected , burned off , dispersed or dissolved . 
The remaining fourth , said White House energy chief Carol M. Browner , will also slowly degrade or disappear , making the risk of catastrophic contamination smaller . 
Could it be that President Obama overstated the severity of the spill when the leak was still gushing , calling it the '' worst environmental disaster American has ever faced '' ? 
He , of course , was hardly the most theatrical -- remember Cajun pundit James Carville 's on-air exclamations of , '' We 're about to die down here '' ? 
The lesson : In the midst of a big , unprecedented event affecting complicated systems with uncertain consequences , it 's better not to jump to superlative conclusions too soon . 
The same caution should accompany the apparently good news last week . 
The spill was so large that even a fourth left over is a huge volume of crude , some of it possibly buried in places where it could take a long time to degrade . 
The massive amounts dispersed in the gulf may have long-term consequences for sea life . 
There also may be huge amounts of natural gas and methane in the water . 
Though the most visible damage occurs shortly after oil spills , it takes much more time for the full effects to be known . 
See , for example , the persistent environmental degradation that plagues even decades-old oil spill zones , from sickly mangrove swamps in Mexico to stunted fiddler crabs in Massachusetts . 
Now is the time to conduct careful study of what still requires cleaning up , not to declare mission accomplished . 
Congress , too , must keep this in mind . 
Pressure to pass legislation making some long-needed changes to oil drilling oversight -- such as lifting the cap on liability for monetary damages that shields drillers and skews their incentives to drill responsibly -- might now wane . 
For a variety of reasons , Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid -LRB- D-Nev . -RRB- 
has delayed consideration of these issues until September . 
A thorough regulatory overhaul can -- and should -- wait until it 's clearer exactly what went wrong on the rig and after the blowout . 
But there are certain things Congress can do before that , such as lifting that liability cap . 
