Thursday 23 June 2005 03.09 BST The war in Iraq is creating a new breed of Islamic jihadists who could go on to destabilise other countries , according to a CIA report . 
The CIA believes Iraq to be potentially worse than Afghanistan , which produced thousands of jihadists in the 1980s and 1990s . 
Many of the recruits to Osama bin Laden 's al-Qaida had fought in Afghanistan . 
The sobering caution came as a senior British anti-terrorism source warned that those trained in terror techniques in Iraq could use their newly-acquired skills in Britain at the end of the war . 
The CIA report , completed last month , remains classified . 
But a CIA source yesterday confirmed that its broad conclusions , disclosed by the New York Times yesterday , were accurate . 
The concern expressed in the CIA report contrasts with the optimism of US defense secretary Donald Rumsfeld two years ago when he welcomed the prospect of Iraq as a magnet for jihadists . 
The Foreign Office and British security services are sceptical about the CIA assessment that the insurgency could spill into other countries . 
Security sources said that there was only a `` trickle '' of recruits from Britain joining the insurgency in Iraq . 
If there was to be a spill-over , Saudi Arabia is potentially vulnerable because many of the Arab fighters in Iraq originate from there . 
Jamal Khashoggi , media adviser to the Saudi ambassador in London , said yesterday he agreed in part with the US assessment . 
`` It will be worse than Afghanistan , '' he said . 
`` We are talking about a very brutal type , a very weird version of Islam in Iraq . 
It is very scary . '' 
Mr Khashoggi predicted the approach of the Saudi government towards jihadists returning from Iraq will be very different from those returning from Afghanistan and Chechnya . 
`` Any al-Qaida coming back from Iraq will be hunted . 
It is not like they have gone to Chechnya and will be coming back as heroes . 
If they come back from Iraq and brag about it , they will be snatched by security in a day or two . '' 
The CIA report suggests the new breed of jihadists will be more deadly than those who fought in Afghanistan . 
It said that they have learned skills in urban warfare in Iraq . 
While the number of Iraq attacks have diminished , they have become more deadly . 
More than 1,000 Iraqis and 120 US soldiers have been killed since the new Iraqi cabinet was formed in April . 
Insurgents once again demonstrated their capacity for inflicting carnage on civilians when they detonated four cars bombs in western Baghdad last night , killing at least 23 people and injuring around 50 . 
At least one was driven by a suicide bomber . 
Earlier a bomb attack on a US military patrol killed three civilians . 
It was claimed by the al-Qaida group led by Abu Musab al Zarqawi . 
There are about 200 individuals in Britain who are suspected of having received training in camps in Afghanistan and Chechnya . 
Senior anti-terrorist officials suggest many fewer have gone to Iraq . 
Ken Jones , the chairman of the Association of Chief Police Officers ' terrorism committee and chief constable of Sussex , said yesterday Britain would remain a prime target . 
`` There is an inevitable targeting of the United Kingdom and UK interests abroad , '' Mr Jones told a conference on terrorism organised by the Royal United Services Institute in London . 
`` The threat will endure for the foreseeable future . '' 
But he added : `` it is not inevitable that they will succeed . '' 
Mr Jones noted that those involved in terrorism no longer necessarily came from the `` excluded and marginalised '' but were increasingly `` highly intelligent , educated young people '' . 
In past terrorist campaigns , he said , there had been a clear goal or aim . 
The new form of attacks required a different response . 
One of the most important ways to combat the growth of terrorism , he suggested , was by encouraging `` confident communities '' - a clear reference to Britain 's Muslims - that would be aware of suspicious activities and would feel confident in reporting them . 
Police in Manchester were last night given another 48 hours to question a 40-year-old man of north African origin , who was arrested under the Terrorism Act on Tuesday . 
It is believed that the man had shared a house in Moss Side with Idris Bazis , 41 , a French-Algerian with a French passport , who blew himself up in a suicide attack in Iraq in February . 
Anti-terrorist sources say there is no link between the Manchester arrest and recent arrests of 11 men in Spain suspected of being connected with the Iraq insurgency . 
Parents of 17 British soldiers killed in Iraq called today in a letter to The Guardian for an independent inquiry into the decision to go to war in Iraq . 
