As the death toll from swine flu in Mexico rises to more than 100 people , governments around the world are on high alert for a possible flu pandemic . 
Follow the latest updates on the spread of the virus The Health Protection Agency is working on the assumption that between 15 % and 50 % of the British population might contract swine flu , according to the Independent . 
`` If swine influenza continues to spread the way it is spreading , I do n't see how we will avoid it , '' Professor Nick Phin , head of the agency 's pandemic influenza unit , told the paper . 
The Health Protection Agency is working on the assumption that between 15 % and 50 % of the British population might contract swine flu , according to the Independent . 
`` If swine influenza continues to spread the way it is spreading , I do n't see how we will avoid it , '' Professor Nick Phin , head of the agency 's pandemic influenza unit , told the paper . 
The European Commission is calling for an emergency meeting of Europe 's health ministers `` as soon as possible '' to consider how to protect against the spread of the swine flu virus . 
`` We will be asking in the course of the day for an extraordinary meeting to be convened to consider the situation , '' said a spokeswoman for EU health commissioner Androula Vassiliou . 
Persons who develop influenza-like-illness -LRB- ILI -RRB- -LRB- fever with either cough or sore throat -RRB- should be strongly encouraged to self-isolate in their home for 7 days after the onset of illness or at least 24 hours after symptoms have resolved , whichever is longer . 
It goes on to discuss sending children away from schools and nurseries and the cancellation of large gatherings . 
There is separate guidance on the use of facemasks , antivirals , and taking care of an infected person in your home . 
Visitors to Mexico should be aware of an outbreak of influenza . 
The federal health ministry issued a nationwide alert on 22 April after learning that a number of people had died from what appears to be a new form of influenza . 
Cases have been reported in Mexico City , together with the states of Oaxaca , San Luis Potosi , Mexicali and Baja California . 
Travellers should consult a doctor immediately if they show signs of flu-like symptoms . 
The WHO is likely to raise its pandemic alert level tomorrow if more cases are confirmed . 
The level is currently at three and will be moved to four if the virus shows a sustained ability to pass from human to human . 
Shares in Top Glove the world 's largest listed rubber latex glovemaker , jumped more than 8 % to 5.95 ringgit on the Malaysian stock exchange . 
One of the most reliable Google Maps on swine flu is being put together by Henry Niman , founder Recombinomics , who has been tracing the evolution of influenza for the last five years . 
H1N1 Swine Flu : Pink markers are suspected cases , purple markers are confirmed , deaths lack a dot in marker , yellow markers are negative There has been a confirmed case in Spain , according to Reuters . 
The health ministry is Spain added that 17 sick people are under investigation . 
A Guardian video shows the latest scenes from Mexico , including a football match being played behind closed doors . 
The European Commission is holding a briefing on the outbreak . 
`` This has nothing to do with the food chain . 
I had a very nice fillet du Porc , yesterday . 
This is a human flu virus , '' said Robert Madelin , director-general for consumer health . 
He added : `` We are trying to get the best possible information , and we are putting in place plans agreed in the last five years , ensuring that the level of risk management is appropriate to the risk - using our ` war-games ' experiences . '' 
He noted that there has been a confirmed case in Spain , but said there is no plans advice against traveling to Spain . 
The EU health commissioner , Andorra Vassiliou urged Europeans to postpone nonessential travel to the United States or Mexico . 
She told reporters `` they should avoid traveling to Mexico or the United States of America unless it is very urgent for them . '' 
Israel has re-named swine flu , because the term is not kosher , according to Reuters . 
`` We will call it Mexico flu . 
We wo n't call it swine flu , '' deputy health minister Yakov Litzman , a black-garbed Orthodox Jew , told a news conference today . 
Health secretary , Alan Johnson , is due to give statement to the House of Commons about swine flu , at 4pm today . 
My colleague , Paddy Allen , is working on a regularly-updated interactive timeline of the outbreak . 
Swine flu : how the latest strain spread around the world The WHO has brought forward its meeting on swine flu from tomorrow to today , becuase of the increasing number of confirmed cases in the US and Canada . 
The group met on Saturday and planned to meet again on tomorrow to advise whether the current pandemic alert level should be raised . 
If you think the Guardian is over-reacting to swine flu , check out the Daily Mail . 
Its latest headline reads : Daily Mail headline on swine flu A source once took precaution of buying Tamiflu over the internet , from a Canadian firm called Drug Delivery . 
It emailed her today `` as a valued customer '' to use the current panic to tout for more business . 
World Health Organization declares `` public health emergency of international concern '' . 
This is not in China , Africa , or some distant country ... This is in the USA and MEXICO ! 
Turn on any television station , open any news paper . 
This is getting worse by the minute . 
Uncontrollable fever , extreme diarrhea , violent vomiting , death . 
The only question that remains ... Is YOUR family prepared ? 
WE CAN HELP YOU PREPARE . 
WE CAN SUPPLY YOU THE MEDICINE YOU NEED TO HELP PROTECT YOUR FAMILY . 
We are able to supply both Tamiflu and Relenza , two products proven to protect against strains of the Avian flu . 
Please seriously consider keeping a supply on hand for your family . 
Our stocks are extremely limited and in the last 24 hours alone we have sold more doses of these medications than we have in the last 2 years . 
Authorities in the Castilla La Mancha region 's health service said the victim was a 22-year-old student . 
`` He arrived from a study trip to Mexico on the 22nd , '' an official said . 
Britain will inevitably be hit by cases of swine flu , the government 's chief medical officer , Sir Liam Donaldson , told BBC 's radio 's World at One program . 
`` Hopefully , if we identify those early and treat people and their contacts , we might be able to reduce the spread , '' he said . 
A Canadian woman is being treated for suspected swine flu at an undisclosed hospital in Manchester , PA reports . . 
An NHS North West spokeswoman said : `` We are aware that an overseas visitor to the Sale area is being tested for possible swine flu . 
`` The person concerned has been taken to hospital for further tests , in keeping with recommendations , and purely as a precaution . '' 
Barack Oabama told reporters that swine flu is a cause for concern , not alarm . 
Mike Davis , professor of history at the University of California , Irvine , and the author of The Monster at Our Door : The Global Threat of Avian Flu , questions WHO 's claims that it is well prepared for a pandemic . 
Writing on Comment is free , he says : The swine flu may prove that the WHO\/Centres for Disease Control version of pandemic preparedness without massive new investment in surveillance , scientific and regulatory infrastructure , basic public health , and global access to lifeline drugs belongs to the same class of Ponzified risk management as Madoff securities . 
It is not so much that the pandemic warning system has failed as it simply does n't exist , even in North America and the EU . 
The US state department is to issue a warning about traveling to Mexico , according to BBC News . 
`` There will be a travel warning urging Americans to avoid all nonessential travel to Mexico because of the swine flu , '' said US official told Reuters . 
`` Front-page photographs of people in surgical masks , praying to the Virgin of Guadalupe for deliverance from a terrifying disease sweeping through their community , is the very last thing Mexican tourism needed , '' Joanna Moorhead reports on the impact swine flu on Mexico 's tourist industry . 
The World Health Organisation says the number of confirmed cases in the US has doubled to 40 , according to AP . 
Gregory Hartl , a spokesman for the WHO is giving a teleconference . 
He says it 's `` perplexing '' why there have only been mild cases outside Mexico so far . 
He suggests that the threat level will be raised as a result of today 's meeting . 
Alan Johnson , health secretary , has started his statement to the Commons . 
Three patients are in isolation wards in the UK after traveling to Mexico , he said . 
He said there had been 25 reports of suspected cases in the UK . 
It 's too early to say if there will be a pandemic , he said . 
It 's important to note that , apart from in Mexico , all people with symptoms have recovered , Johnson said . 
The UK has been preparing for a flu pandemic for five years , Johnson said . 
It has 33 million treatments of antivirals . 
Should the virus start spreading we will use antiviral stockpiles , the health secretary added . 
The scientific evidence does not suggest that wearing facemasks is necessary , but the government is looking into increasing supplies of masks , he said . 
A swine flu information line is being set up for the public . 
Johnson said we can all take precautions against flu , by covering the mouth when sneezing and coughing and washing hands , and staying away from work if you have flu-like symptoms . 
There is understandable concern across the world and the UK , Johnson said . 
He claimed that the UK and France are the best prepared countries in the world , for dealing with a possible pandemic . 
Tanya Huntington Hyde , an American artist and writer living in Mexico City , reports on the `` sense of impending doom '' in the city . 
That 's it from me , my Washington-based colleague , Daniel Nasaw , will be taking over the blog for the rest of the day . 
Health officials in Guatemala and Peru are investigating possible cases of swine flu in recent travellers to Mexico . 
Peruvian Health Minister Oscar Ugarte told Peruvian radio an airline passenger arrived in Lima from Mexico with a high fever and other `` suspicious symptoms '' , Reuters reported . 
In Guatemala City , a hospital director told local radio that a 29-year old who had recently been to Mexico had symptoms similar to those reported in swine flu cases there . 
Authorities in both countries are checking airline passengers arriving from Mexico for swine flu symptoms . 
Elsewhere in central and South America , Colombia has reported a suspected case . 
Michael Tomasky blogs , via the Nation , that Republicans in the US congress stripped $ 900m in pandemic research funding from the fiscal stimulus package during debate in January and February . 
The US Centers for Disease Control offers some guidance on which flu drugs it deems most effective at this point . 
Good news : antiviral drugs oseltamivir and zanamivir seem to be working . 
On the benefits of the drugs , the agency says : Treatment : If you get sick , antiviral drugs can make your illness milder and make you feel better faster . 
They may also prevent serious influenza complications . 
For treatment , antiviral drugs work best if started as soon after getting sick as possible , and might not work if started more than 48 hours after illness starts . 
Prevention : Influenza antiviral drugs also can be used to prevent influenza when they are given to a person who is not ill , but who has been or may be near a person with swine influenza . 
When used to prevent the flu , antiviral drugs are about 70 % to 90 % effective . 
When used for prevention , the number of days that they should be used will vary depending on a person 's particular situation . 
US customs agents are now checking travelers arriving at airports , seaports and land border crossings for signs of illness , the Associated Press reports . 
The agents will refer travelers who say they are not feeling well CDC officials for further screening , US customs and border protection spokesman Lloyd Easterling tells AP . 
Mexican health and education officials just announced they are shutting all schools in the country until Wednesday May 6 . 
Officials said they are now investigating 149 possible deaths from the swine flu , and warned more cases are likely to surface . 
Mexican health secretary Jos ngel C rdova said at a news conference that 1,995 people have turned up at hospitals with suspected swine flu symptoms , with about 53 % of those , or 1,070 , discharged . 
`` This is the high point of this epidemic , and the number of cases will likely increase , '' C rdova said , according to a CNN translation . 
Mexican education minister Alonso Lujambio said the government is unhappy at having to close schools , `` but there 's nothing more important than Mexicans ' health . '' 
He said the time will give health officials room to investigate the outbreak and devise preventative measures . 
CDC acting director Richard Besser said the US has confirmed 40 total cases in five US states , but says the only change from yesterday is an additional 20 cases at a New York City private school . 
He said the additional cases represent increased testing , rather than the spread of the virus . 
In a press conference happening now in Washington , Besser said that of the 40 cases , only a single patient was hospitalised . 
Others who were infected and sickened have since recovered . 
He notes the US has n't seen the severity that Mexico has suffered . 
Besser said the US state department would issue a travel advisory `` out of an abundance of caution '' , warning against non-essential travel to Mexico . 
Besser said businesses , schools , parents and religious institutions should formulate plans in case a worker , student or parishioner takes ill . 
Noting the disparity between the severity of Mexico cases and those in the US , Besser said Americans should not think the country has for some reason been spared . 
`` I would n't rest on the fact that we have only seen cases in this country that are less severe , '' he said . 
He said many factors could explain the discrepancy , and said that as health officials monitoring the US discover more cases , the range of severity is likely to `` broaden '' . 
Besser said he does not recommend widespread use of the surgical masks that were ubiquitous during the SARS outbreak in China and are even now in Mexico City . 
`` The evidence of their value outside of healthcare settings ... is not very strong , '' he said . 
Besser said people should not kiss one another in greeting -LRB- though he did not specifically proscribe more romantic smooches -RRB- , and advised people to wash their hands frequently and cover their mouths and noses when they cough and sneeze . 
US secretary of state Hillary Clinton is urging `` caution '' to people planning to travel to Mexico , and pointed people to the US state department website . 
Heading into a meeting with Singaporean foreign minister George Yeo Yong Boon about two hours ago , she told reporters : We do believe that our efforts are developed and prepared to confront this wherever it might occur inside our own country , and enhanced cooperation across boundaries will be very important . 
And we obviously have offered help and assistance to the Government of Mexico to make sure that they have the resources and the technical expertise that they might need if they so request . 
Scottish health secretary Nicola Sturgeon said authorities have confirmed two cases of swine flu in Scotland , the first confirmed cases in Britain . 
At a press conference in Edinburgh , Sturgeon said the two patients at Monklands Hospital in Airdrie , Lanarkshire , are `` recovering well '' . 
New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg today said that health officials believe more than 100 people at the St Francis Preparatory School had been sickened , with 28 cases confirmed . 
At a city hall press conference , the mayor threw a positive spin on the news , noting that four or five days after the initial outbreak `` we are still dealing with a single cluster of swine flu cases '' . 
The New York Times ' City Room blog has a thorough write-up here . 
The Guardian 's Polly Curtis and Jessica Shepherd report that UK school officials are telling schools to re-familiarise themselves with flu pandemic guidelines , in preparation for the possible spread of the virus through the country . 
US homeland security secretary Janet Napolitano said travel warnings to Mexico will continue until the flu abates , and nixed talk of closing America 's southern border . 
`` People could be coming in now , under passive surveillance , who actually have the flu , '' she warned . 
The WHO just said it was raising its pandemic alert to phase four from three , which assistant director general Keiji Fukuda said is `` a significant step towards pandemic influenza , '' but that `` we are not there yet '' . 
The highest is phase six , indicating a severe global pandemic . 
Read the latest news piece from myself and Guardian journalists Chris McGreal here in Washington , Jo Tuckman in Mexico City and Rachel Williams in London here . 
Yes , the swine flu could mutate and become more dangerous . 
It could spread farther and further . 
What 's more worrisome is the corrosive and contagious quality of the fear , not the flu . 
And frankly the economic impact of this outbreak has the potential to be even more painful and long-lasting for all of us . 
Yet the panicky atmosphere in Mexico City is palpably toxic . 
So I 'm heading out of town for a few days - before they really do shut down the metro . 
School is canceled and most ` fun ' things are closed . 
