Swine flu : pandemic threat alert raised The British couple being treated for swine flu have been named , as fear of a pandemic increase and the death toll in Mexico continues to rise . 
Follow the latest updates on the spread of the virus The British couple being treated for swine flu in an isolation ward in a Scottish hospital , have been named as Iain and Dawn Askham . 
They had just returned from Mexico where the authorities said the virus had caused 152 deaths . 
The World Health Organisation reports a lower figure of 73 . 
In the United States 50 non-fatal cases have been confirmed . 
Worldwide there were 79 confirmed cases , including six in Canada , one in Spain and the couple in Scotland . 
Are you worried by swine flu ? 
So far the majority -LRB- 57 % -RRB- of people voting in our online poll say it 's all media hype . 
British nationals resident in or visiting Mexico may wish to consider whether they should remain in Mexico at this time . 
British Nationals should continue to follow local advice on precautions to take to avoid exposure to the influenza . 
Cases of swine influenza have been reported in Mexico City and a number of other locations across the country . 
Travellers should consult a doctor immediately if they show signs of flu-like symptoms . 
The Mexican Secretariat of Health has advised people to avoid large crowds , shaking hands and kissing people as a greeting . 
Maintaining a distance of at least six feet from other persons and frequent hand washing may decrease the risk of exposure . 
The Mexicans have closed educational establishments across the country . 
Museums and other public venues and events have been closed or postponed . 
Most visits are trouble-free , but crime and kidnappings continue . 
You should be particularly alert in tourist areas -LRB- especially on public transport and when dealing with real or purported policemen -RRB- and exercise caution when exchanging or withdrawing money . 
See the Crime Section of this advice for more details . 
The Guardian 's political editor , Patrick Wintour , explains how Britain is preparing for an outbreak of swine flu . 
`` Prepared for the Apocalypse '' , the Independent thunders this morning describing Mexico as a `` quasi-apocalyptic vision of anonymous faces shrouded in government-issued surgical masks '' . 
The Express offers a double page spread on `` Pandemic Pandemonium '' . 
`` It destroyed the Roman Empire , wiped out most of the New World and killed millions in Europe . 
How disease - not just Mexico 's swine fever - has shaped the planet . '' 
It is littered with scaremongering including : `` Around a third of all humans could easily die off '' and `` The viruses killed the young and healthy '' and also runs a handy sidebar on `` why facemasks could be useless '' . 
The Telegraph reports , somewhat alarmingly , that online demand for Tamiflu is up 1000 % , with pharmacists warning that their stocks may not last . 
The Mail leads its story by saying that Britain can not hope to escape a `` global pandemic of swine flu '' , citing the UK 's chief medical officer saying cases here were inevitable . 
The Mirror , by comparison , places the ugliest picture of a pig it can find on its front page announcing `` SWINE FLU IS HERE '' focusing on the two cases of the disease confirmed in Scotland but again goes for the full throttle on its leader page : `` Sore throat at breakfast ... dead by teatime ... how the last flu pandemic killed 40 million . '' 
Back to the real world , and an important point noted in a few of the papers today : all those who have shown symptoms of swine flu outside Mexico so far have recovered . 
Things could change at any moment . 
But more worrisome is the corrosive and contagious quality of the fear , not the flu . 
And frankly the economic impact of this outbreak has the potential to be even more painful and long-lasting for all of us . 
Yet the panicky atmosphere in Mexico City is palpably toxic . 
So I 'm heading out of town for a few days -- before they really do shut down the metro . 
School is canceled and most ` fun ' things are closed . 
South Korea has announced its first probable case of swine flu . 
Final tests are still necessary to confirm whether a 51-year-old woman has contracted the disease , the Korea Centres for Disease Control and Prevention said in a statement , AP reported . 
The woman has remained quarantined since returning from a trip to Mexico on Sunday . 
MacDoctor is worried about the prospect of a pandemic as the southern hemisphere enters its flu season . 
We are about to go into our busiest time of year with health services normally being pushed to the max by respiratory illnesses . 
Add all the possible swine flu sufferers and you have a recipe for a completely overwhelmed health service . 
Add everyone with cold and flu symptoms -LRB- understandably -RRB- panicking and trying to access the heath system to find out whether they have the disease or not and we have all the makings of utter chaos . 
Why is swine flu causing death in Mexico but not elsewhere ? 
The Mexican paper La Jornada says the answer is simple : `` The inevitable contrast between the deaths in Mexico and the cases caused by the virus in the United States , which seem to be much more benign , has an equally inevitable explanation : poverty . '' 
My Spanish-speaking colleague , Robert White , says the paper castigates successive governments for pursuing neoliberal policies of `` trimming the state '' . 
La Jornada says this ensured that the long-awaited announcement of such a flu outbreak was always `` bound to be disastrous '' and fatal for many of those infected . 
At a press conference in Poland , Gordon Brown said he would be attending a meeting of the civil emergencies committee known as Cobra to discuss the swine flu crisis when he returned to London later this morning . 
Brown also said that one of the patients in a Scottish hospital with swine flu was expected to go home today . 
`` I understand the very real concern that people across Britain , across Europe and across the world have about this outbreak of swine flu disease , '' he said . 
British holiday tour companies Thomson and First Choice have suspended their operations to Mexico today . 
Gregory Hartl , a spokesman for the WHO , told a news conference in Geneva that the WHO emergency committee will not be meeting today . 
Yesterday the committee recommended raising the pandemic threat level . 
Hartl said the WHO does not recommend travel restrictions or border closures due to swine flu . 
A journalist complains that it has been impossible to reach WHO officials . 
Hartl admits that he has 2,800 unanswered calls . 
On reports of new suspected cases in China , Hartl said : `` We have rumors all the time . 
It 's important that we hear rumors , they may turn out to be unfounded . '' 
As Hartl spoke , Reuters reported confirmed cases in New Zealand and Israel . 
`` We do n't understand why the disease has been more severe in Mexico , '' Hartl said . 
`` Mexico has large supplies of Tamiflu . 
People at the beginning of an outbreak are always more vulnerable . '' 
A Health Protection Agency spokesman said the passenger who reported feeling unwell on a flight from Cancun which landed at Manchester airport had been sent home . 
Robert White has translated some more from Spanish-language media . 
Writing in the Mexican paper El Universal , Ricardo Rocha says swine flu is a `` fourth plague , after the financial , economic and social crises we are still suffering ... an epidemic with devastating effects - above all , for the poorest . 
The truth is , this country has been ill for a long time . '' 
Under the headline , Sick Mexico , he says poverty , structural weaknesses and bad government , are `` killing Mexicans in ever greater areas of the country , and there is no one who can stop it . '' 
NHS Direct are due to release details of yesterday 's call volume soon , my colleague James Strucke reports . 
NHS Direct said : `` We started receiving calls about swine flu at around 3.30 pm on Sunday . 
By 11.30 pm that night we had had 88 swine flu calls . 
In 15 cases there were symptoms of the flu and the details were passed on to our on-call out of hours staff . 
Clearly we are expecting number to have risen yesterday . '' 
`` The plane touched down and the captain made an announcement which at any other time would have been banal . ' 
Welcome to Mexico ' , '' writes the Guardian 's South America correspondent , Rory Carroll , after flying in last night . 
`` Mexico City 's airport is the busiest in Latin America but last night it was quiet , like the city outside . 
Muzzled taxi drivers whisked arrivals through gloomy , ghostly neighborhoods , '' he adds . 
EU health commissioner , Androulla Vassiliou , said there are reports of suspected cases in Denmark , Sweden , Greece , the Czech Republic , Germany , Italy and Ireland . 
Speaking at a press conference in Brussels , she said other cases , including one in Belgium , had been ruled out . 
She said she could not give the exact number of suspected cases . 
Vassiliou also requested a meeting with pharmaceutical companies on the development of a vaccine . 
An EU meeting will discuss possible travel restrictions on Thursday , she added . 
Ireland 's Department of Health will release swine flu test results later today on four Irish people who have returned from abroad . 
NHS Wiltshire has confirm that seven people are being tested for possible swine flu in the county , according to the INS news agency . 
A new Guardian video features fears from New York mayor , Michael Bloomberg , that 100 people may have contracted the virus in the city . 
Phil , a farmer and blogger from Utah , is taking no chances . 
He has put together a pandemic preparedness kit containing : 5 masks , 25 pairs of disposable vinyl gloves , alcohol-based hand sanitiser and alcohol-based wipes . 
`` My impression is that Mexicans in general - and chilangos -LRB- those from Mexico City -RRB- are no exception - are often apathetic with regard to matters of common interest . 
This -LRB- swine flu -RRB- touches on every sphere , from the frivolous use of cars , to the waste of water , to facilitating organised crime by buying illegal products , to throwing rubbish in the street ... etc. `` Now , faced with swine flu , we all have to rethink these sorts of attitudes . 
My opinion is that the government has played its part well ... now the ball is in the court of the public . '' 
New York Times : interactive map What 's in a name ? 
The term swine flu is misleading , the EU health commissioner Androulla Vassiliou and should be renamed `` novel flu '' to avoid damaging the pork industry . 
The respected ProMed-mail is going for the long-winded `` Influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- virus , human '' because it is not being spread by pigs . 
An Israeli minister suggested that swine flu is not kosher and is calling it Mexico flu , to the concern of officials in Mexico . 
Others suggest `` media flu '' would be a better term . 
NHS Direct has received more than 200 potential cases of swine flu in the past 24 hours , James Sturcke reports . 
He writes : `` The national health information and referral service released figures showing that it received 1,378 swine flu related calls yesterday . 
In 238 cases , the caller displayed symptoms of the disease and had recently traveled to an infected area , and was referred to a GP . '' 
On the A very public sociologist blog Phil BC offers scathing criticism of the media response to swine flu : Sensationalist reporting is likely to see tamiflu wiped off Britain 's shelves and encourage an influx of needlessly worried people into doctors ' surgeries - wasting time and resources already rationed thanks to the marketisation imposed on the NHS by the government . 
But whatever happens the media barons will wash their hands of the consequences . 
However , he does admit the situation is `` potentially serious '' in his polemic , which ends with a call for newspapers to be removed from private ownership . 
`` Most consumers think pandemic means something like the Spanish flu pandemic of 1918-1919 , which is said to have killed between 20 million to 100 million people . 
Something like that is unlikely to happen today , however . 
Nearly a century ago , the standards of living and medical care , for humans and animals , were vastly different . 
The country was recovering from World War I , with widespread poverty , hunger and unsanitary living conditions , coupled with no available antibiotics or flu medications or modern medical care . '' 
Szwarc also suggests the deaths in Mexico may not be attributable to it being afflicted by a more virulent strain , but rather extreme poverty . 
Providing fuel for the conspiracy theorists , the US independent investigative reporter , Wayne Madsen , suggests in this video that some scientists have said swine flu is `` not naturally occurring '' . 
`` There is always some flu around and flu is always killing some people . 
Even when a raw mutant flu manages to kill off more people than a shooting-war , flu has never ravaged whole cities as cholera or the Black Death can do . 
As awful pandemics go , flu is like the snotty-nosed little sister of awful pandemics . '' 
Time has examined the lessons to be learned from 1976 , when a nationwide vaccination program in the US , instigated after an outbreak of swine flu , was held responsible for a number of deaths : `` Vaccines carry risks of complications , leading to agonizing ethical dilemmas . 
In 1976 , Ford offered indemnity to the vaccine manufacturers . 
But according to reports , President George W. Bush decided in 2002 not to administer a nationwide smallpox vaccination program despite Vice President Dick Cheney 's belief that doing so was a prudent counterterrorism step because it could have resulted in dozens of deaths . '' 
On Twitter , John Dyer in Texas writes that the university where his wife teaches has instructed staff to bow or nod rather than shake hands . 
The New York Times doorstepped Esti Lamonaca , a New York teenager , who went to Mexico with friends for their spring break . 
They are now suspected of bringing swine flu to New York : '' ` No one can prove it , ' said Ms. Lamonaca , who came to the door of her family 's house in Forest Hills , Queens , on Monday , in a gray tank top , athletic shorts and a surgical mask . 
Her parents , she said , had ordered her not to take off the mask until her symptoms went away . 
They made a ` quarantine ' sign to hang on the doorknob of her bedroom , she added . '' 
The Scottish health secretary Nicola Sturgeon is speaking in Edinburgh . 
She says no decision has been taken on the discharge of the couple with swine flu and nine people in contact with them have `` mild symptoms '' . 
There are 14 more people in Scotland showing potential symptoms , although not confirmed as having swine flu . 
Those 14 people being investigated all have travel links to the US and\/or Mexico , says Sturgeon . 
She adds it 's `` cause for encouragement '' that everyone outside Mexico who has contracted swine flu is suffering only `` mild symptoms '' . 
While many are blaming the media for creating fear , Deborah Hargreaves , the Guardian 's head of business writes : '' The public panic about swine flu is completely out of proportion to the threat involved . 
People do n't seem to understand the concept of risk any more - either that or we have become so risk-averse as a society that we are not prepared to stomach even the slightest threat to our health . '' 
The Guardian 's Paddy Allen has produced a new interactive guide to the countries where there have been confirmed and suspected infections . 
Swine flu : the affected countries -LRB- Thanks to Haroon Siddique who has been blogging for here for the last three hours . -RRB- 
Michael O'Leary , the outspoken boss of the Irish budget airline Ryanair , has added his blunt words to the situation , according to AFP . 
`` It is a tragedy only for people living in slums in Asia or Mexico , but will the honeymoon couple from Edinburgh die ? 
No , '' he told journalists . 
Many people have been turning to Dr Ben Goldacre , the author of the Guardian 's Bad Science column , for his judgement on swine flu . 
In a Twitter update today , Goldacre says he is `` genuinely fascinated by how many people are contacting me to say ` is swine flu just nonsense ? ' 
, media now utterly mistrusted on health . '' 
The WHO assistant director-general , Keiji Fukuda , says there have only been seven laboratory-confirmed deaths from swine flu in Mexico . 
There are 79 infections worldwide , he said . 
Fukuda said `` it was not inevitable '' that the outbreak would turn into a pandemic . 
Speaking at a teleconference , he added there are no plans to rename the virus . 
The total number of confirmed US swine flu cases has reached 64 , says the CDC . 
The latest cases are in states where the virus has previously been found , with New York confirming 17 additional cases . 
Daniel Nasaw in Washington , taking over . 
Thanks Matthew and Haroon . 
Four people that the Republic of Ireland 's health service tested for swine flu came out all-clear . 
The health service executive said there are no probable or confirmed cases in the country . 
The four had returned home from abroad and presented suspected symptoms of the illness . 
The White House is set to request $ 1.5 bn from congress to combat the flu , the Associated Press is reporting . 
Much has been made in recent days of the congress decision in January and February to cut from Obama 's stimulus package $ 900m to fight pandemic illness . 
Cuba is suspending flights to and from Mexico for 48 hours to prevent an outbreak of swine flu on the island , the state-run media reported . 
Cuba has no reported cases of the disease . 
New York City Mayor Mike Bloomberg said today that officials supect children at a second school in Queens have taken ill with swine flu . 
The New York City health commissioner today said that `` many hundreds '' of schoolchildren are sickened with the suspected flu . 
`` Yes , it is here and it is spreading . 
We do not know that it will continue to spread , and we do n't know whether it 's worse , '' Dr Thomas Frieden said . 
The Los Angeles coronor is investigating two deaths that could have been caused by swine flu , the Los Angeles Times reported , and California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger declared a state of emergency . 
If these are confirmed they would be the first deaths outside of Mexico . 
Coroner 's spokesman Craig Harvey said Bellflower Medical Center reported the death of a 33-year Long Beach resident Monday afternoon from symptoms resembling swine flu . 
`` It 's that diagnosis that needs to be confirmed , '' Harvey said . 
`` An autopsy will be performed to establish the cause of death . '' 
The man was taken to the hospital Saturday , complaining of shortness of breath and lymphoma . 
Doctors later diagnosed the patient with pneumonia , Harvey said . 
The second case involves a 45-year-old man from La Mirada , whose death was reported Monday to the coroner 's office . 
The man died April 22 at Coast Plaza Doctor 's Hospital in Norwalk . 
The Obama administration just trotted out three top officials to assure the world that US pork exports are safe to eat and to warn trading partners against banning the products . 
US Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack , who was joined by Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and US Trade Representative Ron Kirk , said US authorities have seen no infections among US swine . 
In any case , he said , `` this is not a food-borne illness . 
You can not contract it from consuming pork . 
The importation of American pork and pork products is safe . '' 
Having established his particular area of concern , Vilsack adds `` It is not correct to call this swine flu '' . 
Kirk said he wanted to ensure US trading partners do not `` take advantage '' of the outbreak to enact trade barriers . 
Acting Centres for Disease Control Director Richard Besser said `` I fully expect we will see deaths from this infection . '' 
He said five people in the US have been hospitalised , up from one yesterday . 
That 's three in California and two in Texas . 
He said the incubation period of the disease seems to be two to seven days . 
Canadian health officials have confirmed 13 cases of swine flu in that country , with new cases turning up in Alberta , Ontario and British Columbia . 
The patients seem to be recovering , the Globe and Mail reported . 
Dr Keiji Fukuda of the World Health Organisation just told CNN that `` the situation is evolving quite rapidly '' but that the group does not deem the swine flu a pandemic . 
`` We are hoping to see that this will just slow down and disappear but it does n't show any signs of doing that so far , '' he said . 
`` I would say we are quite quite concerned about it . '' 
He reiterated that the WHO does not recommend travel restrictions or border closures . 
Guardian journalists Chris McGreal here in Washington and Rory Carroll in Mexico City have an updated news story on the global outbreak . 
The US Senate just confirmed Obama 's nomination of -LRB- now former -RRB- Kansas Governor Kathleen Sebelius as health and human services director . 
Washington has seen some mild handwriging in the past few days over the fact that the government agency charged with responding to the swine flu crisis lacked a chief . 
But in Washington , it is often the top layers of career officials , rather than the political appointees , who do most of the heavy day-to-day work , and I have had no sense that the US was worse off . 
The senate confirmed Sebelius 65-31 , over Republican objections about her record supporting abortion rights . 
