Finger pointing towards intensive farming is spreading like the H1N1 virus itself ; it 's time for an urgent inquiry to find out the facts The growing concern over the H1N1 swine flu virus a particularly alarming combination of swine , avian , and human viruses which has now reached the UK seems to have come almost out of nowhere . 
The World Health Organisation -LRB- WHO -RRB- is now calling the virus , which has infected an estimated 1,000 people and killed around 150 in Mexico , an `` international public health emergency '' that could reach global pandemic levels . 
But as Dr Michael Greger , director of Public Health and Animal Agriculture at the Humane Society of the United States , has pointed out , this is not the first time a triple hybrid human\/bird\/pig flu virus has been uncovered . 
The first was found in a North Carolina industrial pig farm in 1998 , and within a year it had spread across the United States . 
Dr Greger has highlighted how some experts blamed the emergence of the original 1998 virus on intensive farming practices in the US , where pigs and poultry are raised in extremely cramped conditions , in adjacent sheds and tended to by the same staff . 
North Carolina has the densest pig population in North America , with around twice as many swine mega-factories as any other state . 
In 1998 , North Carolina 's pig population had hit ten million , up from two million just six years before . 
Yet the number of hog farms was decreasing , with more and more animals being crammed into fewer and fewer farms . 
Since the primary route of swine flu transmission is thought to be the same as human flu , the increased potential for the spread of disease in such conditions is clear . 
More research is urgently needed to explore the potential link between industrialised animal farming , and the spread of disease . 
Some elements of the Mexican media are already pointing to the potential role of intensive pig farming in Mexico , which has grown substantially in recent years , with some giant operations raising tens of thousands of pigs at a time . 
Since news of the epidemic broke , reports in Mexico City daily La Jornada and Veracruz-based paper La Marcha have detailed how a number of community residents in the affected areas have expressed concerns over the operations of Smithfield Foods , the world 's largest pork packer and hog producer . 
According to these reports , in Veracruz where the outbreak originated , a Smithfield subsidiary called Granjas Carrol raises 950,000 hogs per year in intensive conditions . 
Smithfield has released a statement denying any link between the outbreak and Granjas Carrol 's operations in Mexico . 
It said the company routinely administers influenza virus vaccinations to its herds and conducts monthly tests for the presence of swine influenza . 
It said it had found no clinical signs or symptoms of swine influenza on its farms . 
This is not the first time intensive , industrialised agriculture has been accused of spreading disease . 
Recent avian flu outbreaks , for example , have shown the extent to which the export-oriented corporate model of poultry production may have spread strains such as H5N1 . 
In my report Avian flu : time to shut the intensive poultry flu factories ? 
of 2006 , I outlined how bird flu has been endemic in wild birds in much of the world without leaping the species barrier and causing people any harm . 
But in damp and cramped conditions , a series of mutations can occur resulting in a highly pathogenic form . 
Within crowded chicken factory farms , the mild virus can evolve rapidly towards more dangerous and highly transmissible forms , capable of jumping species and spreading back into wild birds , which are defenceless against the new strain . 
Experts are increasingly warning that the practices of intensive farming must be reviewed and regulated . 
While it will be difficult to reach any firm conclusions about this current outbreak of swine flu until more details emerge , it is crucial that the authorities undertake an urgent inquiry , in order to better understand the development and spread of animal-based epidemics which can be lethal to humans . 
cents Caroline Lucas is Green party MEP for the south-east of England Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
Time for a ban . 
