Garbage containers are set on fire as Iranian protesters stage an anti-government demonstration on February 14 , 2011 . 
An Iranian opposition member warns that street protests could lead to civil war `` Nastaran '' warns that protests are strengthening Iran 's Revolutionary Guard and pro-government militia `` Nastaran '' says many Iranians will not accept a religious figure as the new leader of Iran -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- An Iranian supporter of the country 's opposition movement has warned that continued anti-government street protests could lead to civil war . 
The woman , a 34-year-old jewelry designer who lives in Tehran , issued the warning in a series of emailed answers to questions put to her by CNN . 
The woman does n't want her real name revealed due to fear of retribution so has asked that we call her Nastaran . 
Does Iran 's opposition movement want regime change or just more freedom from this regime ? 
-LRB- The -RRB- separation of religion from politics . 
As long as religious leaders do n't interfere with politics , I do n't see a regime change as necessary . 
However , I doubt that the religious leaders would be willing to accept this . 
What kind of real change does the opposition movement hope to accomplish with street protests ? 
Nastaran : I completely disagree with the continuation of street protests . 
We are walking towards a civil war by asking people to pour into the streets and fight with empty hands . 
The regime will not step back and will kill as many people as it deems necessary to stay in power . 
Fight over Iran protest deaths Civil war is not the way . 
We need a change in strategy . 
I think by not changing the strategy and constantly asking people to get into the streets -LRB- especially in the same location -RRB- we are empowering Sepah -LRB- Iran 's Revolutionary Guard -RRB- and the Basij -LRB- Pro-government militia -RRB- . 
It is evident when you go on the streets during the protests that they have learned how to organize and mobilize better . 
Further , we are helping them to expand their army . 
How afraid are you of Iran 's security forces and their threats ? 
Nastaran : Extremely scared !! They are merciless and will do anything in the name of religion . 
The legal framework of Iran is also being ignored so they can accuse you of anything and perhaps kill you . 
Are Mir Hossein Moussavi and Mehdi Karrubi the leaders of Iran 's opposition movement ? 
Nastaran : To me they are not . 
To me they became leaders through people 's anger and dissatisfaction with the regime . 
However , I believe that every movement and uprising requires a leader and at this point in time there is no one better than them . 
The regime will not step back and will kill as many people as it deems necessary to stay in power . 
I do not accept them as leaders because I generally disagree with their ideologies . 
Further , I think they are not the right leaders for a large portion of our population . 
Many Iranians will always believe that these guys are part of the system and will refuse to support them . 
Many Iranians will not accept a religious figure , some one with a turban on their head as a leader , given their experience in the past 30 years . 
What does Iran 's opposition movement want from America right now ? 
What do you want President Obama to do ? 
Nastaran : Direct interference -LRB- from -RRB- America is not helpful . 
Iranians are prone to conspiracy theories and history has proven that American interference is not to our benefit . 
28 Mordad is a prime example -LRB- the 1953 U.S.-backed coup that overthrew Iran 's democratically elected government -RRB- . 
As a result , the masses tend to not want to follow any movement that is initiated or assisted by Americans . 
Their help should be indirect , but their help can be valuable . 
An example would be creating infrastructure for Iranians to more freely communicate , have access to information and spread the information . 
Additionally , appropriate sanctions can be useful also . 
However , they should be the type of sanctions that the regime would n't be able to blame for the people 's unhappiness and poverty . 
I think -LRB- that -RRB- until people really feel hungry and see that different economic and foreign policies will mean more comfortable lives , they wo n't join any kind of a movement . 
Intelligent sanctions can result in the latter . 
