Justice Department Putting New Focus on Combating Corporate Fraud Ten years ago , a Justice Department official drafted a set of guidelines for prosecuting corporate crime . 
Little noticed at the time , the strategy ultimately transformed the way prosecutors pursue corrupt businesses -- by exhorting them to hire their own investigators and share the results with the government in exchange for leniency in plea deals . 
The memo 's author was Eric H. Holder Jr. , who has become the nation 's attorney general at the same time that a financial crisis is putting pressure on prosecutors to hold businesses accountable for fraud . 
`` I want to see people prosecuted , '' Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick J. Leahy -LRB- D-Vt . -RRB- 
said yesterday at a hearing that examined the Justice Department 's handling of corporate corruption . 
Senators from both parties are advocating that more federal resources be devoted to investigating business fraud , pointing out that such prosecutions plunged after the Sept. 11 , 2001 , attacks , when more than 2,000 FBI agents were diverted to protect national security . 
Justice Department and FBI officials committed anew to weeding out fraud in the marketplace , telling lawmakers that they are looking into more than 530 cases of alleged corporate malfeasance . 
Among them are 38 investigations of name-brand businesses and financial institutions involved in the financial crisis , including American International Group , Countrywide Financial , Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . 
FBI Deputy Director John S. Pistole said the bureau is `` doing a complete scrub of all resources '' to ensure that enough agents are assigned to corporate investigations . 
Prompted by the government 's bank bailouts and mounting taxpayer anger , Democrats have introduced two bills in recent weeks to fund the hiring of more agents and prosecutors to combat mortgage fraud and financial wrongdoing . 
Any government crackdown on financial malfeasance is likely to tap into corporate resources , given the drain of years-long investigations on tight federal budgets . 
Many of the Justice Department 's largest ongoing fraud inquiries appear to be months if not years from reaching their targets , lawyers said yesterday . 
It is far easier for department officials to deputize companies to hire law firms and bear the cost of investigations of themselves . 
The companies are encouraged to turn over the results to the government , along with evidence against employees complicit in accounting fraud or other schemes . 
That strategy has alienated some judges who argue that employers have sacrificed individuals to secure better deals for their companies . 
It also could rile lawmakers who already have put the Justice Department on notice about protecting employee rights . 
While President Obama has decried corporate greed and fraud in recent weeks and during the presidential campaign , it is too early to know how his administration will approach such cases , and Holder has been difficult to read . 
`` We 're not going to go out on any witch hunts , and yet we 'll drill down and see '' what evidence exists of fraud and other crimes , the attorney general told reporters after being sworn in last week . 
Holder 's experience on both sides of the courtroom adds to interest in the legal community about how he will tackle the issue . 
A decade ago , after Holder , who was deputy attorney general at the time , heard persistent complaints from corporate defense lawyers , he enlisted a group of government lawyers to draft guidelines for prosecutors handling business cases . 
The Holder memo instructed lawyers to take into account a company 's cooperation with authorities in deciding whether to bring an indictment . 
The government wields substantial leverage in negotiations , because even the threat of criminal charges can put some companies out of business , as happened to accounting firm Arthur Andersen more than six years ago . 
In 2001 , Holder left government and moved into a lucrative career in private law practice , conducting investigations for companies and then sharing the results with prosecutors in exchange for leniency . 
Holder is not the only senior Justice Department official with experience defending corporate America . 
David W. Ogden , who is nominated to serve as the department 's second in command , represented media companies , government contractors and technology firms while in private practice . 
And Lanny A. Breuer , the nominee to lead the department 's criminal division , defended a host of businesses and individuals . 
New Justice Department officials are still considering their options for policing corporate fraud . 
Among the questions is whether to create a national task force to standardize decisions about what criminal charges and prison sentences to pursue in cases against employees at mortgage companies and financial institutions , said Rita M. Glavin , acting chief of the department 's criminal division . 
But authorities appear to sense that interest in the issue is peaking as the economy suffers . 
Ogden told senators at his confirmation hearing last week that on his watch , the department would undertake a `` strong , law enforcement response '' to crime on Wall Street . 
`` Serving jail time may well be an appropriate result , and it could be a deterrent in the future , '' he said . 
More in the Politics Section 
