BP directors will meet on Monday to discuss whether to suspend dividends to shareholders , the BBC has learned . 
Executives will then meet US President Barack Obama on Wednesday , but no announcement on the payments is expected in the near future . 
BP has been under intense pressure from the US government , which wants BP to use the money to pay for the Gulf of Mexico clean-up . 
Meanwhile , BP 's shares closed up 7.2 % , recovering losses suffered on Thursday . 
`` No announcement is expected for a while , but it is looking more likely that BP will cease paying the # 1.8 bn of dividends per quarter that it 's been delivering to shareholders - until that is it can quantify the final massive bill for the Gulf of Mexico oil debacle and prove to the White House that it can afford those enormous costs , '' BBC business editor Robert Peston said . 
Pensions expert and former government adviser Ros Altmann told the BBC that if the company did cut its dividend it would be `` a blow '' , but should not be taken `` out of proportion '' . 
It looks increasingly likely that dividend payments will be ceased for a period - because of the intense pressure to do so from senior US politicians and the White House '' End Quote Robert Peston BBC business editor `` For people already drawing a pension it does n't really have much impact . 
For people saving for a pension , what we 're talking about here is one quarter 's dividend perhaps not being paid , certainly initially , '' she said . 
`` It will only have an impact on people who are coming up to retirement immediately and will then have to convert their pension fund into a pension straight away , then the value of that pension fund will be less . '' 
The National Association of Pension Funds -LRB- NAPF -RRB- estimates that UK pension funds ' exposure to BP is about 1.5 % of their total assets , which are worth more than # 800bn . 
Pensions expert Ros Altmann : `` I do n't think we should take it out of proportion '' Joanne Segars , chief executive of the NAPF , agreed that the impact on pensions would be `` relatively diluted '' as pension funds invest in many different companies ' stocks and shares . 
`` The ability of pension funds to pay out pensions to today 's pensioners and tomorrow 's pensioners should n't be affected by this crisis , '' she said . 
But she added : `` If we saw a continuation of withholding of dividends or the company coming under further pressure and further speculation about its future then that 's a real issue . '' 
BP shares closed at 390p on Friday , recovering the losses suffered during a choppy trading session on Thursday . 
However , the oil giant 's share price has almost halved since the Deepwater Horizon oil spill began on 20 April . 
This week , the crisis has taken on a more political dimension with UK Prime Minister David Cameron and senior ministers commenting on the oil spill for the first time . 
BP chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg , who has been asked to meet President Obama next week , earlier spoke to both Mr Cameron and Chancellor George Osborne . 
A Downing Street spokesman said Mr Cameron had told the BP chairman that he was `` frustrated and concerned '' about the environmental damage caused by the spill . 
He added : `` He said that it is in everyone 's interests that BP continues to be a financially strong and stable company . '' 
Mr Cameron will discuss the issue with US President Barack Obama during their regular phone call on Saturday . 
Also on Friday , the head of the US Coast Guard , Admiral Thad Allen - the US official overseeing the clean-up of the oil spill - said BP would be able to nearly double the amount of oil it was collecting from the ruptured undersea well by next month . 
He said once a `` hard cap containment system '' was in place , BP would be able to siphon off 50,000 barrels a day . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
