Dr Conrad Murray was hired by Jackson after becoming friends in 2006 When Michael Jackson died on 25 June 2009 , Dr Conrad Murray was at the hospital for the pop superstar , who had hired him as his personal physician and considered him a friend . 
Months later , the 58-year-old was charged with Jackson 's death and became a hate figure to the singer 's legions of fans around the world . 
Raised by his grandparents in Grenada in poverty , Dr Murray worked his way up to become a successful cardiologist in the US . 
A series of financial and personal problems seemed to be ending after a chance meeting in Las Vegas with Michael Jackson led to a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity . 
Dr Murray was hired at Jackson 's request to be the star 's personal physician ahead of his 50-date series of London concerts , This Is It . 
Raised by his maternal grandparents , Dr Murray proved a hard-working student , eventually following his absent father , also a doctor , to the US - where he enrolled at Texas Southern University . 
He graduated three years later with a degree in pre-medicine and biological sciences . 
He continued his medical studies in Nashville , Tennessee , before completing his training in California and the University of Arizona , where he studied cardiology . 
In 2000 , he opened his own practice in Las Vegas , expanding with a second clinic in Houston in 2006 . 
Like his father , he took pride serving both ends of the community , and provided medical care to deprived areas . 
However , Dr Murray 's apparent success was blighted by outstanding debts and tax demands . 
Reports suggest he filed for bankruptcy in 2002 while living in California . 
The doctor 's financial problems stemmed by providing medical care for the poor , his lawyers have said . 
He had not paid the mortgage on his home in months when Jackson offered him the job as his personal physician . 
Other unpaid bills and debts loomed . 
Dr Murray met Michael Jackson when the singer 's daughter , Paris , was sick during a family trip to Las Vegas in 2006 . 
According to Dr Murray 's spokeswoman , someone within Jackson 's group knew the doctor and called Dr Murray to treat her . 
They remained friendly and Jackson hired the physician in May 2009 . 
He was to be paid $ 150,000 -LRB- # 96,000 -RRB- a month . 
`` As a company , we would have preferred not having a physician on staff full-time because it would have been cheaper ... but Michael was insistent that he be hired , '' promoter AEG 's Randy Phillips told the Associated Press . 
`` Michael said he had a rapport with him . '' 
Dr Murray 's lawyer , Edward Chernoff , said the case had put his client in fear of his life and he had to be accompanied `` 24\/7 with a bodyguard '' . 
The prosecution called Dr Murray 's girlfriends to testify `` He ca n't operate his practice , '' said the attorney . 
`` He ca n't go to work because he is harassed no matter where he goes . '' 
According to public records cited by the LA Times , Dr Murray had two children with his wife , but also fathered several children with different women . 
Those children included the now young toddler of Nicole Alvarez , an actress who met Dr Murray in 2005 . 
Several of Dr Murray 's recent girlfriends have also testified at his trial , as well as former patients . 
According to court records , he has been sued more than 10 times , including for breach of contract and unpaid child support . 
He has never been sued for malpractice . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
