Conrad Murray jury to return after weekend Prosecutors ended their case by saying Dr Conrad Murray 's care of Jackson had been `` bizarre '' , while the defense said the singer had caused his own death . 
The panel will resume considering the involuntary manslaughter charge against Dr Conrad Murray on Monday . 
Fans of Jackson , who died in June 2009 , gathered outside the Los Angeles court , carrying signs asking for a `` one way ticket to jail '' for the accused . 
If convicted , Dr Murray , 58 , could face four years in prison and lose his licence to practice medicine . 
The cardiologist denies giving Jackson an overdose of the powerful sedative propofol to help him sleep . 
The jury of seven men and five women heard from 49 witnesses and saw more than 300 pieces of evidence over the six weeks of the trial . 
Dr Conrad Murray chose not to testify in his own defense There was no sign of Dr Murray on Friday or his legal team , but they are to receive a two-hour notice once a verdict is reached . 
During closing statements on Thursday , the prosecution said the world had lost a `` genius '' , while the defense characterised Murray as `` a little fish in a big dirty pond '' . 
Prosecutors said Dr Murray 's care of the pop star had been `` bizarre '' and left the pop star 's children fatherless . 
They projected images of Jackson 's grief-stricken children on a giant screen . 
The children , Prince , Paris and Blanket , who range in ages from 9 to 14 , were not in court on Thursday , but Jackson 's parents and several of his siblings were present . 
Deputy District Attorney David Walgren said the accused had caused the star 's death through negligence and greed , and had essentially been experimenting on Jackson . 
The defense countered that the singer had caused his own death by injecting a dose of propofol while his doctor was out of the room . 
`` They want you to convict Dr Murray for the actions of Michael Jackson , '' defense lawyer Ed Chernoff said . 
Dr Murray chose not to testify in his own defense . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
