Russia threatens UN veto over Syria resolution Russian UN envoy Vitaly Churkin addressed the council in a closed-door meeting , diplomats say Russia has threatened to veto a UN Security Council resolution on Syria if it is put to a vote on Friday , diplomats say . 
Russian officials say they need more time to consult Moscow , BBC UN correspondent Barbara Plett reports . 
Meanwhile , a new draft resolution is to be sent back to governments for further deliberation . 
The wording has already been watered down in an apparent attempt to overcome Russian objections . 
The new text drops explicit calls for President Bashar al-Assad to yield powers to a deputy to oversee a political transition . 
His stepping down is a key part of an Arab League plan to end the Syria crisis , but Moscow insists such a move would amount to regime change imposed from outside . 
Diplomats said Russian Ambassador Vitaly Churkin made the latest announcement at a closed-door meeting of the council . 
Mr Churkin described Thursday 's negotiations as `` something of a roller-coaster . '' 
`` We have a text which we are going to report to our capitals , '' he said . 
Earlier on Thursday , some envoys said the council was close to agreement on the draft . 
Western nations tried to accommodate Russian concerns by dropping explicit reference to the power transfer , but to no avail . 
So they have drawn up a new text and are sending it to their governments to make the difficult decision . 
The sticking point is whether the council should fully support the Arab plan or simply note it . 
Western states insist on the former , Russia prefers the latter . 
The sponsors of the resolution are putting the new text into a vote-ready format , apparently as a pressure tactic to persuade Russia to agree . 
But diplomats said further negotiation is still possible . 
Despite the latest Russian objections , our correspondent says a vote-ready version of the draft resolution - which contains only a few more small changes - will be sent to governments . 
It is hoped that high level decisions can then be taken that would allow a vote as soon as possible , she adds . 
Colombian UN ambassador Nestor Osorio told journalists that talks would continue on Friday . 
The UN Security Council began negotiations on Wednesday after a high-level meeting urged the council to back the Arab League plan . 
Russia , a key ally of Syria , has continued to supply weapons to the Assad government despite the uprising . 
Human rights groups and activists say more than 7,000 people have been killed by Syrian security forces since the uprising began in March . 
The UN stopped estimating the death toll in Syria after it passed 5,400 in January , saying it was too difficult to confirm . 
The government says at least 2,000 members of the security forces have been killed combating `` armed gangs and terrorists '' . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
