03 February 12 17:03 GMT Russia 's deputy foreign minister says his country `` can not support '' a draft United Nations Security Council resolution on Syria . 
According to the Interfax news agency , Gennady Gatilov said that despite changes that took some of its concerns into account , Russia could not support the text in its current form . 
`` This is not enough for us , '' he said . 
The resolution , drafted by European and Arab countries , endorses an Arab League plan for Syria . 
That league 's plan calls on Mr Assad to hand over power to a deputy to oversee a political transition . 
The watered-down UN text drops explicit calls for the president to step aside , which were included in an earlier draft . 
However the document still `` fully supports '' what it calls the league 's decision `` to facilitate a political transition '' . 
Western diplomats say this means that it still clearly backs the substance of the Arab plan . 
It is not clear whether Mr Gatilov 's comments mean that Moscow , which has a permanent seat on the UN Security Council , would veto the resolution or abstain from voting . 
Russia , a long-standing ally of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad , has opposed any suggestion that the resolution could be seen as backing for regime change in Damascus , and demanded guarantees that it would not lead to outside military intervention . 
Moscow has continued to supply weapons to Syria despite the uprising there . 
BBC UN correspondent Barbara Plett says a senior Western official there had expressed cautious optimism that Russia had received the assurances it wanted in order not to veto the resolution . 
Negotiations between diplomats at the UN headquarters in New York over the past few days were described as `` a roller-coaster '' by Russia 's ambassador , Vitaly Churkin . 
In Syria itself , 18 people were killed in clashes across the country on Friday , according to activists . 
Thousands of people demonstrated in Hama to mark 30 years since the country 's worst massacre of recent times - when more than 10,000 people were killed in the city . 
Hafez al-Assad , the father of the current leader Bashar , sent the troops there in 1982 to put down a revolt by the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood . 
Syria has been convulsed by nationwide protests against Bashar al-Assad 's regime for almost a year . 
The United Nations stopped estimating the death toll from the uprising after it passed 5,400 in January , saying it was too difficult to confirm numbers . 
The Syrian government says at least 2,000 members of its security forces have been killed combating `` armed gangs and terrorists '' . 
