TRIPOLI | Tue Jul 26 , 2011 2:51 pm BST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Efforts to find a deal to end the civil war in Libya intensified on Tuesday , with a U.N. special envoy heading for Tripoli and Western powers signalling that Muammar Gaddafi could stay in the country if he gives up power . 
U.N. envoy Abdul Elah al-Khatib , who visited the rebels in Benghazi on Monday , is looking for a `` political process '' that will end a war that has failed to dislodge Gaddafi despite months of rebel attacks backed by NATO bombing raids . 
France and other Western members of the anti-Gaddafi coalition have signalled that the Libyan leader could stay in the country provided he and his circle agree to step down . 
A rebel leader this week appeared to endorse this view , which would mark a major shift in policy as previous demands have insisted that Gaddafi must leave the country . 
Deadlines are approaching for the NATO-led alliance , whose mandate for military action expires on September 27 . 
Hopes have also been expressed that some agreement could be reached before the holy month of Ramadan begins at the start of August . 
Britain and France , two of the main backers of the campaign to end Gaddafi 's four decades in charge of the North African oil-producing nation , held talks in London at which they called once more for Gaddafi to leave power . 
British Foreign Secretary William Hague and his French counterpart Alain Juppe also said that it was up to the Libyan people to decide their own future . 
British officials said there had been no change of policy direction , but the comments were interpreted as tacit backing for the proposal that Gaddafi can remain in Libya after quitting . 
`` Gaddafi must leave power , '' Hague told reporters on Monday evening . 
`` The best way of showing the Libyan people they need no longer be in fear of Gaddafi would be for him to leave Libya . 
`` So that very much remains our position , but it 's also very clear that whatever is settled is a settlement which the Libyan people are happy with . 
It 's for them to determine their future , not for those outside to try to lay down that future . '' 
Juppe , who has already endorsed the idea of Gaddafi remaining in Libya after leaving power , added : `` As far as we are concerned , Gaddafi should renounce any kind of power in Libya and he must commit himself to not play any kind of role . '' 
`` Gaddafi is going to have to abandon power and then it will be for the Libyan people to decide what their future will be , '' Juppe said . 
Gaddafi has supported talks with the rebels and with the West . 
But while he has made clear he backs the idea of his remaining in Libya , he has shown no sign in public of agreeing to the other part of the deal -- stepping down from power . 
While rebel forces have been unable to move decisively against Gaddafi , they have accused neighbouring Algeria of bolstering his troops by turning a blind eye to an arms shipment . 
Algeria denied it had allowed the weapons to be offloaded at an Algerian port . 
In his talks with the Benghazi-based rebel leadership council , Khatib , the U.N. envoy , discussed ideas for ending the war but said a firm initiative had yet to take shape . 
With a diplomatic push to end the conflict gathering steam , Khatib told Reuters he would canvass government views in Tripoli on Tuesday . 
`` We did not put a plan in front of them . 
We discussed the views and ideas on how we can trigger a political process ... to achieve a political solution , '' he said . 
Libyan officials said they expected the Tripoli talks , with senior Gaddafi aides , would cover peace negotiations . 
But they also wanted to focus on civilian casualties and a desire to urge NATO to stop its air strikes . 
NATO has continued to hammer Gaddafi forces around Libya , striking twice in central Tripoli on Monday , and Britain has said there would be no let-up during Ramadan . 
But hopes have grown for a negotiated end to a war that has dragged on longer than many initially expected . 
Speaking to Reuters after meeting Khatib , senior rebel official Mahmoud Jibril said he had underlined that the rebels would not accept any initiative that did not involve the removal of Gaddafi from power as a first step to peace . 
Khatib , a senior Jordanian politician , has said his ideas involve an agreement on a cease-fire and , simultaneously , on setting up a mechanism to manage the transitional period . 
He has not given details . 
`` So far , there is no initiative . 
He is trying to propose some general ideas , see what is acceptable and what is not acceptable , and on the basis of that he can propose an initiative , '' Jibreel said . 
The rebel leaders have given conflicting signals in recent weeks over whether they would allow Gaddafi and his family to stay in Libya as part of a deal , providing he gave up power . 
In the latest comment on the issue , opposition leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil told the Wall Street Journal that it would be acceptable . 
`` Gaddafi can stay in Libya but it will have conditions , '' he said . 
`` We will decide where he stays and who watches him . 
The same conditions will apply to his family . '' 
The poorly armed rebels seem unlikely to quickly unseat Gaddafi . 
Rebels announced they had almost taken the oil town of Brega , but later said that minefields had slowed their advance . 
While rebels in the east received a boost this week when Turkey delivered its first cargo of fuel under a multi-million dollar supply deal , a government rocket attack has cut fuel supplies in the frontline western town of Misrata . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
He has fought the rebels and NATO to a standstill . 
He has effectively won . 
NATO will , in a few months , make some kind of excuse for leaving Libya , and then Gaddafi 's army will move in decisively on the rebels and finish them off . 
Thousands will be executed and Gaddafi will go down in history as the man who beat us all . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
