-LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Following are the latest political and military developments in the Libyan crisis . 
\* The United Nations envoy to Libya and the Benghazi-based rebel council discussed ideas on Monday for ending the civil war but said a firm initiative had yet to take shape . 
\* Senior rebel official Mahmoud Jibril said Monday he had made clear his side would reject any initiative that did not involve removing Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi from power as a first step to peace . 
\* U.N. envoy Abdul Elah al-Khatib said he plans to go to Tripoli on Tuesday to canvas government views . 
\* Gaddafi and his family can stay in Libya as part of a political deal to end the five-month-old war provided they give up power and rebel leaders can decide where and under what conditions they remain , senior rebel leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil told the Wall Street Journal on Monday . 
\* Jalil said rebels would continue their offensive during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan , which begins early next month . 
\* Turkey has delivered its first cargo of fuel to aid east Libya as part of multi-million dollar free oil supply deal with the cash-strapped rebel government aimed at easing shortages , industry sources told Reuters . 
\* The two fuel cargoes from Turkey are worth at least $ 10 million -LRB- 6 million pound -RRB- and each carry 5,000 tonnes of diesel . 
One was delivered to Benghazi late last week and the second cargo is being delivered , trade sources said . 
\* Rebel-held Misrata was running short of fuel on Monday as a fire raged at a storage depot hit by a rocket from Libyan government forces . 
\* NATO said it struck central Tripoli twice on Monday . 
\* The front near Gaddafi-controlled Zlitan , the largest city between rebel-held Misrata and Tripoli , was relatively quiet on Monday . 
Twenty casualties were taken to hospital in the nearby rebel-held city of Misrata and to a field hospital , but doctors said most had only light shrapnel wounds . 
\* Tripoli-based journalists were taken to Zlitan on Monday to see what officials said were some food warehouses and a medical facility that were hit by NATO forces . 
It was not immediately clear whether the buildings were used by civilians or the military . 
Officials said seven bodies had been recovered from what they said was the destroyed clinic . 
\* A group of Libyan diplomats and staff stormed the Libyan embassy in Sofia , Bulgaria , smashing statues and portraits of Gaddafi and declaring the embassy under the control of the rebel forces , television channel BTV reported on Monday . 
The group , led by consul Ibrahim al-Furis , took over the mission 's seal and the safe and declared they are now joining the rebels . 
\* The Bulgarian Foreign Ministry declared al-Furis persona-non-grata and asked him to leave the country in 24 hours , saying it was not linked to the storming of the embassy . 
\* NATO said it conducted 111 air sorties on Monday , 54 of them strike sorties that aim to identify and hit targets but do not always deploy munitions . 
\* NATO said key targets hit on Monday included : -- One military vehicle storage facility near Al Khums ; -- One military facility , five armored vehicles , two tanks and 11 light military vehicles near Brega ; -- Two armored fighting vehicles near Gharyan ; -- Two command and control nodes , two anti-aircraft weapons , three multiple rocket launchers and one military vehicle near Tripoli ; -- One ammunition storage facility near Waddan ; -- Three command and control nodes , one military armored vehicle storage facility and two armed vehicles near Zlitan . 
\* Since NATO took over command of air strikes on March 31 , its aircraft have conducted 16,555 sorties , including 6,239 strike sorties . 
NATO members participating in air strikes in Libya include France , Britain , Canada , Denmark , Norway , Belgium , Italy and the United States . 
\* Seventeen ships under NATO command are patrolling the central Mediterranean Sea to enforce a U.N. arms embargo . 
On Monday , 18 vessels were hailed to determine destination and cargo . 
Two were boarded but they were not diverted . 
A total of 1,944 vessels have been hailed , 186 boarded and nine diverted since the start of the arms embargo . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
