Monday 9 May 2005 00.00 BST In June 1971 , Colonel David Hackworth , probably America 's most decorated soldier in Vietnam , appeared on ABC television and told his countrymen that the war could not be won , that US military leaders had failed to understand or train their men for the nature of the country or the conflict , that Saigon would fall to the communists within five years and that one of every five American casualties had been the victim of so-called friendly fire . 
This criticism put Hackworth , who has died of cancer aged 73 , under concerted attack from his superiors , an assault made easier to sustain by the fast and loose approach to regulations he had employed as commander of a Blackhawk air cavalry brigade in Vietnam . 
His troops wore US civil war hats , and Hackworth , as commander of the unit , later became the model for Colonel Kilgore , the abrasive , cigar-chomping officer played by Robert Duvall in the 1979 film Apocalypse Now . 
Hackworth had set up his unit 's own bordello in Vietnam , and the US army used that and other violations to threaten him with court-martial . 
However , General Creighton Abrams , the overall commander in Vietnam , called him `` the best battalion commander I ever saw '' , and , in 1971 , he was allowed to resign with an honorable discharge . 
He threw away his medals in protest , and moved to Australia . 
In the 1980s , Hackworth returned to the US after his medals were reissued , and his book about Vietnam , About Face , became a best-seller . 
From 1990 to 1996 , he was a contributing editor on defense at Newsweek magazine , where , in 1996 , he wrote a column revealing that Admiral Michael Boorda , a former chief of US naval operations , wore combat medals he had not earned . 
When the admiral committed suicide , Hackworth again incurred the military 's wrath . 
He was accused of lying when he claimed to be the army 's `` most-decorated soldier '' - the US keeps no statistics on such matters - and of wearing an unearned Ranger tab . 
An army investigation found that Hackworth had been issued the tag in error , but had never been given a number of medals he had earned . 
His decorations included two distinguished service crosses , the second highest US award for valor , 10 silver stars , eight bronze stars and eight purple hearts . 
After leaving Newsweek , Hackworth wrote a syndicated newspaper column , Defending America , with his third wife , Eilhys England . 
Covering both Iraq wars and peacekeeping actions in Somalia , the Balkans and Haiti , he became a fierce critic of the US establishment . 
His website , Soldiers For Truth , lambasted the Pentagon 's `` perfumed princes '' , whom he claimed constantly betrayed the ordinary solider . 
He was particularly incensed that Donald Rumsfeld used a machine to sign condolence letters sent to the families of dead soldiers in Iraq . 
Hackworth 's army connections began young . 
Orphaned at five months , and raised by his grandmother in Santa Monica , California , he shined shoes at a local army base , becoming a mascot to the soldiers , who gave him his own uniform . 
At 14 , he lied about his age and joined the US merchant marine ; a year later , he paid a sailor to impersonate his father and get him into the army , where he served in postwar Italy , policing the border dispute over Trieste . 
He won his first silver Star in Korea at the age of 20 , when his battlefield commission made him the army 's youngest captain . 
Commanding the Wolfhound Raiders , he led one attack despite being shot in the head , modelling himself on General James Gavin , America 's youngest second world war general -LRB- played by Ryan O'Neal in the 1977 film , A Bridge Too Far -RRB- . 
Hackworth volunteered for service with the US special forces in Vietnam , and , as the army 's youngest full colonel , returned in 1965 , commanding a paratroop unit . 
With General SLA `` Slam '' Marshall , he wrote the Vietnam Primer , a guide to counter-guerrilla tactics . 
He used his theories about the enemy , whom he referred to as `` the G '' , to transform a hapless 4\/39 infantry unit into what became known as the Hardcore Battalion , driving his men so hard they allegedly put a cash bounty on him . 
But he also won their loyalty , by such acts as leading the rescue of a trapped company while riding on the strut of a helicopter . 
It was one of three times on which Hackworth was nominated for the congressional medal of honor , America 's highest award . 
After leaving the army , he was successful in property and restaurants in Brisbane , and became active in the Australian peace movement . 
He returned to Greenwich , Connecticut , in the 1980s . 
Hackworth 's many books included a novel , Price Of Honor , a volume of war dispatches , Hazardous Duty , and a memoir of the hardcore battalion , Steel My Soldier 's Hearts . 
Serving soldiers fed his website with information about the army 's leadership shortcomings . 
Last February , he wrote , `` Most combat vets pick their fights carefully . 
They look at their scars , remember the madness and are always mindful of the fallout ... the White House and the Pentagon are run by civilians who have never sweated it out on a battlefield . '' 
Hackworth died in Tijuana , Mexico , while pursuing alternative treatments for bladder cancer , a common cause of death among soldiers exposed to the dioxins Agent Orange and Agent Blue , used to defoliate Vietnam . 
He is survived by Eihlys and his stepdaughter , two daughters and a son from his first marriage , and a son from his second marriage . 
David Haskell Hackworth , soldier , born November 11 1931 ; died May 4 2005 Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : 
