The prime minister must accept that most British people want the troops out of Iraq Monday 9 May 2005 00.00 BST Tony Blair insists British troops can not leave Iraq until Iraq 's own police and army can guarantee security . 
It is , of course , the same argument that George Bush uses to justify keeping close to 150,000 US soldiers in the country . 
Never mind the fact that pulling foreign troops out would almost certainly improve Iraq 's security , since much of the violence is directed against the occupation . 
Without the occupation , the insurgency would decline dramatically . 
Let us take Blair 's position at face value . 
Has he not noticed that in Basra and the other two south-eastern provinces where British forces are based the insurgency barely exists ? 
It is true that another British soldier died last week in Amara , a traditionally difficult town , but Basra has been quiet for months . 
Suicide bombers are conspicuous by their absence . 
Attacks on British forces are rare , and fatalities even rarer . 
On election day in January there was almost no violence . 
The reasons are varied , the main one being that the Shia political groups which control Basra are taking the long view . 
They form the backbone of Iraq 's new government in Baghdad and have no particular complaint with the current drift of Iraqi politics nationally . 
Although they are Islamists , the conservative stamp they have put on the city has not been opposed by the British . 
The radical Shias around the cleric Moqtada al-Sadr who strongly denounce the occupation and have taken up arms against it are not as active in Basra as they are in Baghdad and the holy city of Najaf , which is closer to the capital . 
So , although there are special factors which explain it , the bottom line is that Iraq 's south-east has no real insurgency to speak of . 
Why then are British troops needed ? 
What is the threat they are allegedly deterring , and that Iraqis can not handle on their own ? 
Forget the cliches about `` not cutting and running '' . 
Cut the rhetoric about `` the need to finish the job '' . 
British troops could pull out immediately , and neither the people of Iraq 's south-east nor the people of Britain would regret it . 
Bush would not be pleased , but the American president has had to accept that other once-staunch allies have changed their minds and withdrawn their forces . 
Spain , the Netherlands and Poland have seen the light , under pressure from their own electorates . 
Now Blair should do the same . 
How can we say we are trying to bring democracy to Iraq , he should tell the White House , and then not recognize democracy at home ? 
Ten days before the general election an NOP poll showed that 60 % of Britons wanted British troops out by the end of this year . 
Last week 's slashing of the Labor parliamentary majority reinforced that view . 
By accepting that most British people want out of Iraq , and telling Bush we can not remain there purely out of solidarity with the Americans , Blair could go a long way towards restoring the public trust he has lost during the past two and a half years . 
It would not completely erase the effect of Iraq on his premiership -LRB- nothing will -RRB- , but it would at least be a sign that he understands how unpopular his policies over Iraq have been . 
Blair will never admit he was wrong on Iraq , let alone that he lied . 
But by bringing his policies into line with the majority of British people , some of the taint of arrogance would be wiped away . 
Iraq has been a kind of slow-motion Suez for Blair . 
Like Eden in 1956 , he took Britain to war in error , but whereas Eden was forced to resign within three months of his blunder , Blair will have taken four or five years to go . 
For Eden it was more humiliating since what undid him was not the unpopularity of the war . 
The Guardian and Observer opposed Suez , but most British people supported the invasion . 
It was US opposition which undid Eden . 
When Eisenhower came out against the invasion of Egypt , Eden had no choice but to take the blame . 
Blair 's circumstances are different . 
There was no majority for the war before it started , and apart from a few weeks while the invasion was under way , there has been no such support since . 
Ultimately , it is a matter of courage . 
Has Blair the guts to tell Bush that he can not stand beside him any longer on a war which is unpopular in Britain ? 
British troops have been in occupation in Basra for more than two years . 
Their job is done . 
They should leave now . 
