Gulf of Mexico oil spill claims to be ` paid quickly ' The oil slick now covers an area of sea the size of Scotland The man running the $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.5 bn -RRB- fund to compensate Gulf of Mexico oil spill victims says he is determined to speed up the payment of claims . 
Kenneth Feinberg said President Barack Obama wanted to `` get these claims paid . 
Get them paid quickly '' . 
He also said he would `` err on the side of the claimant '' in assessing emergency claims from fishermen and businesses . 
Oil giant BP agreed to bankroll the fund , under pressure from Mr Obama , after the sinking of its rig in April . 
Meanwhile , a worker on the Deepwater Horizon platform - which exploded and sank killing 11 workers - has told the BBC 's Panorama program he had identified a leak in the rig 's safety equipment weeks before the blast . 
Tyrone Benton : ` We saw a leak ' Tyrone Benton said the leak was not fixed at the time , but that the faulty device was shut down instead and a second one relied on . 
Mr Feinberg ran the victims ' claim fund set up in the wake of the 11 September 2001 attacks in New York and Washington . 
`` We 've got to get the claims out quicker , '' he told CNN . 
`` We 've got to get them out with more transparency so that claimants understand what the status is of their claim . 
`` And we 've got to ease the burden on these folks in the Gulf . 
I was there last week . 
I 'll be there tomorrow . 
We 've got to accelerate the process just as the president instructed me to do . '' 
He added : `` With the emergency payments ... you 've got to allow those payments to go out with less corroboration than you would if you 're giving a lump-sum payment that is the total compensation . 
`` For the emergency payments , we 've got to err on the side of the claimant . '' 
Mr Feinberg has said that individuals and businesses affected by the spill can file a claim for compensation for lost wages or profits , personal injuries or even death . 
His latest comments came after BP said that its costs so far of tackling the oil spill and compensating victims had risen to $ 2bn , including $ 105m paid out to 32,000 claimants . 
On 20 April , when the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded , the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- device failed . 
The most critical piece of safety equipment on the rig , it is designed to avert disasters just like the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The blowout preventer has giant shears designed to cut and seal off the well 's main pipe . 
The control pods are effectively the brains of the blowout preventer and contain both electronics and hydraulics . 
This is where Mr Benton said the problem had been found . 
`` We saw a leak on the pod , so by seeing the leak we informed the company men , '' Mr Benton said of the earlier problem he had identified . 
`` They have a control room where they could turn off that pod and turn on the other one , so that they do n't have to stop production . '' 
Mr Benton said his supervisor e-mailed both BP and Transocean , the owner of the rig , about the leaks when they were discovered . 
He said he did not know whether the leaking pod had been turned back on before the disaster or not . 
He said to repair the control pod would have meant temporarily stopping drilling work on the rig at a time when it was costing BP $ 500,000 -LRB- # 337,000 -RRB- a day to operate the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
Henry Waxman , a House of Representatives Democrat who is overseeing congressional investigations into the rig disaster , has accused BP of taking safety shortcuts to save money . 
BP - In Deep Water , BBC One , Monday , 21 June at 2030 BST Then available in the UK via the link below `` BP appears to have made multiple decisions for economic reasons that increased the danger of a catastrophic well failure , '' Mr Waxman said . 
BP chief executive Tony Hayward , giving evidence to Congress , said : `` There is nothing I have seen in the evidence so far that suggests that anyone put cost ahead of safety - if there are then we will take action . '' 
Congress has identified numerous other problems with the blowout preventer , including design problems , unexpected modifications and a flat battery . 
End Quote Robert Peston BBC business editor The other major problems on the rig , Congress has said , centred on the cement job . 
Cement in an oil well blocks explosive gases from escaping , and it appears the cement may not have been set properly on the Deepwater Horizon platform . 
BP said it had had indications of a successful cementing operation and the company that was in charge of the cement job , Halliburton , has said it was consistent with that used in similar applications . 
The BBC spoke to several rig workers who were on the Deepwater Horizon rig and they said there had been pressure in April to work fast . 
Work to prepare and then seal the well was behind schedule and had to be completed before a production rig could move in and start turning profits . 
`` Too many jobs were being done at one time . 
It should have just really slowed down and just took one job at a time , to make sure everything was done the way it should have been , '' said Mr Benton , who is now suing BP and Transocean for negligence . 
BP has responded to Mr Benton 's account saying Transocean was responsible for both the maintenance and operation of the blowout preventer . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
