BP 's chief executive Tony Hayward has been under fire The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico has been made worse for BP by the public-relation gaffes of those in charge of the company . 
A few misplaced words can cause a lot of damage , so why are they getting them so wrong ? 
There 's a chronic foot-in-mouth outbreak at BP and it does n't look like it will be clearing up anytime soon . 
Chief executive Tony Hayward has already been dubbed `` wayward Hayward '' by the media for his gaffes when speaking about the company 's massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Even when he says very little , he gets it all wrong . 
Facing US politicians in Washington last week he was repeatedly criticised for dodging questions . 
One frustrated congressman accused him of `` just kicking the can down the road like you have nothing to do with it '' . 
`` The Gulf of Mexico is a very big ocean '' - Tony Hayward `` There 's no one who wants this over more than I do - I would like my life back '' - Tony Hayward `` We care about the small people '' - Carl-Henric Svanberg He 's not the only one at BP to be struck down by the complaint . 
Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg also attracted criticism last week when he referred to those affected by the spill as `` the small people '' . 
He apologised , saying his words were `` clumsy '' . 
Crises are unpredictable , but they are not unexpected . 
A good company prepares for the unexpected and a good PR team is poised to do damage limitation . 
So why is BP getting it so wrong ? 
`` BP 's communication over the oil spill has often been inexplicable and at times simply shocking , '' says Sharon Francis , chief executive of Media First , specialists in communication training . 
`` You 'd think those in charge of one of the world 's biggest companies would know better than most that one stupid comment travels round the world in a nanosecond . 
`` BP was slow reacting to what happened and failed to express appropriate concern and compassion , which is vital . 
As a consequence , any apology now just seems hollow . '' 
BP initially appeared to understate the extent of the situation , with Mr Hayward saying the spill would not be a major problem because the gulf was `` a very big ocean '' . 
Contrition and reparation are called for , says Professor Stephen Brammer , who lectures on corporate reputation at Bath University . 
`` Say you are sorry as quickly as you can and tell the world what you are doing to put things right , '' he says . 
Show empathy with those affected Often over reaction is what 's needed , not trying to play things down . 
In 1982 seven people in Chicago died after taking poisoned Tylenol tablets . 
Johnson & Johnson reacted quickly , including a huge US-wide recall of the product - some 31 million bottles - at an estimated cost of $ 100 million . 
`` A nationwide recall probably was n't needed , but it showed that the company was putting protecting the public above profit , '' says Mr Brammer . 
It 's also crucial to express empathy and that you understand the people affected . 
So far Mr Hayward 's biggest gaffe has been saying he wanted the crisis to end so he could have his `` life back '' . 
He later apologised and said the remark had been `` hurtful and thoughtless '' , especially to the families of the 11 men who died when the well exploded . 
`` No one cares how the crisis is personally affecting the life of the head of BP , '' says Prof Brammer . 
`` Getting his life back probably means being able to drop his kids off at school again or take his wife out for dinner . 
It was a stupid thing to say when he is dealing with such a catastrophe . '' 
This series of public-relation gaffes meant Mr Hayward reportedly received intensive training for his appearance before addressing US politicians at a Congressional hearing in Washington last week . 
It did n't help , say critics . 
He was accused of dodging questions , the assumption being that he had been briefed by BP 's lawyers not to accept any responsibility . 
But that does n't mean you simply shut down , says Mr Brammer . 
`` Trying to dodge things is ridiculous , it 's never a good reputation-management strategy . 
Even when you do not want to accept responsibility , you can distinguish between the legal and the moral . 
It is never good to use the legal mechanism to prevent discourse . '' 
Media consultants say BP has also suffered hugely because it has too few Americans leading its communications strategy . 
This has been extremely costly because Britain and America may speak the same language , but they use it very differently . 
`` BP 's communication has been done in a very British way , it has been very self-deprecating , '' says Ms Francis . 
`` Americans do n't deal in such language , they do n't see themselves as ` little people ' - they are a can-do culture . '' 
So why did a such a big company get it so wrong ? 
Most companies have strategies in place to deal with a crisis , say communication consultants . 
But that 's not enough , they should have regular `` risk audits '' to make sure plans are up to date and not just `` filed away and forgotten '' . 
It 's also should n't have a one-size-fits-all approach . 
`` I think that has been BP 's downfall , '' says Ms Francis . 
`` Situations vary and companies should adapt , like getting American PR people in to help in the case of BP . '' 
So is there any way back for BP ? 
Possibly , but it will take years of the right action and words . 
`` It 's going to be facing a reputation issue for years , but it is possible to rebuild things , '' says Jonathan Hemus , crisis-management expert with Insignia communications . 
`` Other companies should look and learn from all of this . '' 
Add your comments on this story , using the form below . 
The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
