Kevin Costner helps clean up oil spill The water will be 99 % clean of crude oil after the separation process Film star Kevin Costner is to play a part in cleaning up the oil spill off the Gulf of Mexico . 
BP says they will be using 32 oil separation machines owned by Costner 's company to clean up the water . 
Costner invested $ 20m -LRB- # 13.46 m -RRB- developing the machines , which can clean up to 210,000 gallons of oily water a day . 
`` I did n't come here to save the day , '' Costner told reporters . 
`` I have come to participate . '' 
BP agreed to use the 2,041 kg machines , which separate oil and water using centrifuge technology , following testing last week . 
Costner developed the devices through his company , Ocean Therapy Solutions . 
Once the machines have separated the oil and water , the oil is stored in tanks . 
Officials say the devices can process 600,000 gallons a day , achieving 99 per cent purity levels without the use of chemical or biologic agents . 
`` This machine was designed ... to fight for you , '' Costner said . 
`` It was designed to give us a fighting chance to fight back the oil , before it got us by the throat . '' 
Thousands of barrels of oil are still leaking into the Gulf in what many are calling the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
A containment cap and another device are capturing some 25,000 barrels of oil a day , but the latest estimates suggest 35,000-60 ,000 barrels a day are spewing out . 
The Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on 20 April , killing 11 workers . 
BP has faced mounting criticism for its handling of what has become the worst environmental disaster in US history , as the leak continues to spread despite efforts to contain it . 
Reuters UK Legal drilling battle looms as Gulf spill spreads - 1 hr ago France24 Judge ends oil drill freeze , White House appeals - 4 hrs ago CNEWS U.S. court blocks Obama ban on deepwater drilling - 4 hrs ago FeedBurner BP 's secret weapon in the great oil mop-up ? 
Joanna Lumley and a giant straw mattress - 5 hrs ago Daily Express Lumley 's inventor investment helps oil devastated coastline - 12 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
