US President Barack Obama has appointed Kenneth Feinberg to administer the $ 20bn -LRB- # 13.5 bn -RRB- fund that BP has set up to compensate victims of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill . 
Mr Feinberg has experience in such matters : he ran the victims ' claim fund set up in the wake of the 11 September 2001 attacks in New York and Washington . 
He has said he is not aligned with the government or BP and will administer the fund independently . 
Who will receive compensation from the fund ? 
The oil spill has caused disruption along the US Gulf Coast , affecting fishing and tourism and fouling some beaches and marshes . 
Individuals and businesses affected by the spill can file a claim for compensation for lost wages or profits , personal injuries or even death , Mr Feinberg has said . 
BP has repeatedly said it will pay all legitimate claims related to the spill . 
The firm has set up a number of offices to handle claims and on its own has so far paid out $ 105m to 32,000 claimants . 
How will Mr Feinberg avoid fraudulent claims ? 
He has said it will be a problem `` making sure that this $ 20bn goes to pay legitimate substantiated claims and not fraudulent claims that we 'll have to be very , very careful about '' . 
However , he also said he does not expect bogus claims to be a big problem and that very few false claims were launched in relation to the 9\/11 attacks . 
Mr Feinberg has said he will `` err on the side of the claimant '' in making emergency payments to people in `` desperate financial straits '' . 
There will be a difference , he said , between such a payment and `` a lump-sum payment that is the total compensation '' to a business or individual . 
`` Long-term payments will require sufficient corroboration so we can validate the claim , '' he told CNN . 
Some claims , such as that of a Boston seafood restaurant owner arguing his business has been hurt by the lack of shrimp from the Gulf , might have to be judged on whatever relevant state laws exist , Mr Feinberg said . 
How long will it take payments to be made ? 
The fund has been set up for a four-year period to pay claims but Mr Feinberg said emergency payments should be made as quickly as possible . 
`` I think when an individual comes in and asks for emergency assistance , that person should not still have to keep coming back for additional emergency assistance . 
We ought to give them a lump sum cheque that will tide them over until we can set up an emergency plan , '' he told ABC News . 
He said he hoped to have a transparent claims process set up in the next couple of weeks to distribute money more quickly . 
Claims could be paid within 30-60 days of being filed , Mr Feinberg said , once a system for assessing them was in place . 
How will the payments be made ? 
Mr Feinberg has said the method for handling claims was still being hammered out , but he promised a more transparent process `` so that claimants understand what the status is of their claims '' . 
He has also said people could file claims electronically and would not need to hire a lawyer . 
He said accepting emergency payments would not mean a claimant giving up the right to litigate , but added that it could take years to resolve a claim that way . 
What are the precedents for such a fund ? 
The main precedent is the compensation fund administered by Mr Feinberg for victims of the 9\/11 attacks . 
The fund was created by an act of Congress shortly after the attacks . 
By the time the fund was wrapped up in 2005 , $ 7bn had been awarded to 97 % of the more than 7,000 claims . 
The average award to relatives of those who died was $ 2m ; and for those injured $ 390,000 . 
`` Only 94 people decided to litigate rather than enter a voluntary fund , '' Mr Feinberg told CNBC . 
`` That 's exactly the kind of precedent that I hope to achieve here . '' 
Claimants had to agree not to sue the airlines involved in the attacks and could not appeal once a compensation offer was accepted . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
