Florida-based BankUnited collapsed yesterday , the largest bank failure so far this year , as a new federal investigation revealed that the bank 's regulator , the Office of Thrift Supervision , allowed the firm to cover up its financial weakness . 
A consortium of investors , including District-based private-equity giant Carlyle Group , agreed to buy and recapitalize BankUnited , the fourth-largest bank to fail since the onset of the financial crisis . 
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. said it expects to absorb $ 4.9 billion in losses . 
It is the second major bank failure involving allegations that OTS , the primary regulator of banks that concentrate in mortgage lending , allowed a bank to obscure its problems from investors . 
OTS has previously acknowledged allowing IndyMac , which failed last summer , to conceal its problems in a financial filing . 
A report yesterday by the Treasury Department 's inspector general accused OTS of permitting three more banks to file misleading reports about their financial condition . 
In the case of Coral Gables-based BankUnited , OTS had ordered the company to raise additional capital and it had been unable to meet a deadline to do so , the report said . 
OTS 's senior deputy director allowed the company to raise the money after the deadline and then to issue a financial report stating that the money had been raised before the deadline , the report said . 
The inspector general 's report describes BankUnited 's case but does not name the senior deputy director . 
The inspector general 's office confirmed the bank was BankUnited . 
Scott Polakoff was the only senior deputy director at OTS during the period . 
Polakoff stepped down this year from his position as acting director of the agency after the inspector general brought his actions to the attention of Treasury officials . 
`` We consider these matters very serious and find it alarming , '' the inspector general wrote in the report . 
In the case of California-based IndyMac , a top OTS official authorized the bank to backdate capital last year , according to the report . 
The senior OTS official in the Western United States , Darryl Dochow , resigned after the incident was disclosed . 
A second bank in the Southeast was told it could not backdate capital last year , did not comply and faced no consequences . 
OTS discovered that a third bank in the Northeast had backdated capital last year , but no action was taken . 
