LONDON | Mon Jul 11 , 2011 11:50 am BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Sterling fell against the dollar on Monday , tracking losses in a broadly weak euro as concerns that Italy may be the next country to be affected by the euro zone debt crisis prompted investors to seek safety in the U.S. currency . 
The pound suffered as the euro fell roughly 1 percent versus the dollar , but losses in the single currency were supportive for sterling , as it kept the euro below 90 pence following a poke above that psychologically crucial level earlier this month . 
Market participants said sterling would continue to be jerked around by the euro and developments in the euro zone as finance ministers hold an emergency meeting on Monday . 
Analysts say euro-negative comments or developments would drag the pound lower versus the dollar . 
`` On one side , sterling should be weak as well -LRB- along with the euro -RRB- because if the euro zone is weak the UK could be affected given its proximity , '' said Ankita Dudani , currency strategist at RBS . 
`` But the other argument is that if people are pulling money out of European countries , they could look at the UK as an alternative . '' 
Dudani added that she agreed with the former argument and saw more scope for the pound to fall against the dollar . 
RBS sees fair value for the pair at $ 1.55 , she said . 
Given the spotlight on euro zone debt problems , market participants said the pound showed limited reaction to data showing the economy grew only modestly in the second quarter . 
Signs that the economy is struggling to recover have been dogging the pound , as such fragility is expected to keep the Bank of England from raising interest rates anytime soon . 
The central bank has acknowledged the possibility that it may even consider more quantitative easing if the economy is unable to snap out of its rout . 
Low interest rates and QE are negative for sterling as they add to its rate disadvantage versus other currencies were rates are rising . 
Sterling fell around 0.6 percent on the day to a session low of $ 1.5946 . 
It retreated from a session high of $ 1.6042 after early gains fizzled ahead of resistance at $ 1.6048 , the 200-day moving average . 
The pound offered little reaction to data from the Chambers of Commerce indicated that the economy expanded by 0.3 percent in April-June , and that a slowdown in export demand suggests the recovery is shaky . 
Broad demand for safe-haven dollars , the world 's most liquid currency , kept the pound in range of $ 1.5912 , and a fall below this level would take sterling to its weakest in more than five months . 
Traders said a test of the $ 1.5900 level was possible in the near term , particularly if the euro continues to suffer . 
`` The risk is for a break lower , '' said a trader in London . 
`` It probably needs a lower EUR\/USD to spark the move but with EZ debt , lack of UK growth and no chance of UK rate rise soon I guess eventual downside break is likely . '' 
The euro slipped 0.3 percent to 88.40 pence , its weakest since late June . 
The single currency has been unable to maintain gains above 90 pence hit earlier this month . 
Dudani at RBS said that level would provide strong resistance , and that any rise above that level would offer an opportunity to sell , given ongoing debt risks in the euro zone . 
Disdain for sterling was reflected in the latest IMM data on speculator positioning , which showed a jump in the net short positions in the pound -- bets to sell the currency -- to 31,669 contracts last week , the highest in roughly a year . 
While hefty positioning in favor of the pound 's downside adds to the view that investors are keen to sell the currency , it can also be seen as a warning sign of an impending shift in positioning , which may result in a correction . 
-LRB- Reporting by Naomi Tajitsu ; Editing by Toby Chopra -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
