How Russian and Chinese media justify Syrian support As Russia and China remain steadfast in their refusal to back UN resolutions condemning President Bashar al-Assad , the BBC news website looks at media coverage of the Syria conflict in both countries and whether broadcasters tend to justify this stance . 
Most Russians get their information about the wider world from three dominant TV channels - Rossiya 1 , Channel One and NTV , which are controlled by the state and generally serve the interests of the Kremlin . 
Russian television suggests that Syria 's government is battling a violent insurgency Between them , these channels get around 50 % of the total TV audience . 
Their share of the TV news audience is significantly higher . 
For most of the current crisis in Syria , Russian TV has suggested that President Assad is facing a violent insurgency that has allowed Islamic terrorists and various criminal elements to wreak havoc in the country . 
They frequently refer to the armed opposition in very negative terms , such as `` bandits '' , `` terrorists '' and `` armed gangs '' and they lay the blame for most of the violence at their door . 
Government forces are largely exonerated , and there is little or no mention of the Shabiha militias widely blamed in the Western media for carrying out atrocities . 
The reporting of the massacre in Houla on 25 May was no exception . 
While early reports of the killings were headline news in most Western media , Russian TV initially tried to play them down . 
Correspondents from Russia 's main TV channels go into the country with the blessing of the Syrian government , and do not run the same risks '' Later , it suggested that the deaths had been an `` act of provocation '' designed to discredit the Assad regime in the eyes of the world and pave the way for Western military intervention . 
A report on official channel Rossiya 1 on 28 May also questioned the West 's reaction to the massacre , suggesting that both Western media and diplomats were wilfully ignoring the possibility that anti-Assad forces -LRB- including foreign mercenaries -RRB- had been behind it . 
A regular feature of Russian television 's coverage of the Syrian crisis has been that Western media and the pan-Arab channel Al-Jazeera have been waging an `` information war '' against the Assad regime . 
As the death of Sunday Times correspondent Marie Colvin showed , most Western journalists reporting from Syria are exposed to considerable personal danger . 
Correspondents from Russia 's main TV channels , though , go into the country with the blessing of the Syrian government , and do not run the same risks . 
In the days following the Houla massacre , Vadim Fefilov , a reporter from NTV - owned by gas giant Gazprom - filed a series of dispatches that purported to show how the violence is affecting ordinary Syrians . 
In Damascus , he spoke to a cafe owner who complained of being `` terrorised '' and said the violence was hitting the economy . 
He also met a Russian-speaking academic who said his daughter had been kidnapped . 
Mr Fefilov also filed a story from Homs , where he filmed a boy in hospital said to have been wounded in an attack on his village by `` bandits '' . 
Mr Fefilov said the attack had claimed the lives of 12 of the boy 's fellow villagers . 
In all these cases , it was the armed opposition or criminal elements who were blamed for the violence . 
There was no mention of violence from the government side . 
Radio stations and newspapers in Russia present a more balanced picture of the Syrian crisis , with some questioning both wisdom and morality of the Kremlin 's backing for President Assad but these media are not nearly as influential as the main TV stations . 
China , which has aligned its position on Syria to that of Russia , has been using its state-controlled media to defend its support for President Assad and to criticise Western nations for aggravating the situation and using it to further their own interests . 
Some Chinese papers have suggested anti-Assad forces were behind the Houla massacre Chinese officials and media have expressed concerns over the increasing violence and humanitarian crisis in Syria , but they stress that the international community should not assume that the Syrian government is behind the violence . 
Beijing condemned the Houla massacre , but used the official media to dispute Western allegations of the involvement of pro-government forces . 
The People 's Daily , the Communist Party 's main mouthpiece , suggested that anti-Assad forces were more likely to have committed the atrocity than the Syrian government . 
An article published on 31 May in the paper 's overseas edition said that the Syrian authorities were `` the least '' likely to be behind the killings , because it was not in their interest to provide the international community with an excuse to intervene . 
`` Those forces which want to destabilise Syria so that they can fish in troubled waters are more likely to have been behind such incidents , '' the article said . 
The paper accused some Western countries of `` politicising '' the Houla incident and using it as an excuse to `` suppress the Syrian government '' . 
The official line dominates the heavily censored Chinese media , but many people have voiced different views on China 's increasingly dynamic internet . 
Some have criticised the Chinese government for siding with a dictator who massacres his own people , while others have questioned the wisdom of antagonising the international community , including much of the Arab world , over a country in which China does not have a big stake . 
The Global Times , a nationalist tabloid run by the People 's Daily , has defended Beijing 's stance against domestic criticisms . 
In an article published on 11 June , the paper said that `` China can not abandon the principle of opposing military intervention '' even though Mr Assad may eventually be toppled . 
`` Even if Assad leaves power , China wo n't be embarrassed for sticking to this principle , '' the paper said . 
Writing in the Global Times on 12 June , Shen Yi , a scholar at Fudan University , stressed that domestic public opinion should not be allowed to interfere with China 's policy on Syria . 
According to Shen , China should guard against such domestic interference because `` foreign policy should serve the long-term national interest '' . 
