The BBC 's Middle East bureau editor Paul Danahar recently visited Syria , where he saw a population living in a state of fear and suspicion . 
Here he explains the dimensions to the conflict and why a solution is proving elusive . 
The world spent too long looking at the Syrian conflict through the prism of the other Arab uprisings . 
The regime was just another domino waiting to fall and that is how the world saw the crisis , in black and white . 
But as the conflict became more complex it dissolved into shades of gray . 
There was still the army and the protesters but there were new elements too . 
The scale of the uprising and the size of the country has stretched the regime because it only trusts its most loyal brigades to tackle the serious flare-ups . 
They fear defections will occur if they ask ordinary units to open fire on civilians . 
There are not enough of these elite units to put out fires and then hold ground . 
So the government created militias , or shabiha , for that task . 
They told the Alawite community , from which most of the leadership is drawn : `` This is not a Syrian revolution , it is a Sunni revolution , so get on the right side . '' 
They gave militias guns and they told them to protect themselves . 
Most people I met in Syria believed that while the shabiha work hand in hand with the army to attack the opposition held areas , they are also working alone to carrying out sectarian murders or settle local feuds . 
Some of these militias decided the best protection is the pre-emptive murder of the community next door . 
It is not even simple on the opposition side . 
Frustrated by the willingness of the regime to shoot unarmed people and the world 's reluctance to intervene to stop them some elements of the opposition began a military fight back . 
In some cases they found that the help they started to get from outside came with strings attached . 
That has led , diplomats told me , to on at least one occasion other regional countries using their command and control of some opposition military units to wreck local ceasefires negotiated by the UN . 
It is because of this kind of incident that Kofi Annan wants to widen the group of people dealing with a resolution of the conflict . 
Much of what the Syrian government said may not have been true but some of it now is . 
In some cases it has been a self-fulfilling prophesy . 
Large-scale killings , like in Qubair , are believed to be the work of shadowy militias Some Islamic extremists are now in Syria and they have come with the experience of fighting in Iraq under their belt . 
They have no real masters . 
If you are not one of them you are against them and you are target . 
Damascus was until recent months fairly detached from this violence . 
Now it is a city constantly on edge . 
The major bomb attacks in the urban centres scared some of the minorities and the people in the middle ground towards the government fearing the rise of jihadi groups . 
The rise of the militias has scared them back towards the opposition fearing a sectarian civil war . 
Even those people once close to the regime are now nervous about falling foul of the security services . 
Everyone is scared of a knock on the door . 
Much of what the activists have said may have been true but some of it is not . 
One diplomat told me : `` This is also a propaganda war - you ca n't take anyone at face value now . '' 
That is why the role of the UN is so crucial because despite the shortcomings of its present brief the world needs a neutral eye on this conflict . 
In Libya last year a UN resolution was drawn up almost entirely based on the `` eyewitness '' reports that the government was bombing the population from the air . 
The claim was wrong and it helped create bad blood between the members of the UN security council . 
Syria is paying the price for that now . 
The UN mission on the ground has carried out a dangerous job but the status quo is quietly accepted as pointless . 
Any extension of their mission must include changes to the scope and size of their operation . 
Some in Syria think Bashar al-Assad has not been tough enough Some embassies closed for security reasons . 
Some closed because of pressure at home for a gesture , to be seen to `` do something '' . 
Many activists in Damascus told me this was short-sighted because they now have no-one to talk to . 
Those governments also now rely on second-hand information to shape policy . 
The so-called `` Yemeni Solution '' is a case in point . 
So many diplomats I spoke to in the weeks and months before I went into Syria thought this was the solution to the problem - replace the president and hand power to the lower downs and the problem would be solved . 
Then you hear that one of the chants among pro-regime supporters in Damascus is : `` Send Bashar to the clinic and Maher to the leadership '' - a call for the president 's brother to take over because some in the regime think the boss is too soft . 
Replacing the top tier of the regime might look neat on paper , but some of the people lower down are actually doing the killing , not just issuing the orders . 
Does the world really want them in charge ? 
Finally any solution must deal with the very real fears of the minority communities , and most particularly the Alawites . 
Perhaps 30 % of the Alawite community is relatively wealthy . 
The rest live in slums and survive only because of their government jobs . 
They dominate the bureaucracy yet they make up only 12 % of the country . 
If the revolution is about justice , then justice means kicking many of these people out of their jobs . 
The world tried `` de-Baathification '' in Iraq and it was a disaster . 
As uncomfortable as it may be , if the fabric of this society is to be held together , `` justice '' might have to wait a few years . 
That suggestion provokes howls of protest from some in the opposition when it is mentioned . 
But trying to shut down the debate by crying `` stooge '' will stop dialogue and that will cost lives . 
The minorities need to believe they will have a future in a new Syria . 
The opposition has to unify and offer these people a reason to put down their guns not convince them that they are in a fight to the death . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
