BP to make decision on ` top kill ' plan to stem oil leak Underwater video shows tests on the seabed ahead of a plan to plug the leak The oil company BP is to decide on whether to carry out a new plan to try to stem the leaking Gulf of Mexico oil well , the chief executive has said . 
Tony Hayward said the procedure would begin on Wednesday if considered safe . 
Teams have been carrying out diagnostic tests to ensure the `` top kill '' method is feasible and will not backfire . 
The government has approved the measure . 
Meanwhile , a congressional memo has revealed there were several warning signs shortly before the rig exploded . 
According to the document , BP officials told congressional investigators on Tuesday that a decision to continue drilling after unusual pressure readings may have been a `` fundamental mistake '' . 
BP said the buildup of pressure was an `` indicator of a very large abnormality '' in the well , the memo by representatives Henry Waxman and Bart Stupak said . 
Problems were also identified with equipment including the blowout preventer - meant to shut down the well in the case of emergency - and potential gas leakage in the hours prior to the 20 April explosion , the memo said . 
Speaking on US television on Wednesday , Mr Hayward said : `` What we 're seeing here is a whole series of failures . 
We 've identified ... at least seven . 
`` It 's very clear that much more needs to be put in place to deal with this situation should it ever occur again . '' 
He added : `` It 's clear that this will be a transforming event in the history of deep water exploration . '' 
Questions were raised in the memo as to whether proper procedures were followed in carrying out pressure testing and other activities in the 24 hours before the explosion . 
A worker for Transocean , the Deepwater Horizon rig 's owner , told US Coast Guard investigators he had heard senior managers complaining that BP was `` taking shortcuts '' by using seawater instead of drilling mud in the well before the blowout , according to witness statements seen by the Associated Press news agency . 
BP is under intense pressure to succeed with its latest attempt to stem the leak , after previous measures failed . 
`` I have to say that it will be a day or two before we can have certainty that it 's worked , '' Mr Hayward told the US network NBC 's Today show . 
If pressure and density sufficient , oil and gas flow stops Coast Guard Adm Mary Landry said federal authorities had approved the `` top kill '' measure - the final authorisation needed for BP to decide whether to go ahead . 
Speaking on a visit to California , President Barack Obama said : `` If it 's successful , and there 's no guarantee , it should greatly reduce or eliminate the flow of oil now streaming into the Gulf from the sea floor . '' 
He said the `` heartbreaking '' spill highlighted the need to find alternative energy sources . 
`` We will not rest until this well is shut , the environment is repaired and the clean-up is complete , '' he added . 
If the new procedure is used , heavy drilling fluids - such as mud - will be injected into the well about a mile -LRB- 1.5 km -RRB- underwater . 
Engineers hope to follow this with cement , designed to seal the well . 
The company has said it estimates a 60-70 % chance of success . 
Officials say the method has been used before in other areas of the world , but not at the depths required to stem the oil from the Deepwater rig . 
If the operation goes ahead , it can be watched via a live video stream of the site , which currently shows plumes of oil and gas escaping from the well . 
A conservative estimate of the amount of oil escaping is about 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons , 795,000 litres -RRB- a day , while some scientists say it could be many times greater . 
The US government has declared a `` fishery disaster '' in the seafood-producing states of Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama . 
Ultra-deepwater rigs and other equipment are at the site A massive containment and clean-up operation is under way , as the oil reaches the beaches and vulnerable marshlands of a 150-mile stretch of coast . 
Some workers involved in the operation are complaining of health problems after contact with oil and chemical dispersants , the Los Angeles Times reports . 
The fishermen , who say they are suffering from nausea , dizziness and breathing problems , told the paper they were not issued with special equipment but were simply told by BP not to pick up oil waste . 
Louisiana Congressman Charlie Melancon has urged the federal government to set up mobile clinics in rural area to treat those affected , the paper reports . 
BP has said conditions are being monitored . 
Mr Obama is due to make his second visit to the Gulf of Mexico region on Friday . 
His visit will come a day after he receives a report into offshore drilling that is expected to recommend tougher regulations and demand more safeguards . 
In the tests which began on Tuesday , five spots on the well 's crippled five-story blowout preventer were being checked to make sure it could withstand the heavy force of the injection . 
A weak spot in the device could blow under the pressure , causing a brand new leak at the site 50 miles -LRB- 80km -RRB- off the Louisiana coast . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
