Ban Ki-moon : `` UN monitors were shot at '' The head of the UN has said monitors trying to reach the Syrian village of Qubair , where 78 people are said to have been killed , were fired upon . 
None were hurt in the shooting but they have pulled back for the night . 
Addressing the UN General Assembly , Secretary General Ban Ki-moon condemned the `` killing of innocents '' at Qubair as `` shocking and sickening '' . 
Envoy Kofi Annan told the UN Security Council the crisis could soon `` spiral out of control '' , diplomats said . 
Mr Annan earlier told the General Assembly his six-point peace plan was not being implemented despite having been accepted by Damascus . 
Opposition activists blame the killings at Qubair on pro-government forces but the government accuses `` terrorists '' . 
The White House said it strongly condemned `` the outrageous targeted killings of civilians including women and children '' in Qubair . 
But both China and Russia repeated their opposition to outside intervention in Syria . 
The UN has 297 unarmed observers in Syria to verify the implementation of a peace plan negotiated by Mr Annan . 
It includes a ceasefire , meant to have taken effect in mid-April . 
`` I just learned a few minutes ago that while trying to -LRB- enter Qubair -RRB- , the UN monitors were shot at with small arms , '' Mr Ban told the 193-state assembly in New York . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut The carnage at Houla , and now Qubair , has injected a dangerous new element into an explosive situation . 
The shabiha militia is almost entirely drawn from the Alawite community , the minority to which President Assad and his ruling clan belong . 
Most of the victims are from the majority Sunni community in which the uprising is to a large extent based . 
There has always been a latent sectarian strand to the crisis but this threatens to pitch the country into open confessional civil war of the kind that tore neighbouring Lebanon apart for decades . 
That is the disastrous prospect that looms if the world powers can not find some way of clawing the country back from the brink . 
`` Any regime or leader that tolerates such killing of innocents has lost its fundamental humanity , '' he said . 
Addressing the special closed meeting of the Security Council later , Mr Ban gave several examples of how UN observers had narrowly escaped injury , a diplomat told the BBC 's Barbara Plett . 
`` The secretary general mentioned to the Security Council a heavy weapons round landing near a patrol ... and armour-piercing bullets fired at at least one vehicle , '' the official said . 
A drone had also been spotted overhead on one occasion , the official said . 
At the same session , Mr Annan urged world powers to warn President Bashar al-Assad of `` clear consequences '' if he did not comply with the six-point peace plan , diplomats said . 
Sausan Ghosheh , spokesperson for the UN observer mission in Syria , told the BBC the monitors had been sent home for the night . 
`` We 're here serving the flag of the United Nations ... until now we 're lucky no-one has been injured , '' she said . 
Speaking earlier in Syria , UN mission chief Gen Robert Mood said Syrian troops had blocked access to Qubair , which is near the western city of Hama . 
In a statement , the White House said the killings , coupled with the `` Syrian regime 's refusal to let UN observers into the area '' , were `` an affront to human dignity and justice '' . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague said the situation in Syria was `` rapidly deteriorating '' into sectarian violence . 
China 's envoy to the UN , Li Baodong , said : `` We resolutely oppose the solutions to the Syrian crisis through outside armed intervention or any attempt to forcibly promote regime change . '' 
The latest violence comes less than two weeks after 108 people were killed in a massacre in Houla . 
Harrowing videos of dead children have been circulating on the internet purporting to show victims of the Qubair attack . 
According to clandestine activists , security forces bombarded Qubair , about 20km -LRB- 12 miles -RRB- north-west of Hama , late on Wednesday . 
Qubair is a small farming settlement inside the Sunni Muslim village of Maarzaf , which lies close to Alawite villages . 
Activists blamed much of the killing on local pro-government Alawite militiamen known as shabiha . 
Militiamen allegedly shot and stabbed many people , with some bodies reportedly set alight along with houses . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees , a network of activists , said 78 people had died in Qubair , including 35 members of one family . 
The BBC 's Tom Esselmont : `` The activists are comparing the killings to those in Houla '' Syria 's ambassador to the UN , Bashar Jaafari , denied Syrian government involvement in the killings and said the allegations were mere propaganda and not helping the situation . 
State TV reported that security forces had launched an attack on an `` armed terrorist stronghold '' in Qubair after appeals from citizens . 
It said a UN observer team had entered Qubair and had `` witnessed a crime by the terrorists , who killed nine women and children '' . 
Members of the international community in Damascus say that most victims at Houla were killed by gunfire raking rooms and not in execution-style killings , contrary to initial reports . 
Are you in Syria ? 
Do you have friends or family there ? 
Send us your comments and experiences using the form below . 
At no time should you endanger yourself or others or take any unnecessary risks . 
Send your pictures and videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to 61124 -LRB- UK -RRB- or +447624800100 -LRB- International -RRB- . 
If you have a large file you can upload here . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
