Oil execs in Senate hearing as gulf oil spill cleanup efforts continue -- photos Oil companies stress one another 's failures in a Senate hearing as cleanup and containment efforts continue in the Gulf of Mexico , after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig April 20 . 
Deepwater Horizon was true to its name . 
The giant drilling rig , floating on submerged pontoons , set up shop 42 miles from land in the Gulf of Mexico . 
It was an award-winning rig that epitomized the technological hubris of the oil industry , successfully chasing the hydrocarbons far beyond the continental shelf in what can accurately be termed the abyss . 
The drilling of Mississippi Canyon Block 252 this spring looked like an unqualified success . 
The rig struck oil and gas beneath 5,000 feet of water and 13,000 feet of rock . 
Executives of BP planned to make a splashy announcement . 
The Macondo field , as they called it , held 50 million to 100 million barrels of crude . 
Then came the blowout . 
The gulf is now witnessing a slow-motion disaster , one that looked even grimmer Saturday with the bulletin that the containment dome that had been lowered onto the worst of the oil leaks has been sidelined by technical problems . 
No one is sure what exactly happened on the night of April 20 to trigger this crisis . 
Critical pieces of evidence , including the immolated rig itself , sit under nearly a mile of water on the mud floor of the gulf . 
What 's certain is that more than one thing had to go wrong . 
Some failure of well control permitted a bubble of gas to surge to the surface , where it ignited and turned Deepwater Horizon into a Roman candle in the night . 
Moreover , the fail-safe mechanism known as the blowout preventer , a massive stack of valves and pistons that is the most critical hardware in the system , failed to choke the well . 
There have been blowouts since the dawn of the oil drilling industry , but never a blowout like this . 
This one is the deepest on record , industry officials say . 
A blowout last August in the Timor Sea had some similarities , but it was in much shallower water . 
Capping the unsealed well , said Coast Guard Commandant Adm. Thad Allen , is as tricky as getting the Apollo 13 astronauts home safely in their damaged spaceship . 
`` We have gone to a different planet in going to the deepwater . 
An alien environment , '' oil industry analyst Byron King said . 
`` And what do you know from every science fiction movie ? 
The aliens can kill us . '' 
To extract hydrocarbons from the ground , even on land , is to take on powerful terrestrial forces . 
The oil and gas are in hot , porous rock , under pressure and trapped -- until someone sticks a straw into the reservoir . 
The deeper the well , the higher the pressure . 
Engineers talk of the importance of having multiple layers of controls , or `` barriers , '' when drilling . 
They do n't pump the oil up , because they do n't need to . 
Instead , they shove heavy drilling mud , a synthetic goo , into the well to act as a counterweight to the pressure from below . 
As the ultimate layer of defense they install the muscular blowout preventer with its hydraulic shears that can cut right through thick pipe . 
But sometimes nature is harder to tame than expected . 
The consequences of a blowout can be dire in shallow water . 
At great depth , the consequences are only now , with each passing day , becoming fully apparent . 
A geyser , a hiss , a flash Something dirty was falling from the sky -- that 's what Alwin Landry , captain of the supply ship Damon B Bankston , remembers of the night of April 20 . 
`` Just a dirty rain , '' he recalls . 
The stuff spattered the back half of his boat , which floated just 40 feet from Deepwater Horizon . 
`` What is this , '' Landry said to a crewman . 
The skipper figured that a line had busted and was leaking drilling mud . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
