By PJ Crowley Former US Assistant Secretary of State US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Russia must be at the table for a political transition in Syria to occur Syria may be at a tipping point , as UN Special Envoy Kofi Annan cautioned early last week , following the Houla tragedy . 
But in his discussions with European leaders , which continue this week , newly restored Russian President Vladimir Putin made clear Houla would not be a pivot-point for Russian policy or a catalysing moment for the international community . 
Unlike Tunisia , Egypt , Libya and Yemen , which were resolved in days , weeks or months , events in Syria will grind on for months and perhaps longer . 
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad may be on his `` last legs '' , as US Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice suggested , but his demise will , more likely than not , be a long , painful process . 
This transition , already a tragedy , will unfold in slow-motion . 
Congresswoman Jane Harman says there is `` little value '' in the Syria peace plan There was some anticipation that Houla - where an estimated 108 people were killed , many executed - would become for Syria what Srebrenica was for Bosnia . 
After the massacre of 8,000 men and boys in Srebrenica in July 1995 an ineffectual international response turned far more intense . 
Within six months , a political agreement at Dayton , Ohio , ended the conflict and included a military intervention that enforced it . 
But the present situation could resemble not 1995 but 1993 , when the conflict was still accelerating . 
International monitoring was ineffective , peace plans were developed and ignored and the international community , particularly the United States , was not yet sufficiently invested to stop it . 
Residents of Taldou village in the Houla region say that after an anti-government protest on 25 May , the army began an 18-hour bombardment Some accounts say rebel fighters attacked the military position from where shellfire was coming Unconfirmed reports say pro-government shabiha militia entered Taldou , killing people at home , shooting them in the head or cutting their throats UN observers say at least 108 people died , including 49 children and 34 women . 
No more than 20 appeared to have been killed by shellfire A government investigation blames armed groups seeking to trigger foreign military intervention The first Bush administration hesitated to get significantly involved in the violent dissolution of the former Yugoslavia - former Secretary of State James Baker famously said : `` We do n't have a dog in this fight . '' 
Washington sought to avoid a public confrontation with Moscow as it managed the emerging `` new world order '' that would soon see the Soviet Union itself disappear . 
Former US President Bill Clinton was elected to fix more urgent challenges at home - `` It 's the economy , stupid '' - not abroad . 
Somalia reinforced Clinton 's instinct to keep Bosnia at arm 's length . 
But after the failure to intercede in Rwanda , confronted with the potential genocide in the Balkans , the United States became fully engaged . 
Propelled by his success in Bosnia , Mr Clinton devoted much of his second term to conflict resolution from the Middle East and Northern Ireland to Africa and Asia . 
If Mr Bush and Mr Clinton felt a tail-wind as the United States emerged from the Cold War with unprecedented power , President Barack Obama felt a headwind from the squandering of that power during the Iraq War and the global economic crisis . 
The Obama administration has clearly , if somewhat inconsistently -LRB- much firmer with dictators than monarchs -RRB- supported the dramatic political developments that have come with the Arab Awakening . 
But , while broadly engaged politically , it has presumed from the outset that the US could only affect regional change on the margins . 
For understandable reasons , Mr Obama has been far more focused on ending wars than starting them . 
The exception , of course , is Libya , although the Obama administration went to great lengths to downplay its role , even declining to term the Nato intervention as `` hostilities '' for domestic legal and political reasons . 
Yet , Libya looms large on all sides of the Syria debate . 
For the Syrians , it set high expectations that the international community would provide protection as they mounted a political challenge to the Assad regime . 
Vladimir Putin has indicated Houla was not a turning point for Russia 's position on Syria Nato , backed by an Arab League request and UN Security Council resolution , not only protected the Libyan people but also directly supported the rebel advance that eventually toppled Muammar Gaddafi 's regime . 
If Libya , why not Syria The United States rejects the idea that Libya set a precedent for Syria , preferring to view all Middle East transitions on a case-by-case basis . 
It remains sceptical of what can be accomplished in Syria militarily at an acceptable cost , particularly given Russian and Iranian political , economic and military support . 
The ideal conditions that enabled the Libyan intervention - Arab League and UN support , and Nato and international participation - are now considered necessary pre-requisites for action in Syria . 
Maybe Syria , if and when For its part , Europe is now engaged in an existential economic struggle centred for the moment around Greece , but potentially affecting other countries as well . 
And in the eight months since Gaddafi 's death , two leaders who helped launch Nato 's Libya operation - France 's Nicholas Sarkozy and Italy 's Silvio Berlusconi - are no longer in office . 
Process led by Syrian parties working with international envoy 2 . 
End to violence by all sides ; army troops to stop using heavy weapons and withdraw to barracks 3 . 
Parties to allow humanitarian aid 4 . 
Authorities to free detainees 5 . 
Authorities to ensure freedom of movement for journalists 6 . 
Authorities to allow peaceful demonstrations Europe is sympathetic to Syria 's plight , but has its hands full . 
Another leader who allowed Libya to happen , Dmitry Medvedev , is now Russia 's prime minister and no longer responsible for international affairs . 
Mr Putin , who is , will block aggressive international action that threatens the status quo and Russia 's already declining influence -LRB- not to mention market share -RRB- in the region . 
Voicing some support for a Yemen-style solution , Russia will seek to preserve the Syrian regime with or without Assad and is willing to bear whatever political costs the United States , Europe and the Gulf states can impose at present . 
Given significant divisions within the Arab League , those costs are viewed as manageable . 
Over the weekend US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton , while criticising Russia 's ongoing support of the Assad regime , reiterated that Russia must be at the table for a political transition to occur . 
Now back in the game , Mr Putin appears to be in no hurry to deal . 
Whether or not this is good for Russia , it is tragic for the Syrian people . 
PJ Crowley is a former US Assistant Secretary of State in the administration of President Barack Obama . 
