During a presentation to the oil spill commission , the panel 's chief investigator said he agreed with 90 % of BP 's conclusions about the disaster . 
But the panel 's preliminary report said some BP actions had led to extra risks . 
BP has been widely criticised since the 20 April blowout in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig killed 11 workers , polluted hundreds of miles of coast and led to the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
Fred Bartlit challenged congressional claims during his presentation to the seven-member National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling , countering allegations that BP had made disastrous choices to save millions of dollars . 
We see no instance where a decision-making person or group of people sat there aware of safety risks , aware of costs , and opted to give up safety for costs '' End Quote Fred Bartlit National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling Among the claims , Democrats Henry Waxman of California and Bart Stupak of Michigan sent a letter in June to then-BP chief executive Tony Hayward claiming the oil company had made multiple decisions because of economic reasons that `` increased the danger of a catastrophic well failure '' . 
Criticism of the disaster has sprung in part from decisions made over the design of the BP well , which used a single pipe , known as a `` long string '' , that ran from the sea floor to the bottom of the well . 
Among the commission 's preliminary findings , released on Monday , was that there was `` no evidence at this time to suggest that there was a conscious decision to sacrifice safety concerns to save money '' . 
`` We see no instance where a decision-making person or group of people sat there aware of safety risks , aware of costs , and opted to give up safety for costs , '' Mr Bartlit said in his presentation . 
He added : `` We do not say everything done was perfectly safe . 
We 're saying that people have said people traded safety for dollars . 
We studied the hell out of this . 
We welcome anybody who gives us something we missed . '' 
But Mr Bartlit did say BP had left some important information out of its investigation into the disaster , which unleashed more than 200m gallons -LRB- 757m litres -RRB- of crude oil into the Gulf . 
He added that there were areas where the panel 's probe would conflict with BP 's findings . 
The commission 's 13 key points focused on tests done to check the cement used in the well , decisions made by BP when plugging the well and the actions of those at the company in the hours before the disaster aboard the Deepwater Horizon rig . 
BP and Transocean treated negative pressure tests as a `` complete success '' , the report says , adding that laboratory data should have prompted a redesign of the cement slurry . 
Once the crew on the rig recognized there was a problem , there were `` several options that might have prevented or delayed the explosion '' , another key point states . 
The report goes on to say that BP incurred `` additional risk '' through certain procedures . 
Despite the critiques by the commission , some groups feel the investigators could have come down harder on the oil giant . 
Daniel Becnel , a Louisiana lawyer who is suing BP , said the new findings were `` absolutely absurd '' . 
`` They are pasting over because they know the government is going to be a defendant sooner or later in this litigation , '' Mr Becnel said . 
Billy Nungesser , the president of Plaquemines Parish in Louisiana , also challenged the panel 's findings . 
`` Why cut corners if it is not for money ? '' 
Monday 's presentation kicked off a two-day hearing that is due to include reaction from BP , Transocean and Halliburton , the contractor which did the cement job on the Macondo well . 
A final report from the panel is due by 11 January . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
