WASHINGTON | Thu Mar 17 , 2011 11:21 pm GMT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The U.N. Security Council voted on Thursday to authorise a no-fly zone over Libya and `` all necessary measures '' -- code for military action -- to protect civilians from Muammar Gaddafi 's forces . 
Here are some questions and answers on the no-fly zone . 
WHEN WOULD ANY OPERATION START ? 
Diplomatic sources in France , which favors more aggressive action against Gaddafi , say military action could come as soon as Friday and could include France , Britain , possibly the United States and one or more Arab states . 
But a U.S. military official said no immediate U.S. action was expected following the vote . 
It is unclear exactly how long it would take to arrange the military operations needed to enforce the no-fly zone . 
Last week , the head of U.S. Joint Forces Command said the Pentagon could implement a no-fly zone ` within a couple of days . ' 
But on Thursday , U.S. Air Force Chief of Staff General Norton Schwartz said it would take `` upwards of a week . '' 
WHAT FORCES WOULD BE INVOLVED ? 
Gulf or Arab League countries have warships and fighter aircraft , but have shown little capability to deploy those forces outside their region and Gulf countries are distracted by the crisis in Bahrain . 
Schwartz , speaking to the U.S. Senate on Thursday , said there were `` nations within the Arab League with capable air forces that under the right circumstances might be brought to bear . '' 
Diplomats have said that among Arab League members , the United Arab Emirates and Qatar may be prepared to take part in enforcing a no-fly zone . 
If the United States chose not to get involved , Britain and France probably have the military capabilities to mount a limited no-fly zone or maritime exclusion zone . 
NATO nations , whatever the arrangement , might ask for the use of air bases in Italy . 
An Italian government source told Reuters on Thursday that Italy was ready to make its military bases available to enforce a no-fly zone . 
But U.S. officials believe the Pentagon , with its extensive air and sea assets , would do the heavy lifting . 
WHAT EQUIPMENT MIGHT THE PENTAGON USE ? 
The United States , if it decides to enforce a no-fly zone , would likely be required to pull air assets from Europe and the United States , officials say , and possibly even from Iraq and Afghanistan . 
Some commanders fear that could tax a military already stretched by two wars and , now , aid efforts in Japan . 
`` There are limited intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance assets , '' Schwartz said . 
The United States would likely use bombers and fighter planes , possibly including F-16s , F-15s and F-22s , to strike ground targets , Schwartz said . 
It would also deploy surveillance planes , aerial refuelling planes , satellite communication equipment and aircraft capable of jamming Libyan communications . 
WOULD IT BE EFFECTIVE IN STOPPING GADDAFI ? 
As time passes , fewer people believe a no-fly zone would be decisive on the ground . 
Government forces have relied mainly on artillery barrages followed by advances by tanks and other ground forces to drive back rebels , and NATO warplanes flying over Libya might be unable to protect civilians on the ground . 
In a sign of reservations within the U.S. military , Schwartz said a no-fly zone alone would not be sufficient to reverse the momentum of Gaddafi 's troops . 
It would be a major challenge to enforce a no-fly zone over all of Libya , with a land area some 35 times that of Bosnia , where NATO implemented a no-fly zone in the early 1990s . 
Officials might choose to set up a more limited area around the Libyan rebel stronghold of Benghazi , using a smaller number of combat and support aircraft . 
WHAT EQUIPMENT DOES GADDAFI HAVE ? 
Last week , U.S. National Intelligence Director James Clapper said Gaddafi had about 80 operational aircraft -- a mix of helicopters , transport aircraft and fighter jets . 
Schwartz said there were `` multiple tens of combat aircraft '' and helicopters numbering in the `` low hundreds '' that had been flying `` tens '' of sorties a day . 
But Libyan aircraft , which Clapper said relied on visual rather than computer targeting , is far less sophisticated than the planes and helicopters flown by U.S. counterparts . 
The International Institute for Strategic Studies , a London-based think tank , estimates Gaddafi has as few as 40 fixed-wing aircraft and the bulk of his air force 's equipment is obsolescent in Western terms . 
WOULD THE FOREIGN FORCE HAVE TO KNOCK OUT AIR DEFENSES ? 
There is some disagreement about this . 
Defense Secretary Robert Gates says it would be necessary before U.S. aircraft could mount patrols over Libya . 
Opponents of the no-fly zone say that would be an act of war . 
Others believe pre-emptive strikes against Libya 's outdated Soviet surface-to-air missiles would not be needed and NATO warplanes could wait until Libyan radar `` locked on '' to them . 
Clapper said Libya had the second largest air defense system in the Middle East , with about 31 surface-to-air missile sites and a large number of portable surface-to-air missiles . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
