How Condoleezza Rice became the most powerful woman in the world As Condoleezza Rice prepares to take over the US State Department from Colin Powell , Paul Harris investigates the girl from Alabama who has risen to become the Bush family 's ultimate insider Condoleeza Rics puts a high price on loyalty , but the most valuable is certainly her own . 
Her unwavering devotion to President George W Bush will reap its most glittering reward this week when she takes over the State Department , becoming the most powerful black American woman in history and the world 's best-known diplomat . 
Her rise to the top is a remarkable story of superhuman tenacity and single-mindedness . 
At its heart lies an unshakeable belief in her own ability to succeed and a ruthless dedication to advancing herself . 
It is a story of a life that began in the Deep South of a segregated America and has now reached the innermost sanctums of White House politics . 
But it is a story that is only just beginning . 
For Rice 's latest assignment is fraught with danger . 
She is tasked with bringing the State Department firmly in hand , stifling the barely concealed dissent that marked the tenure of Colin Powell . 
It will not be easy and is likely to spark the most fierce bout of Washington infighting in years . 
But for Bush the job is vital . 
The State Department must be brought to heel . 
It is Rice 's job to win that battle for her boss . 
` Can Rice transform the State Department into an obedient tool of the administration ? 
That is the only question in town , ' said Larry Haas , a Washington commentator and former official in the Bill Clinton White House . 
If she does , the Bush administration will at last be a united and monolithic bloc . 
The last whiff of internal dissent will have been snuffed out . 
Rice is in the fight of her life . 
At the same time , Rice is inheriting a complex brief that spans a troubled world . 
The meat grinder of the Iraq war is an ever-present factor . 
Within days of her taking over the job , Iraqis will go the polls in what will either be a vindication of America 's decision to invade or a blood-soaked disaster . 
The threat of Iran and North Korea looms . 
Relations with the United Nations and ` Old Europe ' are tattered and torn . 
Not that Rice is nervous . 
She has been keeping two offices in recent weeks . 
One is deep in the heart of the White House , the other a ` transition office ' on the first floor of the State Department a short stroll away on Washington 's C Street . 
But , starting this week , she will be in ` transition ' no more . 
Friends who met her last week say she is relaxed and affable . 
Her familiar calm demeanor is unruffled by troubles ahead . 
` She was excited , but was the same old person . 
She was relaxed and happy and had a lot of time to chat , ' one friend said . 
That is the Condoleezza Rice way . 
She is like a swan on a lake . 
All poise and grace on the surface , but beneath the water Rice paddles furiously , ruthlessly carving out a place at Bush 's right hand . 
But who is Condoleezza Rice ? 
When she sits down this week before the Senate for the confirmation hearings that will clear her for the job , the panel of aged politicians will see an enigma . 
She has risen to the highest ranks of Washington by being the ultimate insider who has the ear of Bush like no other power player in the capital . 
Yet Rice has remained firmly outside the whirl of Washington life . 
She lives alone and rarely , if ever , socialises on the ` circuit ' . 
She comes from a tradition of academic study rooted in Ivy League universities , yet is a key part of an administration which has openly disdained such elites . 
She is central to one of the most radical Republican governments in recent American history , yet many liberals like her . ' 
I am a flaming liberal , ' laughed one of her friends , ` but she is so bright and intelligent . 
I just think her views are not really represented in this administration . ' 
That is debatable to say the least . 
Rice is undoubtedly deeply conservative , but part of her genius is in persuading many liberals that she secretly might be one of them . 
Rice is also a black American , yet race is rarely if ever mentioned when discussing her rise to power . 
In a race-obsessed society , that is an enigma . 
Perhaps the secret lies in her childhood in the segregated Deep South of Alabama when her home town of Birmingham was marred by racial violence and dubbed ` Bombingham ' . 
For Rice 's family did not embrace the civil rights movement in the way many other Southern blacks did . 
They came from a different tradition which held that simple hard work , discipline and education would bring the American Dream to black America . 
Her family was solidly middle class , with a father who worked as a school guidance counsellor and part-time minister and a mother who was a teacher . 
She was raised intensely as an only child of a couple who came to parenthood late . 
A young Rice performed in church , took piano lessons , learned to play the flute , spoke fluent French and skipped two grades in school . 
Her parents stressed advancement through achievement , not through fighting any racial injustice . 
Despite everything , it would be wrong to say that Rice has little awareness of racial politics . 
` She has no time for black people who are constantly talking about race , but that does not mean she has removed all consciousness of her race , ' said Nicholas Lemann , a writer who has interviewed Rice several times . 
Several anecdotes exemplify Rice 's attitude to her race and also her ferocity when attacked . 
She famously told one interviewer : ` Let me explain to you : I speak French , I play Bach , I 'm better in your culture than you are . ' 
On another occasion , when Rice was an academic at Stanford , she was shopping for expensive jewellery with a friend when a white clerk made some hostile comments . 
` Let 's get one thing straight , ' Rice reportedly told him . 
` You 're behind the counter because you have to work for six dollars an hour . 
I 'm on this side asking to see the good jewellery because I make considerably more . ' 
Rice was a stellar performer at high school , helped by iron discipline that saw her ignore any idea of rebellion or slacking off . 
` If she had children , they would call her ma'am and salute . 
She has a quasi-military approach , ' Lemann said . 
She was certainly a young woman in a hurry to achieve . 
Her family moved to Denver when she was a teenager and she enrolled at the local university at 15 . 
It was there she gave up dreams of becoming a concert pianist and discovered a new passion : international relations . 
That in turn led to an academic career , specialising in the Soviet Union , that eventually brought her into contact with politics and the Bush family . 
When Bush appointed her as his National Security Adviser she was already familiar to him from stays at the Bush family compound in Kennebunkport , Maine . 
From there it has been her incredibly close relationship to Bush that has defined her continued rise . 
She is the paragon of discretion and quiet service to her President . 
` There is little daylight between Rice and Bush . 
It is hard to think of anyone closer to him , ' said Shaun Bowler , a political scientist at the Riverside Campus of the University of California . 
Like Bush , Rice was all transformed by the experience of 11 September , 2001 . 
That day wiped out any remnant of the ` Old School ' Rice who had spent years steeped in academia and the Cold War . 
` Before 9\/11 Rice probably would have been many diplomats ' dream of a Secretary of State , ' said Lemann . 
` After 9\/11 she was transformed into someone tackling a very new world . ' 
Loyalty is now probably what best describes the secret of Rice 's success . 
Not for her the almost public spats with Donald Rumsfeld that marred Powell 's term of office . 
Not for her the secret briefings to the press or the thinly veiled attacks on her colleagues . 
But also not for her the terrible isolation that Powell suffered . 
When it comes to the real decisions over the next four years , Rice will be at the heart of it all . 
She will bring the ideology of the White House right into the State Department . 
That is why she was appointed . 
` Appointing Rice is bringing the White House into State , not bringing State into the White House , ' said Bowler . 
That will antagonise many of the Powellite ` Old Guard ' in the State Department , who long for a world before the war on terror , the invasion of Iraq and the dawn of the neocons . 
It is up to Rice to steamroller that opposition and make her department an effective tool of pushing the Bush doctrine around the world . 
` She has a huge job ahead of her , ' said Haas . 
` State usually has a severe reluctance to ruffle feathers across the globe - but this is clearly a feather-ruffling administration . ' 
So far , however , Rice 's first moves have struck a note of caution . 
Her appointment of the pragmatic Robert Zoellick as her deputy is a traditional move , especially as it passed over the ambitions of the hawkish John Bolton , who would have been the favorite choice of the neocons . 
Surprisingly , Rice has few critics in the American political spectrum . 
Possibly that is because of her achievements , but also perhaps because few people want to be seen to be attacking such a high-profile black woman . 
One critic , however , is Mel Goodman , a former top CIA analyst and author of the book Bush League Diplomacy , which attacks neoconservative foreign policy . 
Goodman said Rice had been a failure at the National Security Council because she was taken by surprise by 11 September . 
` She failed in her job at the NSC . 
It is the story that people refuse to tell , ' he said . 
In a sign that Rice may be headed for troubled waters , Washington insiders are waiting with bated breath for a book by former CIA director George Tenet , who resigned last year as the agency imploded over the scandal of pre-war intelligence on Iraq . 
Goodman said that an initial synopsis of the book indicated who would be firmly in its sights : ` Tenet 's going to go after Condie Rice . ' 
One thing is certain . 
Through all the troubled times ahead , Rice will always appear calm . 
She has good reason to feel safe and secure for she has the unquestioned support of the only man who matters : Bush . 
When last year she referred to Bush as ` my husband ' it was a Freudian slip that reflected how close Rice and the Bush clan have become . 
When it comes to Rice , the little girl from Birmingham who now bestrides the world stage , she really is part of the family . 
I find football so interesting strategically . 
It 's the closest thing to war . 
What you are doing is taking and yielding territory and have certain strategies and tactics . 
My parents had me absolutely convinced that you may not be able to have a hamburger at Woolworth 's , but you can be President of the United States . 
There can not be an absence of moral content in American foreign policy . 
Europeans giggle at this and say we are naive , but we are not European , we are American and we have different principles . 
You were told in segregated Birmingham that if you ran twice as hard , you might get half as far . 
And there were also people willing to run four times as hard so they could stay abreast . 
And once in a while , somebody was willing to run eight times as hard so they could get ahead . 
