Policemen stop a mother who is trying to access the area of a fire at a daycare center in Hermosillo , in the Mexican state of Sonora June 5 , 2009 . 
MEXICO CITY | Sat Jun 6 , 2009 7:05 pm EDT MEXICO CITY -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The death toll from a fire at a day-care center in northern Mexico rose to 35 children with at least 40 more hospitalized , many with life-threatening burns , Mexican authorities said on Saturday . 
Mexican President Felipe Calderon said he has ordered an investigation into Friday 's fire at the ABC day-care center in the northern city of Hermosillo to find who is to blame . 
As flames blocked the center 's doorway , employees and neighbors used cars to punch holes through a wall and stumbled over unconscious infants and toddlers as they tried to rescue them , witnesses said . 
Smoke inhalation killed many children before rescuers could reach them , with the victims ranging in age from a few months old to about 3 years old , authorities said . 
It was unclear where or how the fire started , although it may have broken out in a nearby warehouse or a tire workshop , the government said . 
`` According to what our people saw , there was an explosion followed immediately by flames , '' Daniel Karam , head of the Mexican agency responsible for health care and social security , said at a news conference in Hermosillo . 
The city of about 700,000 people is located about 170 miles south of the border with the U.S. state of Arizona . 
Calderon said he was rushing medical assistance to overwhelmed medical staff in Hermosillo , including air ambulances and specialists in reconstructive surgery . 
`` I have ordered the attorney general , along with local authorities ... to investigate as soon as possible to find out exactly what happened and identify whoever may be responsible , '' Calderon said in a speech during an event in the state of Quintana Roo . 
More than 140 children were in the ABC day-care center when the fire broke out , Karam told reporters . 
Karam said the center had passed its last government inspection in May . 
The previous death toll given by the government was 31 children , but four more died in the hospital overnight . 
In addition , at least 40 more children remained hospitalized , authorities said . 
About 20 were in `` extremely grave '' condition , some with burns covering more than 70 percent of their bodies , the government said . 
Six adults also were hospitalized in less serious condition following the fire , authorities said . 
At a government auditorium , parents waited silently for their children 's bodies to be turned over to them . 
At least one child was being flown to the Shriners children 's hospital in Sacramento , California , which specializes in burns and has been consulting with Mexican doctors , the hospital said . 
`` Our burn team here has been working all night with the medical professionals in Mexico to triage these patients , on the phone , '' Shriners hospital spokeswoman Catherine Curran told Reuters . 
