Last updated : 29 June 2010 Are you trying to trace your family tree ? 
Have you come up against a brick wall ? 
If you think your ancestors came from Mid Wales , here 's the place to post a query . 
If you can help with any of the queries on this page , email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk and we can add the information to the site . 
John J Anderson has responded to a query made by Lyn Evans : John : `` Whilst not able to help Lyn Evans answer his question directly I am researching the history of my maternal great grandmother , one Annie Evans ' a fine soprano ' who performed with the Walford Family in the 1890 's early 1900 's , married William Walford in Llwynypia in 1904 , and ended up in Fowey Cornwall where they owned the ` picture house ' -LRB- cinema -RRB- Annie was born in Ystradfodwyg or more precisely Llwynpia , the daughter of Esther and Elias Evans whose families came from Llandysul and Newcastle Emlyn respectively . 
She had two brothers , David and Arthur . 
So far -LRB- I think -RRB- I have established that Elias 's parents come from the Aberystwyth area and the father was a William Evans . 
A further link with Lyn 's research is that these Evans 's had a grocers ' shop in Miriam Street Llwynypia . 
Is there a family connection between Lynn and the Evans family I am researching ? '' 
Rosalyn Fisher of Ottawa sent us this reply to a message from Melissa Fountain in Italy . 
Rosalyn : `` I 'm a descendant of the Newills of Welshpool but I do have info on the branch who were ironmongers in Presteigne . 
My Newills spell their name with an I but the Presteigne branch spelt it with an E. Edward Taylor Newell b 1812 expanded his father Hugh 's business & it grew rapidly as the population grew & he bought up land & property & even owned a warehouse in London . 
My gt x 4 grandfather was John Newill -LRB- Nowel -RRB- who married Elizabeth Hekin in Guilsfield church in 1795 & he was a tailor & overseer . '' 
Margi Kelly would like information about a relative from Knighton : Margi : `` I am looking for any information or photo of my 2nd cousin who died ww1 in the Somme , vincent edward hammond , he has his name on the memorial cross in Knighton , and his parents edward and bertha paid for the cross in st edwards church knighton and its still used to date , we have where he was killed and have been back to knighton to lay flowers at the memorial , but i am looking for a photo of his army days he was in the lonsdale 11th , then hereford regt , if anybody has relatives that were in the army where vincent was or even knew of him i would love to hear from you , i still have vincents prayer book and i want to put a finishing touch to our brave relative , like so many others that deserve to be recognized thank you . '' 
David Dewitt sent this response to a query by Robin Barna in May 2010 : David : `` In response to Robin Barna my ggg grandfather was Stephen J. Davies . 
He had a sister named Mary Eleanor and a brother John who lived in Hancock County , Kentucky . 
My grandfather told his children that he came from Cardiganshire , Wales as a young boy . 
Stephen became a Methodist minister in Louisiana , but kept in touch with Mary and John . 
I believe that I have found their parents in Llanarth , Wales . 
I believe their names to be Timothy and Elinor . 
Was your grandmother born in 1825 ? 
John would have been 1822 . 
I have more information if you are interested . 
Your grandmother 's funeral book sounds fascinating . '' 
Paul Lord from Cheadle would like information about relatives from Meifod : Paul : `` My Grandfather , Thomas Lewis Jones , was born in Meifod in 1886 . 
We have discovered that he lived and married on the Wirral before WW1 and settled in Manchester until his death in 1942 . 
He must have attended the local Meifod school in the 1890 's and we have a slight connection to him with a place named Gwerhycil -LRB- ? -RRB- . 
If anyone can shed any light on this time in general , or specifically about Thomas , it would be very much appreciated . '' 
Karenanne Herbert from Birmingham would like more information about relatives from Tregyon : Karenanne : `` Looking for more info on the early life\/relatives of my Great Great Grandmother , Kate T Davies born in 1855 , Llanwydellan . 
Her father was William Davies -LRB- 1829 -RRB- and Margaret Hughes -LRB- 1832-57 -RRB- In 1901 William is living in Tregynon -LRB- Pen y Borfa ? -RRB- 
with his second wife Mary Butler . 
Claudine Cleaver , Kate 's daughter is also with him . 
William describes himself as a road labourer\/foreman on Kaste 's marriage certificate . 
Any help greatly appreciated . '' 
Joan Richards -LRB- nee Eccleston -RRB- has this message for Andy from Australia : Joan : `` Andy from Australia has quite a lot of information about my Grandfather . 
Thomas Worpel Howard , which leaves me to believe he is a distant relative of mine . 
Elizabeth Allen , his wife , was born in Liverpool and her father came from Twerton , nr Bath . 
His name John Allen married Jane Hancock who lived in Box , Wiltshire and they married in Bath on Boxing Day . 
Is Andy 's Great Grandfather William Eccleston ? '' 
Peter Williams from Wrexham is looking for information about relatives from Llanelwedd and beyond : Peter : `` I am trying to trace the family of my great grandmother , Jane Price , who was born in 1833 . 
On the census returns , she gives her place of birth , variously , as Brynderwen , Tal-y-llyn and Merthyr Cynog . 
She married a Thomas Williams , whose father , Edward , was , in 1834 , toll gate keeper in Llanelwedd and whose mother -LRB- Jane ! -RRB- 
came , likewise , from Merthyr Cynog , although Edward was from Abergavenny . 
1 -RRB- Are all of the Breconshire locations , mentioned as Jane Price 's birthplace , close together ? 
2 -RRB- Does anyone have a link to any of the above ?! 3 -RRB- Are there any records that I can access about tollkeepers of that period ? 
4 -RRB- Is there any likelihood of a connection between Jane + Thomas Price -LRB- of Llantrisant , as I kept being told , when I was young that there was a family connection ?! Many thanks ! '' 
John Woods from Somerset sent us this query abour realtives from Borth in April 2010 : John : `` Trying to research family history . 
Got back to John Williams -LRB- mariner -RRB- & Margaret , son William 1811-57 -LRB- master mariner -RRB- & Elizabeth Simon . 
Their children , all sons of whome were mariners . 
My problem is that I ca n't find out anything about Borth ships in the 1800 's . 
Was Borth a sailing center , did it have a harbor ? 
If not where did the Borth men go to find ships ? 
Can anyone point me in the direction of this information ? '' 
Vivien in Hampshire has replied to Derek Edwards : Vivien : `` My great-grandmother Mary Edwards was James Edwards older sister . 
She married Henry Richard Williams and they moved to London . 
They lived in the Ladbroke Grove area where they had a shop selling milk . 
Mary had a large family which included my grandmother who was called Annie Mary . 
Three more sisters - one was always known as `` Aunty Rye '' - I have always wondered about her name now I can see she was called after her mother 's sister . 
My Mum has a photo of Nanny Williams -LRB- Mary Edwards -RRB- which I hope to get from her to copy and send to you . '' 
Dave Kay would like some information about family who lived on the Welsh Marches : Dave : `` I am trying to find any information regarding Edward Hughes born about 1832 in SALOP DUDLESTON . 
1861 census has him as a farmer , address THE CIED , living with his mother REBECCA and 4 servants\/farm workers , one of these was WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT . 
1871 Census has him living at 72 RHOSYDLAN or RHOSYDLAW in the parish of ST MARTIN , married to ANNIE , with sons CHARLES , ARTHUR , ALBERT & HARRY . 
Derek Edwards in Rogerstone has sent an immediate response to Vivien Wood 's query : Derek : `` In answer to Vivien Wood who asked about Cadogan Edwards I can confirm that he died in 1874 at the tender age of 32 of concussion . 
I assume it was a farming accident but an inquest was inconclusive . 
My grandfather James was only 3 years old when his father Cadogan died . 
They family lived at Gwernygof Farm in Aberyscir . 
Cadogan 's wife Margaret and their four daughters Catherine -LRB- known as Kate -RRB- , Elizabeth Annie -LRB- known as Bethany -RRB- Mary and Sarah Mariah -LRB- known as Rye -RRB- ran the farm for 11 years until James was able to take over , age 14 . 
I have a photograph of James and much more information . '' 
Vivien Wood sent us this response to Derek Edwards query in April 2010 : Vivien : `` I too am seeking information on Cadogan Edwards and his family . 
He is my great great grandfather . 
James Edwards was the younger brother of my great grandmother who was greatly loved by our family . 
Sadly I do n't have extra info on Cadogan Edwards but would welcome any help to find out more . '' 
David Harding of Ottawa in Canda sent us this query in March 2010 : David : `` Would anyone in mid-Wales be willing to try to verify that my birth-father -LRB- Richard Leslie Drury -RRB- who lived with his family at Melindwer Farm was confirmed in Pennal -LRB- Church of England ? -RRB- 
sometime during the period 1926-1929 or from school records that he attended school for at least some of that period in Eglys-Fach , Wales ? 
I am really at a dead end and a long distance from Wales . '' 
Seamus K Keays has some information about a query made by Maureen Rees : Seamus : `` The 1901 Census for the Talybont-on-Usk area covered three parishes : Llansantffraed , Llanfigan and Llandetty . 
The enumerators ' paths are easy to follow and one can fairly accurately locate a particular dwelling by using the 1905 6 inch to the mile mao . 
Copies of the census and the maps are held in Brecon Library . '' 
Melissa Fountain from Italy would like more information about relatives who lived inPresteigne , Newtown or Welshpool : Melissa : `` I 'm trying to trace the ancestors of my great-great grandfather , Edward Taylor Newell of Presteigne . 
I believe his father was Hugh , born 1764 in either Presteigne , Newtown or Welshpool , as was his father , Hugh , whose father in turn was either Richard or Robert , born in the early 1700 's . 
If you can help , I 'd be extremely grateful . '' 
Cheryl Jones from Suffolk sent us this request in March 2010 : Cheryl : `` my g dad was thomas f m jones , married gwendoline head , his father was george maurice jones born 1881\/2 past away 1947 , married mary maud lewis in 1909 newtown born 1885 , children thomas f m1914 , lauara k m1917 , john henry , emily mary maud jones , laura has a son still living i think its jimmy\/timmy , laura and florry had hair dressing shops in newtown laura died jan 2003 lived at 6 sycamore drive newton powys in 200 ? 
please please help , i hoping they will have some photos of myself and siblings as my mother burnt them all . '' 
Wendy from Tredington has some informtaion about the Arkinstall family : Wendy : `` Mary Webb -LRB- author of Precious Bane -RRB- - has printed other novels one of which she writes of the Arkinstall family -LRB- Novels are based in Shropshire -RRB- . 
I am an Arkinstall and come from a large family of Arkinstalls - I am also attempting to trace the family history which has to date lead me to Stoke and Shrposhire . '' 
Alison Davies from Geelong , Australia wants information about relatives from Berrie . 
Alison : `` Looking for relatives of Laura Ellen Lewis b 14.04.1889 Berriew Wales , daughter of John Lewis and Elizabeth Evans . 
Siblings Alice Elizabeth -LRB- m Thomas Meredith ? -RRB- 
, Mary Catherine -LRB- m Arthur Bennett ? -RRB- 
, John Graham & Edith Ann -LRB- married ?? Teare -RRB- . 
Laura is my great grandmother and emmigrated to australia in 1910 . 
any information would be appreciated . '' 
Wayne Morris from Port Talbot sent us this query in February 2010 : Wayne : `` About 20 years ago an American came to Wales on two occasions seeking his relatives . 
He spoke on the 6 0 ` clock news which I watched but had no idea that the story he told related had happened in my family . 
He said that an ancestor named John Llewellyn had hung himself on Resolven mountain . 
John Llewellyn was my great grandfather . 
So it seems very likely that we are releated . 
Can anybody help ? '' 
Michael Lloyd Morgan would like information about relatives from Llanidloes : Michael : `` I recently visited Llanidloes and Great Oak St was of particular interest as well as St. Idloes church as this town was the birth place of my Grandfather , Morley Bennet Lloyd Morgan whose parents were David Lloyd Morgan and Margaret Morgan -LRB- late Jones , formerly Williams -RRB- . 
He was born on 23rd March 1880 . 
If anyone has any information on any of the above family , i would greatly appreciate it . '' 
Charlotte Watkins from Talgarth wants to know information about the Edwards Watkins family : Charlotte : `` Edward was born about 1802 in Talgarth and married a lady named Margaret . 
They had 3 children I am aware of : Elizabeth born about 1829 , John about 1830 & Hanah about 1834 . 
There may have been more who died . 
They children were born in Llanfihangel Cwm Du . 
-LRB- Edward `` may have been '' the son of Edward & Rachel Watkins of Talgarth ... I have no info -RRB- . 
John is the next in the line for my husband . 
John married Elizabeth Sykes & I have the long list of their children . 
Their son -LRB- & I have his photo -RRB- Thomas came to the U.S. in the late 1800 's and married a girl in New York , Mary Ann Bates , who was from Hereforshire . 
Their eldest son 's son Rahlp EDWARD Watkins , was my husband 's Grandfather . 
My husband 's father was Arthur Watkins , my husband is Arthur Watkins , Jr. . 
WE would like to track any Watkins relatives in the Wales area , now that I have discovered who and where Edward Watkins lived and was . 
He was a master stone mason . 
Does anyone have any information or way to locate any Watkins descendants in the area ? 
We would LOVE to connect . 
We live in a little Village in Ohio . '' 
Jean Roche sent a response in February 2010 to a query made by John Harris : Jean : `` John Harris has asked if anyone knows John Lewis of Llanllwchaiian . 
John Lewis -LRB- 1805 -RRB- was my ancestor . 
He was a farmer . 
John married Martha Goodwin on 25 March 1829 in Newchurch Radnorshire . 
They had 6 children George , Thomas , Richard , William , Martha and Elizabeth . 
My ancestor was Thomas Lewis born in 1837 , the brother of Richard born in 1841 . 
Richard married Susan and they had 7 children , Catherine -LRB- 1869 -RRB- , Alfred -LRB- 1870 -RRB- , Charles -LRB- 1873 -RRB- , Stephen -LRB- 1876 -RRB- , Anne -LRB- 1878 -RRB- , John -LRB- 1880 -RRB- , and John Gethin -LRB- 1881 -RRB- . 
John does not appear on another census as he probably died . 
There are a few death records for John Lewis with similar details all before 1891 . '' 
In February 2010 L D Best sent us a reponse to a query about Angie Ilich Edwards\/Evans and the Robert family . 
LD Best : `` Rowland Evans age 26 was charged with theft of Morris Evans of Berthyneus farms of Carno horse . 
-LRB- Found in some Montgomery collection As well I am seeking to see if anyone can help me with The Evan Evans circa 1780 family who married Mar or Jane Roberts cir 1786 to find out if they had a son Richard born Ch 9 Feb 1818 Trefeglwys and died 1 Jan 1857 Tysia Ffinant . '' 
John Hughes from Stafford gave us the following tip in January 2010 : John : `` Many people researching their family history in Ceredigion trace their origins back to a farm and get confused by the fact that names of farms can be repeated across adjacent parishes so which was theirs ? 
The Dyfed Family History Society have included many histories of farm occupation on their website at www.dyfedfhs.org.uk that you can browse , in some instances they have photographs . '' 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external websites Patsy from Corfe would like some information about relatives who lived in Llanidloes : Patsy : `` I wonder if anyone has any connections to a Morgan Humphreys born 1793 in Llandiloes died1871 Dolgelly married to Mary Wools born Middlesex 1795 ? 
His son was James humphreys b. 1824 llandiloes d. 1898 Birmingham , a journeyman tailor and his son was van George Humphreys b 1863 d. 1905 in Warwks . 
Morgan is my 3x g. grandfather and I have hit a complete vacuum of information further back . 
Would be most grateful if anyone has any information - can share what I know about my own grandfather and father . '' 
Derek Edwards would like to know more information about relatives from north Breconshire : -LRB- ` p -RRB- Derek : `` I am looking for any information on three generations of farmers in north Breconshire . 
Firstly my grandfather James Edwards , Born 1871 , Battle , Brecon . 
Secondly my great grandfather Cadogan Edwards , Born 1842 , Llandew , Brecon . 
Thirdly my great , great grandfather Cadwgan Edwards , Born 1792 , Llangammarch Wells . 
I would be very grateful for any information on the family or areas mentioned . '' '' 
Unfortunately I have not been able to achieve a connection with any of your postings . 
Perhaps someone may be able to provide information to enable a link . 
In the meantime I have come to a dead end on progressing this line . '' 
Gwilym Price from Cholsey , Oxfordshire is looking for information on relatives from Rhayader : Gwilym : `` I am seeking information on my late father 's family . 
His name was Cyril Beaumont Pryce and was born in 1892 in Rhayader . 
I believe his father 's name was Edward and his mother 's maiden name was James . 
The Pryce family had a watchmaking\/repair shop near the bridge in Rhayader . '' 
Margi Kelly sent us this request in January 2010 : Margi : `` i am looking for the details of a family member my gg nan martha hammond 1858 ludlow , born martha davies , married william hammond 1882 , had a son william 1884 but for some reason she went back into ludlow ways left her son with brother in law and wife to bring up , and william her husband followed . 
Family say she went into a asylum talgarth but i carnt find her at all , i found william again on the 1901 census this time a widower and 2 more children born 1894 and 95 , so she must of died shortly after but i carnt find her , when my gg grandad came back to knighton to settle again he would not speak about her only to say she had turns ? 
any help solving this family discussion point would be great . '' 
John Baugh would like information about relatives from Rhayader and south Wales : John : `` I am looking for any references to James Henry Baugh , born c. 1874 and married to Martha , nee Powell who was born in 1870 . 
James Henry was active in the early growth of trade unions in the South Wales coalfields . 
There was a brother , Joseph Baugh , who traveled the world and Martha 's mother 's name was Catherine I believe . 
The latter married for a second time , after being widowed , into the Trelhys family -LRB- if that is spelt correctly -RRB- . 
Or perhaps the Powell name was her second marriage . 
James Henry 's father was David Baugh , previously a farm labourer but then a coalminer . 
Martha started a shop - a ` house shop ' in Pontllanfraith I think -LRB- ` Baugh 's shop ' -RRB- and leased a second premises to open a shop for David Powell Baugh , my father -LRB- her son -RRB- . 
Martha laso had a sister , Catherine Anne , who married into the Watkins family . 
Her husband was a schoolmaster I think in Rhayader . '' 
Andy from Australia has some information about Thomas Worpell Howard : Andy : `` Thomas Worpell Howard is my great great grandfather he was born liverpool 1856 and was married in 1881 . 
He married elizabeth -LRB- nee allen -RRB- . 
His parents were thomas howard and eliza ann -LRB- nee grace -RRB- . 
Thomas Howard was born 1826 and eliza ann born 1830 , thomas worpell howard 's grandparents were thomas howard born 1796 and ann howard -LRB- nee vicars -RRB- born 1806 . 
He is registered as an inn keeper maybe that is how they know the worpell 's . 
I hope these are the people u r searching for and good luck with your searches . '' 
Gwyn Roberts from Dolgellau has an update abou realtives who lived in Llanwrin : Gwyn : `` I refer to an earlier appeal for information whilst trying to identify my Great-Great Grandmother -LRB- Jane -RRB- who was wed to one Griffith EVANS , b. 1825 Dolgellau . 
I have now confirmed that one of their eight children was also named GRIFFITH EVANS , born Bangor 1858 . 
He was also wed to Jane -LRB- possibly LEWIS -RRB- born Llanwrin 1858 . 
Living with them as a Lodger was one EVAN LEWIS , b Llanwrin 1880 , University Student at Bangor . 
His siblings were Jane Lizzie , Anne , John and David . 
Ther family resided at No. 7 , The Village , Llanwrin . 
Will this added information ring a bell with anyone as to the strong connection with Llanwrin and possibly confirm a relation -LRB- s -RRB- with family still living at the village of Llanwrin . '' 
Malcolm Bebb from Poole in Dorset is looking for relatives from Bettws Cedewain : Malcolm : `` I 'm looking for Bebb ancestors - and descendants - of the Bebb family who were livingin The Frolic , Bettws Cedewain in the 1880s . 
The sons later moved to the Rhondda for mine work . 
Father Thomas was thought to have been at various times a railway worker and a shepherd . '' 
James E Richards , of Old Mission , Michigan , USA wants to trace relatives in Brecon : James : `` Grand father left Brecon to America in the 1890 's Are there still Richards in Brecon . 
Moved to upper Michigan to work in the copper mines . 
Self taught steam Engineer Edwin Richards might have connection with Rycards . 
Looking for any information at all about history pre move . '' 
Bruce Avery from Belleville , Ontario , Canada , would like to trace a realtive who died at talgarth . 
Bruce : `` I wish to know whom Henry Batts was , he sent a letter on my grandfathers -LRB- john henry avery -RRB- behalf in 1922 to cardiff scattered homes looking for his son my father Hampton charles Avery . 
John Avery was admitted to Talgarth mental hospital in that year and died there in 1931 and was buried at the chapel graveyard . '' 
Rosemary Wilson wants to trace a relative from Cardigan who died in action during World War 1 . 
Rosemary : `` I am doing Family History research and would like to find any relatives of John Brown who was killed in W W 1 19 September 1918 - buried in Ramleh Cemetery Israel - his next of kin is listed on the Commonwealth War Graves site as Mrs. Sydney Kate Brown of 5 High Street , Cardigan , Wales . 
I think they had 2 children , Florence and Ariel . 
John Brown is related to me through his mother , Mary Simmons , later Brown and then MacCunn . 
Thank you very much for your help ! '' 
D Emmett from Dorset would like more informaiton about a relative who lived at Hundred House in Presteigne : D Emmett : `` I am trying to find some information about my late maternal grandfather , a farmer William Price , who lived at Hundred House , then in later years moved to Kington . 
He married late in life and had four children , but I believe he may have been married prior to that and had a daughter -LRB- their names would have been Alice and Violet Willice Ann -RRB- . 
I am very interested in learning about his early years , from late 1870s to about 1920 as these years remain a mystery and no one can help me on them . 
I believe he was born around 1872 or may be slightly later and died in the spring of 1956 . 
He was one of eight or nine children , the descendants of which are probably living around that area I would be very grateful if someone could help me with this . '' 
Mari Williams from Wiltshire is looking for information about a relative born in the parish of Llanwenog : Mari : `` I am searching for information about Samuel lewis born in Llanwenog in April 1877 . 
His mother was called Margaret Jones but there seems no record on the census about them . 
He married Anne Bowen & they lived in Cross Hands . '' 
Marnie Slade has responded to Irene Cassidy 's query about the Lower Cwm-twrch area , near Ystradgynlais : Marnie : `` I was evacuuated to South Wales , Lower Cwm twrch -LRB- I hope I have spelt that right -RRB- . 
I was just 4 years old and living in Seaforth , Liverpool in 1939 . 
The people I stayed with and looked after me so well I would like to try and get in touch with as over the years I have lost touch with them . 
Their name was Pitts and they had a son called Alistair . 
My husband and I are now retired and live in Canada and have children and grandchildren of our own . 
I remember going to the mumbles beach in Wales with the Pitts and enjoying the time with them , they were very good people , they used to call me Margaret Cave and not Irene , my second name was Margaret . 
My married name now is Cassidy . 
Any information that you could obtain for me would be most appreciated . 
Is Irene Cassidy still looking for information ? 
I am prepared to enquire , on her behalf . '' 
D. E Cole has sent us this response to a query from John HUghes , Ellesmere Port about Cefn Griben : Mr Cole : `` My GGgrandfather Henry Jones -LRB- a labourer -RRB- was living there in 1853 when he married Winifred Davies , he was the son of Henry Jones -LRB- a gardener -RRB- . 
My GGgrandfather died in 1868 aged 39 at this time he was a `` post boy '' and was accidentally deceased according to his death certificate , I have been to Llanfyllin to try and get more information without sucess . 
, however I did find out that Cefn Griben was and still is a farm . 
My Ggrandfather John Maurice Jones -LRB- child of Henry and Winifred -RRB- left llanfylin and came to Liverpool where he married in 1886 . 
I wonder if your John Jones was the person my John M Jones was named after ? '' 
Carrie Pinkham sent us this message in October 2009 : Carrie : `` I have history on a Richard Charles Evans married to a Mary Jones they had eight children moved from Carno to Columbus , Ohio Where Mary died during childbirth in 1885 He then married a Margaret Hughes in 1888 They had seven children Richard died in Mussoula , Mt 1934 Margaret died 1944 and they are both buried in the Missoula cemetery . 
I do have some history of the children but not a lot My grandmother is Alice Marie daughter to Richard and Margerets daughter Helena -LRB- Lena -RRB- Margaret Hughs was from South Wales it took the family six months to travel from Wales to Sandusky , Ohio via sailboat , according to the stories . '' 
Frances Moody of Westerville , OH . 
USA has a message for John Calvin Lewis of Neath : Frances : `` I am the daughter of Ada Lewis\/Wadsworth & William Wadsworth . 
I have some information . 
I am in Ohio , USA . '' 
John Hughes from Ellesmere Port is looking for details about relatives from Cefn Gribin . 
John : `` I am looking for decendants of my gggrandfather John Jones who in 1841 was living at Cefn Gribin with his wife ann and children john b. 1821 edward b. 1823 margaret my ggrandmother b. 1828 robert b. 1830 any help appeciated . '' 
Leslie Lewis has some information in response to a query by Kevin Curtis regarding the Humphreys family of Llanwnog : Leslie : `` I have some information which may help . 
I can send a hard copy if you make contact . 
I think there may be a family connection as fathers name Edward Lewis . '' 
Barney Larsen is looking for information about a relative from Ceredigion . 
Barney : `` I am looking for any information on my great grandfather Tomas E. Lloyd . 
I think he was from Hales on the Green , Aberystwyth . 
He and his son Jordon Lloyd homesteaded Spokane County Washington , USA . '' 
Gerald Varley from Keswick in Canada is trying to trace relatives about his family : Gerald : `` I am looking for decendants of Arthur Ambrose Varley and Alice Emma Varley , I know they had three children , Lily , Gwendoline , and Donald . 
They all seemed to live in the Haverford Area having moved there from Norwich . 
I beleive that Donald is deceased . 
His daughter Maragret Varley married a David Ayers in 1969 . 
I would love to contact them . 
my name is Gerald Varley and I now live in Ontario Canada , Arthur Ambrose Varley was my Granfathers brother and I am not sure if the Varley side know if my sister and I exist . '' 
Michael Griffiths of Surbiton would like more information about a relative from Hay-on-Wye . 
Michael : `` I would be glad to hear any details of my Grandmother , Nellie Griffiths , who was born in Hay-on-Wye around 1822 and later moved to Cardiff . 
She is thought to have worked for a solicitor of the same name in Hay-on-Wye . '' 
Pat Smith from Australia would like to know more information about relatives who once lived in Machynlleth : Pat : `` My grandfather came to Australia from Wales about 1906 leaving behind his parents John Bell Corbett and Laura , nee Edwards , his brother George , sister Liza Jane . 
They lived in : Paul LLander ? 
terr - Machynlleth , Montgomeryshire , Wales in 1901 . 
in 1909 Liza Jane had a son Arthur Gordon Jones I wonder if there are any descendents in Wales ? '' 
Michael Nicholls from Darlington is looking to trace relatives from Ystradgynlais : Michael : `` I am trying to build a family tree and need any details on my family who lived in Spencer Terrace , Ystradgynlais around the 1930 time , my grandparents were Alfred and Eliza Nicholls any help would be much appreciated . '' 
Shirley Frost from Birmingham would like to know more about a relative who lived in Llanfyllin : Shirley : `` My Great Great Grandfather Edwin Jones was Station Master at Llanfyllin in 1881 and 1891 according to the census , in 1901 he was a Retired Station Master . 
He and his wife Anne are buried in Llanfyllin . 
I have had the following three books from Llanfyllin Library in the hope there would be a photograph of him , sadly there is not . 
1 -RRB- The Llanfyllin Railway by Lewis Cozens - a small book published in 1959 2 -RRB- Llanfyllin - a pictorial history by Richard Kretchmer 3 -RRB- Llanfyllin - portrait of an age by Melvin Humphreys . 
Station Master in those days would have been a position of some standing I feel sure there must be a photograph of him somewhere over that 20 year period . 
I wonder if the Trustees of the History Project of Llanfyllin would be able to help me . 
Derek Beavan sent this information to Julie Dowland of Hampshire . 
`` The Havards are still at Penwern , Boughrood are you in contact ? '' 
Gillian Gear Redbourn wants to find out more about relatives who lived in the 19th century : `` My 2x great grandmother Mary Barton lived in Hanwell , London at the time of her death in 1923 but she had been born in Llandewi and was living in Llangattock when her daughter Jennie Jones was born in 1871 . 
I assume therefore that she had been married at least twice , first to . . 
Jones and second to John Barton . 
I did find a candidate a Mary Jones aged 26 living at Llangattock in the 1871 census with two daughters . 
She was described as a Coal Merchant but there is no husband mentioned although she is described as married rather than widower . 
She was living at the Coal Wharf . 
I wondered if anyone with local knowledge can tell me where the registers for this village are and if there are any local directories or other documents that might provide further information . 
Incidentally we spent many weeks in our caravan when our sons were small on a farm called Noyadd just outside Rhayader . 
I see there was an enquiry on your page . '' 
Neil Gibbons sent us this message in August 2009 : Neil : `` Firstly I would like to thank John S Batts for all the information that he supplied earlier . 
On checking the adjacent households on the census which turned out to be Ashbrook House , the residence of Albert Seacome the rector Of Cusup on the one side and 13 Almshouses the other . 
This places the tool house as John suggested on the junction of Dishpool Lane -LRB- now Forrest Road -RRB- and Brecon Road . 
The Toll House was bought by the council in 1895 and demolished and it seems a new cottage built called Loggin cottage . 
Thank you again John for all your help . '' 
Catherine McMillan from Oxfordshire sent us this request about relatives from Welshpool in August 2009 : Catherine : `` I am searching for any relatives of James and Mary Evans of Pool Quay Welshpool . 
I have found tyhem on the 1881 census living in Stanley Street with George , Walter , James , Isabel and Rose and I think one other daughter . 
James senior and junior were chimney sweeps and I think George and Walter went into farming . 
James junior was my gt grandfather . 
Lyn Evans from Llwynypia , Rhondda would like more information about a relative who lived at Ysbyty Ystwyth in the 19th century : Lyn : `` Looking for information re . 
my great grandfather William Evans 1836-1900 who kept a shop at Ysbyty Ystwyth until 1895 . 
he was involved heavily whith the choir and brass band there . 
he livid in Rhondda from 1895 until his death in 1900 he is buried somewhere in Yspyty Ystwyth . '' 
Andy Hillhouse got in contact in July 2009 regarding Francis Mills : Andy : `` I would like to respond to the message by Pauline Fellows - I am also searching for information on Francis Mills -LRB- my ggg grandfather -RRB- born 1786 in Berriew . 
I have no further information at this time but would like to stay in touch . '' 
Helen from Surrey is looking for relatives from Radnorshire Helen : `` Looking for William Gwillim born in 1795 son of Cathrine Gwillim . 
William was a blacksmith he married Sarah ? 
and they had a daughter Caroline in 1828 . '' 
Lorna Markle from Penticton , Canada wants to know more information about the Mills family from who emigrated to Canada from Llandrindod Wells in 1910 : Lorna : `` My Grandfather , Cecil Mills came to Canada with his brother David Mills in 1910 . 
Cecil was 18 years old at the time . 
He first went to Winnipeg for one year then went on to Vancouver where he told me he work on the `` dray '' . 
He eventually bought a farm in Matsquie Prairie in the Fraser Valley of British Columbia . 
He married Bernadette Edwards and had one daughter Emily Mildred Mills . 
He named her after his sister Emily who stayed in Britian , I believed she moved to England . 
Brother , David , went to Calgary and worked on the CPR Railway . 
He had three children . 
One of which was Lloyd Mills . 
I would like to know more about this Mills family . 
Grandpa did tell me that his Mother 's maiden name was Eliza Morgan . 
They belonged to the Congregational Church . 
They lived near Landrindod Wells . 
He lived until he was 94 years old . '' 
David Williams from Trelew , Chubut , Argentina , has some ionformation about Gwynfryn Hall : David : `` I know quite a lot about a certain mansion of the same name , but it is located to the south of Llangynfelin , not far from aberystwyth . 
The big house dates from 1814 and is still standing , I visited it in 2003 . 
I have pictures of the mansion and of its owner . 
Curiously , it was also a hospital for old people . 
Are you sure that your Gwynfryn Hall is near Cricieth ? '' 
John S Batts has added more information in response to Neil Gibbon 's request for information about a Turn Pike Gate address at Hay in 1881 : John : `` Further to my earlier response to Neil Gibbons ' request for information about a turnpike house in Hay-on-Wye , I have now had a chance to look at Geoffrey L. Fairs ' \* Annals of a Parish : A Short History of Hay-on-Wye \* -LRB- Thornton Books , 1994 -RRB- . 
Chapter 10 deals with `` Transport by Road , Rail & Water '' and refers to the establishing of Turnpike Trusts and the opening of the Hereford to Brecon turnpike via Hay in 1757 . 
Fairs mentions a couple of dwellings related to the turnpike which may possibly be candidates for the house Neil refers to as being mentioned in the 1881 Census . 
In Hay `` the toll house was at Dishpool Lane -LRB- now Forest Road -RRB- on the junction of that and the Brecon Road , close to the Manor Pound -LRB- formerly on the SE of the corner , but this stone-walled enclosure has disappeared with the construction of houses on the adjacent fields -RRB- . 
Fairs goes on to remark that this toll house was eventually bought by the Council in 1895 and demolished . 
Fairs mentions two other possibilities : -LRB- 1 -RRB- the Black Lion Toll House which `` still exists just beyond the bridge over the Dulas brook and was locally known as the Nantyglasdwr -LRB- anglice Nantyglaster -RRB- gate '' ; and -LRB- 2 -RRB- the Cooper 's Hall gate -LRB- on the Whitney road -RRB- that `` was moved about a mile westward -LRB- Fairs must surely mean `` north-eastward '' -RRB- to Pontvaen in 1867 . 
Both toll houses are now dwelling houses '' -LRB- pp.79-80 -RRB- . 
Notice , of course , that the words `` Turnpike House '' are not used by Fairs , but it is just possible that the 1881 Census did refer to one of these toll-houses in that fashion . '' 
Susan from North Carolina , USA would like Julie from Croydon to explain a little more about the Myatt 's : Susan : `` Do you know the name of the surviving daughter that lives in Newtown Powys . 
I know my father had a younger brother Named James who was born in1935 , is this your father ? . 
If this is correct this means that wer are cousins , and perhaps we can share information on the family . '' 
Karen has responsed to Phil Abberley 's query about a woman born in Welshpool in 1922 Phil was trying to trace any record of birth certificate for Olive Jean Thompson who died in 1976 : Karen : `` Birth Registration Olive J Tompson ; September Quarter 1922 ; Mother 's maiden name : Bowen ; District : Forden ; Volume : 11b ; Page 252 . '' 
Joyce Thompson from Dunoon would like to know information about relatives from Meifod : Joyce : `` Does anyone have any info on the Richardson family who lived in Meifod -LRB- Elm Villa -RRB- late 18thc\/mid 19thc . 
George and Janet -LRB- McKay -RRB- were my gt . 
grandparents and were both born in Scotland in 1838 . 
George was a gamekeeper and died in 1895 at Penycoed They had children -LRB- all born in Meifod -RRB- : William M -LRB- b. 1876 -RRB- who still lived in the village in 1895 ; Andrew -LRB- b. 1877 -RRB- who married Kate\/Priscilla and lived in Warrington from 1904 ; Agnes Jessie -LRB- b. 1879 -RRB- ; Alice Elizabeth -LRB- b. 1874 -RRB- married Joseth Wheeler ; and George -LRB- aka Dodd - b. 1880 -RRB- . 
Why did George and Janet move to Wales from Scotland and when ? 
Dave Campbell from Burnaby , Canada has replied to the query sent in by Sara-Lee Salterio from Canada in June 2008 who was trying to find out the name of the community that Thomas Lloyd Dawson was in when he was the First Presbyterian Minister in Wales : Dave : `` My great grandfather 's name was Thomas Lloyd Dawson -LRB- 1848-1939 -RRB- . 
He was born at Llangar , near Corwen in North Wales . 
We have no record of him every being a clergyman himself , but his father , Rev. John Dawson was the last rector of the old Llangar Church and the first at the present church -LRB- St. Johns -RRB- . 
John died in 1858 aged 47 and just three years after St Johns was opened . 
He is buried in the churchyard of Llangar Church . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external websites John 's father was also named Thomas . 
He lived from 1784 to 1865 in St Asaph Flintshire , Wales . 
We do n't know if he was also a clergyman . 
I hope this is helpful . '' 
Barry Evan Lund from Dallas , Texas would like some help to trace his Welsh ancesters : Barry : `` I was born in Cambridge , Ohio , U.S.A. on July 21st , 1962 . 
All I know is that I was born at Guernsey Memorial Hospital on that day and that I was adopted out of the Lutheran Brotherhood sometime later in Cleveland , Ohio . 
I know that I am of Welsh heritage but that is all . 
Please help in any way you could . 
Garry Parker from Caergwrle , Flintshire would like more information about relatives from Llanfechain : Garry : `` Does anyone have family connections with a Davies family living in West Felton , Salop from 1891 -LRB- census -RRB- but formerly of Llanfechain , Montgomeryshire . 
I am trying to find further info on my great-grandfather , Thomas Davies , born 1885 and his father Robert Davies born 1843 . 
I can find a Robert Davies , widower , with children Edith and Thomas in 1901 census but working backwards census data for 1891 has father Robert with wife Sarah and children Herbert , George , Edith , John and David but no Thomas . 
All chldren supposedly born in Llanfechain from the censuses but from family memorabilia I have traced military records for Herbert Davies that say he was born in London and went to miltary schools in Ireland . 
Would be very grateful if anyone could confirm any of this . '' 
John S Batts has written in response to Neil Gibbon 's request for information about a Turn Pike Gate address at Hay in 1881 : John : `` I have looked briefly at a copy that happened to out on my desk of \* Nobody Had Heard of Hay \* -LRB- Logaston Press , 2002 -RRB- . 
This includes a brief account of the first 800 years of Hay , with an addition on nineteenth-century Hay . 
No luck as far as I could see with `` Turn-Pike Gate , '' for the gates mentioned in the stone-wall defences of The Hay post-1237 are Newport Gate , Black Lion Gate , Carls Gate . 
In his medieval account John Leyland -LRB- \* Itinerary \* -RRB- mentions 3 gates . 
The catch is that turnpikes are not established until the eighteenth century . 
So I suggest you find a copy of two Geoffrey Fairs ' books on Hay . '' 
Linda Powell from Merthyr Tydfil would like to know more about relatives from Llanfair Clydogau , near Lampeter : Linda : `` My great grandad was born in Llanfair clydogau in 1872 , his name was David Morgan , he married Sarah Roberts from Llangollen and moved to Merthyr Tydfil to work on the railways I am trying to find out other relatives , his dad and mam 's names or brothers and sisters . 
Registration of his birth in a local chapel or church or his marriage would be useful any ideas where to begin I do not know the area but want to connect with my family roots . '' 
Neil Gibbons from Rhymney in Gwent would like to know more about the Turn Pike Gate in Hay : Neil : `` I 've traced my wife 's ancestors William & Mary Gwillim to Hay on Wye . 
The address given on the 1881 census was Turn Pike Gate and Mary 's occupation was Toll Collector . 
Does anyone have any information on the toll gates or Turn Pike Gate , any information would be gratefully appreciated . '' 
Derek Jackson from Crewe would like more information about a relative from the Llanfyllin area : Derek : `` I would like to find Mary Sophia Jones , she was aged 17 in 1901 , that census claims she was born at Pontesbury . 
She married William Sragg in 1902 , no fathers name on cert . 
She died of TB in 1911 . 
No other leads except a child of the same name born in Llanfyllin can you please help . '' 
Philip Humphreys is trying to find out whether he is related to Chicago gangster Murray ` The Hump ' Humphreys : Philip : `` I am trying to establish whether I am related to Llewellyn Humphreys who later changed his name to Murray `` the Camel '' Humphreys . 
According to his entry on the Wikipedia website , he `` was a Chicago mobster of Welsh descent who was the chief political and labor racketeer in the Chicago Outfit during Prohibition . 
His family immigrated from the village of Carno , in Powys , Wales . '' 
Dorothy Williams is looking for any information about the Gittins family . 
Dorothy : `` My great uncle was a Christopher John Gittins , b. 21\/07\/1885 , Llanfair . 
He was married to a Sohpie L. Rowland .1914 . 
His father was a Christopher . 
He was a tailor . 
He lived in Stone Cottege . 
is wife was Elizabeth . '' 
Derek Edwards from Rogerstone is looking for information on the parish of Llywel in Breconshire . 
Derek : `` I am looking for the Edwards family in approximately 1800 - 1880 . 
I 'm also interested in information about Capel Horeb in the parish and the nearby farm of Glyn Foel . '' 
James Jackson from Tweedbank would like to know more about a farm in Guilsfield : James : `` My family on my mother 's side owned a farm called Begdin Farm in Guilsfield . 
The farm was owned by the Drury family for much of the 1800 's . 
I am trying to find out if anyone would have any information on the farm . 
I would be grateful for any infomation on the farm . '' 
Kim wants to know about a place name near Llangunllo : Kim : `` I am trying to locate a place name on my Great Great Aunt 's marriage certificate . 
The Chapel was the Gravel Baptist nr Llangunllo in Radnor\/Hereford . 
They lived in `` Hencefa '' ? 
The nearest place name I can find is Hen Gefn , would anyone know if this is right please . '' 
I have managed to get back to a John Beavan born c1800 , who had a son Anthony married to Sophia Morris of Hanging Hill Radnorshire . 
They had a son , also called John who married a Mary Bass from Shropshire , John and Mary were my Great Grandparents . 
At some point they had moved to York , and were in the tailoring trade . 
My Grandfather left York in the early 1920 's and moved his family to Coventry , where my father was born . 
My father new very little about his background , and now he is no longer with us , I have no way of finding out any more information , and would be grateful if anyone could fill in any gaps for me . 
From a contact on Genes Reunited , I think the Beavans were variously involved in tailoring , baking and possibly butchers ! 
Many thanks for any information anyone can give me . '' 
John Harris is trying to trace information about relatives from Llangyniew : John : `` I am trying to trace my Great , Great , Great , grandparents , Thomas Harries and Mary Parry , they were married on the 2nd of August 1813 in Llangyniew and had four children that I know of , Thomas -LRB- 1814 -RRB- , Abraham -LRB- 1819 -RRB- , my great , great , grandfather , Sarah -LRB- 1821 -RRB- , and Mary -LRB- 1826 -RRB- . 
Thomas was a weaver and was living at Cefn Llwydd . 
I have searched the Llangyniew Parish Records and have found a number of Harries but unfortunately Thomas is not listed . 
Can anyone help please . '' 
Jean Ventris wants information about Llanbrynmair : Jean : `` Does anybody have any information about a place called The Lodge , Llanbrynmair . 
I am researching my family history and know that the gentry used this place in the mid 1940s around the time of the glorious 12th as they came up to do pheasant shooting . 
I know some of their names , ie Mr Palethorpe of the sausage firm , Mr Brinton , Mr Astley Jones , and a few more . 
The Lodge was on the Sir Watkin Williams Wynne estate . '' 
Andrea Phillips has sent a response to a query sent in by Keith Evans : Andrea : `` Hello Keith . 
This afternoon my Stepfather in law -LRB- complicated ! -RRB- 
was sorting out some papers and gave me a picture telling me that this lady was the first postwoman in Monmouthshire . 
I said that I wondered what her name was and he thought that it was Evans , and that there was a link to something to do with shoes , perhaps a menders . 
Please reply if you would like to see the photo as I really do n't know if this is relevant to your search . '' 
Maggie Morris from London would like to find out more about relatives who lived at Llangadfan . 
Maggie : `` I have traced my husband 's family to 1786 in Llangadfan . 
He is interested in finding out more about his father 's family . 
Are there any records , or transcripts of BMD 's in the area which would help us in our search ? 
I would be grateful for further information . 
Sincerely Maggie Morris . '' 
Scott Powell from Pennsylvania wanted information about relatives who emigrated to Pennsylvania in the 19th century : Scott : `` The following information is provided in an attempt to locate the area from which my possible GG Grandfather and GG Grandmother hailed from in Wales . 
John A. Powell born in 1814 , Wales and his wife Mary born in 1828 -LRB- it is unknown if Mary is , in fact , from Wales -RRB- . 
I have traced John and Mary as far back as 1860 in the United States , Pennsylvania , Danville , Montour -LRB- or very possible earlier Columbia -RRB- County . 
I have located a US Census form showing John Powell , Pudler and his wife Mary living in Danville . 
They had 4 children in 1860 , Elizabeth -LRB- 1848 -RRB- , Mary -LRB- 1850 -RRB- , John -LRB- Jr. , 1856 -RRB- , and Thomas -LRB- 1860-just born -RRB- . 
My G Grand Father , George Lincoln Powell -LRB- known for certain -RRB- was also born there in 1862 and does not appear on this census form . 
A second form in my possession is a Petition for Citizenship in where John A. Powell , arriving in USA , New York on July 7 , 1842 is a subject of the Victoria Queen of Great Britain and Ireland . 
The age for John is correct as is the place of residence . 
This in mind it is safe to say that the John A. on the US Census form and the Petition are the same man . 
I need to connect John A. Powell and George L. Powell . 
Since George L. Powell had not been born yet in 1860 I can not do this in the absence of other documents and I have looked high and low . 
Any other help I can provide -LRB- on relative beyond John A -RRB- I will be more then happy too . 
The Powell family of Chester Pennsylvania thank you for any and all information you can provide . '' 
Sue Nicholls from Suffolk wants to know more information about relatives who lived at Glynfach : Sue : `` I am searching for any information on John Nichols born abt 1795 Glynfach Breckonshire . 
I have him and his family on the 41 census onwards , but ca n't find anything on him before 1841 . 
There are only two Nichols families on the 41 census both born Glynfach , John and a Thomas Nichols , that l think must have been his brother . 
On the 51 census Thomas Nichols has his Father listed as Thomas Nichols born 1775 Boughrood Radnorshire . 
I would be very grateful for any information . '' 
Edward Thomas of Beltsville , Maryland , USA wants details about relatived who live in Aberystwyth in the 19th century : Edward : `` I am searching for information about the children of Edward and Margaret Thomas , Married 1824 at Aberystruth , Wales , and buried in the churchyard of Ebenezer Congretional Church at Pontnewynydd . '' 
June Tribbick nee Edwards from Perth , Australia , is looking for information about relatives from the Llanidloes\/Trefeglwys area : June : `` My Grandfather Richard Edwards b1882 Trefeglwys -LRB- lived Brynbedw and Caemegan -RRB- and my Grandmother Mary Mills b1882 Llywn Crwn Llanidloes were married 1907 Manledd Chapel Llanidloes . 
They migrated to Australia in 1910 with two small children Phyllis and Arthur , and had another 6 children . 
Richard had 5 sisters - Maggy May Edwards married a William Henry Mackie . 
Mary had 2 brothers and 5 sisters - Ellen -LRB- Nell -RRB- MILLS married Thomas Richard -LRB- son -RRB- -LRB- poss 1894 -RRB- and Catherine Mills married Pryce Breese -LRB- poss 1902 -RRB- I am looking for descendants of these families . 
Can anyone please help ? '' 
Julie from Croydon , Surrey has some information about the Myatt family . 
Julie : `` I think Andrew and Hannah Myatt that Susan mentions are my grandparents . 
My father was james Pryce and he had a older brother named John . 
My Father died in 2007 and now Hannah and Andrew have one surviving daughter who lives in Newtwon , Powys . '' 
M Hosking would like information on Cefn Vaesdre : `` I am researching my ancestral line . 
Ashton line Trefeglwys succesfully , but my grandmother Annie Rebecca Evans came from Kerry -1901 census records family living Cefn Vaesdre . 
Please , can you offer any information re Cefn Vaesdre ! '' 
Susan : `` I am looking for information about Andrew and Hannah Myatt who lived in Caersws from abt 1935 till Hannahs , death in 1968 , I am a family member now living in the USA My Father was John Myatt . '' 
Wendy Parry from Berkshire wants to trace relatived from the Newtown and Llanidloes areas : Wendy : `` My great grandfather , David Parry -LRB- b Newtown c1831\/6 -RRB- married Sarah Meddins -LRB- b 1825 -RRB- from Kerry and moved to Llanidloes where he was a cooper . 
They had children Richard -LRB- Meddins -RRB- , John , David Charles , George , Edward , Margaret , Mary Jane and Llewellyn . 
Most of the family were coopers although Llewellyn was a tailor and moved to London -LRB- married , I think , Margaret Williams , a nurse , from Llanidloes -RRB- . 
Edward married Alice Spencer from the Shifnal area of Shropshire and moved to Abingdon about 1897 . 
George moved to Welshpool where I believe he married Anna Humphreys and carried on the business of a cooper at Church Bank . 
I came across a photo of his son , Charles , in an archived item from the Welshpool newspaper in 1962 when he won a car . 
His business was as a builder at this stage , still at Church Bank . 
I think he was married to Martha Lloyd . 
Margaret married Ernest Bird , moved to Ilford and had a daughter , Muriel Dorothy . 
I have been looking for some connection to my Parry ancestors for a couple of years now and have completely drawn a blank . 
I can move no further forward than the 1901 census . 
If there is anyone with information or distantly related , please contact . 
I know there have been various members of the Meddins round Kerry for several hundred years but I have not yet found a common link . 
None of Sarah Meddins ' family crop up on any censuses prior to her marriage to my great grandfather . '' 
Leigh McKinnon is looking for information about realtives from Breconshire : Leigh : `` I am looking for any information on Thomas Phillips -LRB- b. 1781 Glasbury , Breconshire\/Radnorshire -RRB- his wife Elinor Davies -LRB- b. 1789 Defynnog , Breconshire , d. after 1871 , Llanfihangel Talyllyn ? 
, Breconshire -RRB- and their children Margaret -LRB- b. 1824 -RRB- , Mary -LRB- b. 1827 -RRB- , Elizabeth -LRB- Later Griffiths - b. 1827 - d. 1905 Kangaroo Flat , Victoria , Australia -RRB- , Elinor -LRB- b. 1830 -RRB- , and Sarah -LRB- b. 1833 -RRB- . 
Thanks in advance . '' 
John Harris sent a question to Marlene Hand in January 2009 . 
: John : `` Would you have the details of when and where Mary . 
E. was married and what her married name was ? 
If you have any information about her please let me know as I am sure it will help in proving she is part of the same Humphreys family that I am trying to trace . 
Brian Powell from Sleaford would like some information about locations at Llanbister : Brian : `` On a marriage cerificate from church of Llanbister it states residing at Upper Gurddfady and Pantyyronen , I am unable to find places . 
I am researching Evan and George and Charlotte Hardwicke from the Llanbister area regards . '' 
John Harris provided a quick response to Marlene Hand 's question below . 
John : `` Mary E Humphreys was the oldest of four sisters , Martha Maude 1881 , Minnie Louisa 1885 , and Margaret 1889 . 
Their parents were John Humphreys and Sarah Jones , they were married in Newtown in 1875 . 
Martha Maude married Herbert Gwilt in 1898 and Minnie Louisa married John Lewis in 1902 . 
John Humphreys died in 1889 and Sarah married Thomas Jones in the same year and were living at the Moat Farm Llandinam . 
My search for John Lewis and Minnie Louisa has hit a brick wall in 1912 . 
Hope this information is of use to you . '' 
Marlene Handl would like some information about Mary E Humphreys , born in 1876 : Marlene : `` John Harris is trying to resolve his family mystery . 
He mentions Mary E Humphrey born 1876 . 
I am looking for my gran who is Mary E Humphreys also born 1876 . 
Would John have any info on her ? '' 
David -LRB- Drury -RRB- Harding would like information about relatives from near Aberystwyth . 
`` I am looking for information about my Grandfather , Harry Drury and his 4 sons during the time they lived at Melindwr Farm , near Aberystwyth -LRB- 1926-1929 -RRB- . 
They came there from Prees , Shropshire and emmigrated to Canada in 1930 . 
His sons ' names were Noel , Leslie , Selwyn and Wilfred . 
I was born in Canada in 1941 , Leslie being my birth - father . 
Leslie attended school in Eglwys-Fach during some of this time and was confirmed in Pennal -LRB- Church of England ? -RRB- . 
I am also looking for information on the daughter , or her children , that my birth-father had , during the time he lived there or who was born after he emigrated to Canada . 
She would be my half-sister . '' '' 
David Hankey from Great Easton in Leicestershire is looking for any information regarding his great grandmother Caroline Morris from Churchstoke , Shropshire who married his great grandfather John Wait at Forden in 1883 . 
David : `` They moved to Lichfield , Staffordshire where their two sons where born . 
John , a Cabinet Maker , along with his brother Francis Martin Wait started the business of F.M. & J. Wait in Lichfield . 
Caroline is shown on the 1891 Census but not the 1901 . 
Any information would be greatly appreciated . '' 
Carrol Drew of Mississauga , ON , Canada provided the following information on 30 November 2008 about the descendants of Thomas Drew and Margaret Sheen : Carol : `` Descendants of Thomas Drew , b 1788 Llanbadarn Fawr , and Margaret Sheen , b 1797 Bettws Disserth , will be meeting in the Builth Wells , Powys area , on Saturday 15 August 2009 . 
Further details regarding venue and a proposed schedule will be forwarded to those expressing interest . 
Please indicate your interest by December 31 , 2008 . 
We will contact you for number attending . 
Let 's get acquainted or even re-acquainted ! 
If you know others who may be interested , whatever their relationship to Thomas and Margaret , please pass this along to them ! '' 
Gillian Rudge has a response to a query by Mrs Oliver from Wigan Gillian : `` There is a Mary Ann Wynn in the 1861 census . 
she is aged 18 years and born in Meifod . 
Working as a housemaid on a farm in Llandrinio . 
In the 1851 census there is Mary Ann Wynn aged 8 years living with her parents at Nantymeichied , Meifod -LRB- Myfod -RRB- Montgomeryshire . 
Parents Samuel Wynn aged 50 years , born Llangyniew Mont. and farming 10 acres . 
Mother Mary Wynn , aged 48 born Llangedwyn . 
Mont. and an older brother William , aged 15 years . 
born Meifod and working on the farm . 
Hope this helps ! '' 
Simon Hughes from Aberystwyth has sent us information about JJ Attwood . 
Simon : `` JJ Attwood was involved with a series of lead mines in north Cardiganshire and this involvement has been much written about . 
The bank was sold in the early 1850s when he became more involved with mining business , sometimes in association with a Mr Spooner under the name of Spooner , Attwood and Co. . 
He also acted as solicitor to Aberystwyth Borough Council for a number of years . 
Some of his papers survive in The National Library as does his beautiful mansion in Llanbadarn . '' 
Jackie Rees would like information about relatives from Builth Wells : Jackie : `` I am trying to find out the family history of the late Rowland Price my grandfather who served with the South Wales Borderers in India born in Builth Wells ? 
late 1800s early 1900s later moved to Aberdare where he died 1953-56 . '' 
Pauline Fellows wants more information about relatives from Berriew : Pauline : `` I 'm trying to find anything about Francis Mills , born 1786 , Edward Mills , born 1826 -LRB- moved to Shropshire -RRB- , his daughter Mary , born 1851 all born at Berriew . 
Mary married a John Smith at Wem and lived at Grinshall . 
They had 7 daughters . '' 
Mrs Oliver from Wigan would like more information about relatives from Meifod : Mrs Oliver : `` My grt grt grandmother is listed on the 1881 census as being born in MEIFOD -LRB- f.c. -RRB- wales her name was mary ann wynn . 
In 1868 she married my grt grt grandfather richard darbyshire in wigan lancashire . 
Any help with the wynn family would be appreciated . '' 
John Lockett from Stoke on Trent would like more information about relatives who lived in Montgomeryshire in the 19th century : John : `` Trying to findout more about my greatgrandparents , Mary Eleanor Sumner born1892 Llandyssil , Montgomeryshire . 
Robert Davies born 1877 Worthen , Shropshire . '' 
Ed Jones from Utah would like more information about relatives who lived in Pontrhydfendigaid at the start of the 19th century : Ed : `` Just trying to find out about my gr gr grand father who was in Pontryhdfendigaid in 1806 ? 
He married Elizabeth Roderick and was burried in the caron parish ! 
Had to try . '' 
George Beastall would like information about relatives who lived in Llanfyllin in the 19th century : George : `` I am looking for information about Robert Bowen and the marriage to Elizabeth Willson in 1842 at Llanfyllin please can you help . '' 
Harvey Williams has some information about Samual Williams : Harvey : `` Samual Williams had a sister Mary Ann , sister , Isabella and Ariadne and brothers John W. , David and William Paul . 
Mother and fathers names were William Williams and Isabelle Pugh . 
They lived on the banks of the river Wye . 
I was surfering some of your pages and saw a request for information regarding Samual Williams son of Isabelle Pugh & William Williams . 
The question was did he have brothers and sisters . 
William & Isabelle were my great great grandparents . 
They were from Radnorshire south Wales . 
They left Wales in 1820 on the ship William Henry . 
They passed away in Granville Ohio -LRB- Welsh Hills -RRB- in 1861 and 1847 . 
My grandson David Williams will be the last of the Williams family in America . 
I would like to know if I have family in Wales . '' 
Maureen Maxwell would like information about relatives from the Llanfair\/Welshpool area . 
Maureen : `` My great-grandfather William Albert Jones , born August 25 , 1859 , immigrated to the United States in 1875 . 
He was boarn in Llanfair , Welshpool . 
He went to the state of Illinois in the U.S. first , then lived in other states : Iowa and Kansas . 
He dies July 4 , 1936 . 
He is buried in Kansas . 
I will be in Britain the week after next and planning to visit Welshpool . 
I thought it was Walter Jones but have since learned it was William Albert Jones . '' 
Diana MacKean from Canada is urgently looking for information about relatives who come from Carno : `` I am trying to find out where my grandparents are buried . 
I never met them as my Dad came over here to Canada in 1924 . 
My Dad died 43 years ago and I 'm trying to find some information about our family . 
I am in a bind as my brother has terminal cancer and I would love to give him this information before he dies . 
They figure he has 3 months . 
We are also planning to have a birthday supper for him in the first week of October . 
I would be so grateful if anyone could help . 
Any pictures of landmarks or anything would be so appreciated . 
My Dad always wanted to go back , but unfortunately it was n't in the plan for him . 
If I have the information I want to follow up . 
I have promised my brother I will go to Wales . 
I have my Dads birth record . 
His name was Joseph James Owens and was born January 26 1906 . 
His fathers name was William Evan Owens and his mother was Amelia Owens formerly Samuel . 
Dads father was a labourer . 
They resided in Tanllyn Carno in the sub - district of Llanwnog in the county of Montgomery . 
The entry of birth is D3472-and a 47 is stamped beside it . 
The Deputy Superintentant was Thomas Richard Bridgewater . 
My father was also given a bible that said to Joseph J. Owens on leaving for Cananda with the best wishes of the church people of Carno , March 1924 T.A. Cooke Vicar . 
I am wondering if my Grandparents might be buried in the church there . 
My full name is Mrs. Diana MacKean 769 Greenbriar Drive , Oshawa Ontario , L1G7J5 Canada . 
If you can not help me is there someone else who can ? 
Thank You for your time and patience . '' 
Susan Ebling from Ontario , Canada , wants information about relatives from Cardigan Susan : `` Looking for information regarding the Davies family , looking for William Davies born 1825 cardigan wales wife Mary same year daughter Catherine ellen born 1857 born in wales but mary 1862 , margaret 1864 and william 1866 were born in St. Helens , Lancashire . 
if any one has any information it would be very much appreciated . '' 
Patricia Edmonds wants to know more about relatives from the Rhayader and Nantmel area : Patricia : `` I have been trying to trace my ancestors from around rhayader and nantmel ... which is the Evans Family ... I have a marriage certificate of my ggrandmother margaret davies and my ggrandfather james evans ... on the certificate it has james father as john evans . . 
and margarets father as benjamin davies I have managed to get quite a few of the davies family . . 
but I have come up against a brick wall with the popular name of evans ... if I could get a birth certificate for james evans it will give me at least his parents ... but how can I get a birth certificate if I dont know his date of birth . . 
I know he was born in 1856 ... and he married on the 17th march 1881 and states he was of full age ... it also states james resided at pentre - ystrad glamorganshire at the time of marriage where he was a collier ... and married at the nantgwlt chapel . 
cwmdauddwr radnorshire ... I do know they then lived in rhayader they lived on the Llandfadog farm ... in the elan valley ... where james died in a farm accident at the age of 32 ... I am trying to find james side . . 
but dont know where to go or what to do now ... can anybody help ... '' Rebecca Morzik from Australia would like more information about relatives from Four Crosses : Rebecca : `` I am researching my family tree , and I am information about Jane Humphreys and William Leece . 
Both were born about 1851 , William was born in England , and Jane in Wales . 
Jane was a domestic servant for Richard P Evans in 1881 at Canal House , Four Crosses , Llandysilio , and apparently had a child to the son of the house . 
She then married William Leece and had 7 more children . 
Also there were 7 still borns or died in infancy . 
William Leece was an illigitimite child , I think his mother 's name was Margaret Leece . 
Jane Humphreys ' father was Edward Humphreys , he was a pork dealer and died 1908 in Bolton , Lancashire , England . '' 
Gwyn Roberts is looking for information about his great , great grandmother who was from Llanwrin : Gwyn : `` I am seeking to identify and trace the origins of my Great-Great Grandmother . 
I can only confirm her name as `` Jane '' and that she hailed from Llanwrin . 
She was wed to one Griffith Evans , b. circa 1826 Dolgellau . 
The couple moved to Treborth , Bangor -LRB- Gwynedd -RRB- , where Griffith was engaged in the final construction of the Britannia Railway Bridge . 
Remaining in the hamlet of Treborth , he secured employment in the capacity of a Railway Platelayer until retirement . 
He died in 1901 . 
However `` Jane '' died in 1906 suffering from Dementia , when she walked into the Britannia Tubular Bridge and was struck by a passing train . 
She did so in the belief that her deceased husband was still engaged on the construction of the bridge . 
They couple had eight children , one of whom was my Great-Grandfather , John Evans , -LRB- others Laura , Evan , Griffith , Thomas , Owen , Ellen and Mary Grace -RRB- who spent his working life working on the railway from Treborth . 
The daughter , Mary Grace JONES nee Evans , resided at Beulah Chapel House , Penrhosgarnedd , Bangor , until her death in 1957 Can anyone assist me in conforming identity of `` Jane '' , her surname and possibly the identity of relatives residing in Llanwrin ? 
I would be most appreciative for any information to end a quest which remains unsolved after 25 years of enquiry . '' 
Pam Golding from Henstridge , Somerset is investigating her husband 's family history : Pam : `` My husband 's 3 x gt grandfather was Richard Evans b. Montgomery -LRB- according to 1841 & 1851 Bristol Temple Census -RRB- about 1791 . 
His occupation is given as haulier . 
He died before 1861 . 
His wife was Elizabeth -LRB- b. about 1801 Carmarthen according to the 1841 , 1851 & 1861 Census for Temple Bristol -RRB- . 
I have found 3 children born in Bristol , the eldest being William b. about 1821 Bristol who was a soap boiler in the St Philips area of Bristol and who died in 1894 . 
My husband 's family had no idea of Welsh ancestry , but this information is so scanty I do n't know how to go back into either Richard or Elizabeth Evans ' past . 
I would so appreciate any help . '' 
Sue Crossley is trying to find out about her mother 's experiences with the ATS in Talgarth : Sue : `` My mother has recently died & looking through her old photos I 've come across several of her with the ambulance she drove for the ATS in Talgarth during WW2 . 
I remember her talking about the challenges of learning to drive a big heavy vehicle in such a hilly area ! 
Her name was Kathleen Smith & she was originally from Bournemouth . 
I realize I do n't really know why or how long the ATS `` girls '' were stationed in Talgarth & I ca n't find any info . 
on the Internet , except one brief mention of `` Talgarth Military Hospital '' . 
Does anyone have any information ? 
If so I 'd love to receive it . '' 
Marged Parry is researching a Humphries from Carno : Marged : `` Llywelyn Humphries was born in Carno . 
where my family is based . 
He also had the same surname as my family , and we were quite widespread in that time . 
I want to know if I 'm related to him in any way . 
Can anyone help me ? 
Jen Whitehead is looking for some information on a Llanelli minister : Jen : `` I am researching my family tree . 
I am trying to find out about a John Williams who was a minister in Llanelli Capel Newydd during the cholera epidemic where he administered to the sick . 
He used to walk to Ammanford every Sunday to preach the gospels . '' 
Christine Moss from Australia is looking for information about relatives who lived in Knighton in the 19th century : `` I am trying to trace my family tree back prior to 1831 in Knighton Wales and the furthest I have managed to get back to is My great great grandfathers death in Pig Market , Wales in 1860 and my Great great Grandmother death was in Knighton in 1878 . 
I have had a researcher doing the work for me to trace my great great grandfather in England . 
It appears I have now reached a brick wall , for they can not do any researching for me in Wales . 
How do I get information prior to 1831 in Wales from Australia ? 
Can I get a hold of a researcher or can I do it on line . 
I am desperate to try and get information to help me . 
Also my girlfriend in England found a Joseph Moss a nail maker in Pig market Wales and I have been searching for ages today trying to find that sight , but it has not been showing it for me like it was for her . 
If Joseph Moss was a nail maker , then he MUST be related to me -LRB- I am not married and a genuine Moss -RRB- because even though my great great grandfather was a haulier , the rest of the family were all blacksmiths or nail makers . 
My great great grandfather son Samuel was working on the railway in Knighton , Wales and would love to know how do I find out more about that . 
He also built the fence at Berrington Hall , Leominster and I have tried to write to them and unable to find out information on that . 
Sorry , but can you help me . 
I live on the other side of the world to you , and just so keen to trace my family . 
My dad came over when he was 5 year old and even though he did not know his family , I want to know about them . 
Thanking you and hoping you may be able to put me on the right track . 
I greatly appreciate it if you could . '' 
Rhoda Perkins-Boyer would like information about relatives who emigrated from Cardiganshire to America in the 19th century : Rhoda : `` I am looking for information about my great great grandparents , Edward -LRB- b. 1810 -RRB- and Mary -LRB- b. 1817 -RRB- Edwards who came from Wales in the mid 1800s to settle in Gallia Co. , Ohio , USA . 
They were married in Wales and left after one or two children were born . 
They had four more children after settling near Tyn Rhos , Ohio . 
Names of children were Ann , Mary -LRB- 1 -RRB- , Richard , Edward , Evan , and Mary -LRB- 2 -RRB- . 
Son Evan fought in the American Civil War and married Julia A. Rickabaugh . '' 
Christine Guptill from London , Ontario , Canada is looking for relatives with an unusual name : Christine : `` I am searching for an ancestor , Thomas Gubtail , who was rumored to have emigrated to America from Wales . 
It is suspected he was born around 1650 , and his family were likely dissenters . 
Does anyone know of this family name anywhere in Wales ? '' 
May Edwards from Falkirk is researching her husbands family and would appreciate some help , This is what she knows : May : Ian Edwards born 1956 to Albert Harry Edwards -LRB- Metal Polisher -RRB- Isle of Man 01\/03\/1921 his father Walter Edwards born 1877 approx died 13\/07\/1949 in Falkirk , Scotland was born in Welshpool we believe his wife Janet Basterfield or Bastafield born Birmingham 1877 we believe died 31\/03\/1968 aged 90yrs in Falkirk . 
Walters father was also Walter Edwards -LRB- Firemaster -RRB- and his mother was Mary Ann Evans we are taking that they came from the Powys area . '' 
Peter John Landrum from Birkenhead is looking for relatives from Rhayader : Peter : `` I am trying to trace my grandmother Esie Owen whome I believe was born in Rhayder on or about the 9th December c1905 , if anyone knows of her or her family from around that date I would love to hear from you , just to help me move on with my family tree , I know she married a John or Jack Williams unsure of the date but my grandad John\/Jack Williams was born in Angelsey North Wales . '' 
Paul Owen from Florida is looking for ancestors from Montgomeryshire : Paul : `` Robert Owen , son of R. Owen of Llandrinio in Montgomeryshire , pleb , matriculated at Brasenose College , Oxford University on July 19 , 1690 , aged 18 . '' 
The status of Pleb . 
-LRB- plebian -RRB- under which he was admitted , would not necessarily imply that he was poor , but certainly he did not come from a wealthy background . 
Robert became a priest in the Anglican Church and in 1699 emigrated to the Maryland Colony in North America . 
Does anyone have information of an Owen family in Llandrinio in the 1600 's . '' 
Angie Ilich wants to find out more about a relative who emigrated to Australia in the 18th century . 
Angie : `` My ggg grandfather rowland edwards was transported to australia in 1791 as a convict for horse stealing from a morris evans of berthyneus carno . 
He was born about 1763 possibly around Carno . 
Would like any family connection . '' 
Gavin Ewer from Sydney , Australia would like to know more about a relative who was transported to Australia from Carno in the 18th century . 
`` Rowland Edwards is a relative of mine . 
I understand he was sentenced at Salop in 1789 for 7 years , and transported to Sydney from Portsmouth on the Admiral Barrrington 27\/03\/1791 arriving Sydney 16\/10\/1791 . 
He married a Jane Fletcher -LRB- convict -RRB- and they had a daughter Ann Edwards in 1808 . 
Ann went on to marry a transported convict Edward Ewer on 02\/06\/1825 . 
I have recently discovered that Rowland Edwards was murdered in 1814 . '' 
Trish Price sent us this request in July 2008 : Trish : `` I am looking for anyone having information on Hetty or spelt Hettie Elizabeth M Hamer born 1897 her birth was registered in Brecknock . 
Hettie was married to Frank Blears and was my father 's step mother a very nice lady . 
I would be interested in anyone knowing details of her family . '' 
Sarah Barnard from Kingston-upon-Thames is looking for relatives in the Lampeter area : Sarah : `` Can anyone help me trace my maternal grandfather and his family ? 
They came from Lampeter and -LRB- I think -RRB- ran Cwm Farm . 
I remember meeting a member of the family a Jennie Jones , know as Jennie Cwm as she had grown up on the farm . 
She lived at 3 Rhydlnfair , Llangybi , Lampeter and died in February 1996 . '' 
Carole Brunton from Billericay would like some information about relatives who lived in Aberystwyth in the 19th century . 
Carole : `` I am desperate for any information on my grandmother Lily Louisa Ellis born in Aberystwyth approx 1878 according to the 1901 census . 
The only two Lily Louisa Ellis I can find were both born , or at least registered , in London . 
According to family stories her mother died when she was around 13 and her dad married a governess whom she did n't get on with and she ran away into service with a family called Sneath . 
The Ellis family were meant to have had a hill farm and my aunt who lived to 102 can remember seeing ladies in tall black hats ! '' 
Jim Buzbeee from Atlanta , Georgia sent us this message in July 2008 : Jim : `` I will be in Wales in early August . 
Trying to locate Thomas Charles Davies who died on March 24 , 1878 in Llansantffraid Wales . 
Any help would be greatly appreciated . '' 
Sheila Shanley is looking for information about some family in Barmouth and Trefonen : Sheila : `` Trying to trace descendants of the Adams family lived at Barmouth , around 1900 . 
Also members of the Breeze family lived at Trefonen , Oswestry - may have moved to Abergele . 
Any information much appreciated . '' 
Bill Mills from Manchester is looking for information on the Mills of Wrexham : Bill : `` Hi i have been tracing the Mills family history . 
I have got back to 1790 I read on the site that a family of Mills moved to Wrexham around 1650-1700 , could you let me know where they came from ? 
My family comes from Manchester area . '' 
Eunice Bold-Edwards in South Australia is trying to trace some eighteenth century ancestors from Brecon : Eunice : `` I am trying to trace the ancestors of Hugh Bold , born Brecon -LRB- 1731 - 1809 -RRB- . 
Hugh was a lawyer in the Brecon office of John Philipps -LRB- of Tre-gaer near Llanfrynach -RRB- . 
He married firstly Elizabeth -LRB- unknown -RRB- about 1765 . 
Elizabeth died 1781 after giving birth to his three children : -LRB- a -RRB- Elizabeth -LRB- 1768 - 1847 -RRB- , who married Rev. William Wynter\/Winter ; -LRB- b -RRB- Rev. Hugh Bold -LRB- 1770 - 1839 -RRB- who married Ann Davies , and their son , also Rev. Hugh Bold 1798 - 1883 married -LRB- 1 -RRB- Theodosia Frances Hutchinson and -LRB- 2 -RRB- Theresa Gales Heartland , and -LRB- c -RRB- Thomas Bold -LRB- 1776 - 1842 -RRB- who married Mary Ann -LRB- unknown -RRB- . 
The second wife of Hugh Bold -LRB- 1731 - 1809 -RRB- was Dorothy Philipps , his employer 's daughter , and Hugh succeeded him in the business . 
An article in the Welsh Dictionary of Biography states that Hugh Bold 's -LRB- 1731 - 1809 -RRB- father was `` trumpeter to the Corporation of Brecon '' . 
I have tried unsuccessfully to find the name of the trumpeter who was Hugh Bold 's father , who would have been born around 1700 . 
Can anyone help me ? '' 
Simon Owen is trying to trace his great grand father who was born in Meifod in the late nineteenth century . 
Simon : `` I have recently lost my father and have come across a copy of a birth certifiacte that I believe belongs to my Grandfather 's father and have been trying to trace any info on him , but without any luck . 
The certificate states he was born Edward Owen or Owens on the 12th of December 1885 at Glascoed Cottage Meifod . 
The Father was named Edward Owens and mother Elizabeth Owens formerly Jones . 
I also know that he served as a gunner in the first world war and survived , but am unsure if he returned to Meifod or if he or his parents are buried in Meifod . 
I would be grateful for any info as I 'm very interested to find out anything more about them . '' 
John Harris is looking for more information about John Lewis from Llanllwchaiarn near Newtown . 
John : `` Results from my search for John Lewis and Minnie Humphreys suggests that John was born in 1880 , his father being Richard Lewis who was married to Susan\/Susannah . 
In 1881 the census shows the family living at Cefn Mawr , Llanllwchaiarn , Newtown , and consisted of John Lewis -LRB- head -RRB- 75 , Richard -LRB- son -RRB- 39 , Susan -LRB- daur in law -RRB- , Catherine -LRB- gr daur -RRB- 12 , Alfred -LRB- gr son -RRB- 8 , Stephen -LRB- gr son -RRB- 5 , Anne E -LRB- gr daur -RRB- 3 , John -LRB- gr son -RRB- 1 . 
By 1891 they had moved to the Slate House , Llanllwchaiarn , Newtown . 
Does anyone recognize this family ? 
any help in tracing John would be very much appreciated . '' 
Deb Delves from Sydney , Australia , is looking for information about Charles Glendower who left Wales in the nineteenth century . 
Deb : `` I 'm searching for the family of my 2xgt grandfather , Charles Glendower -LRB- Glyndwr ? -RRB- 
Powell , who was born in Wales in approximately 1830 . 
Unfortunately this is all the information I have on him , before he arrived in Australia . 
According to his Australian Death Certificate , he had lived in NSW for 60 years when he died on the 10th August 1908 . 
Family legend has it that he `` jumped ship '' ... but his occupation on the Death Certificate is `` tinsmith '' -LRB- would an 18-year-old have acquired a trade , already ? -RRB- . 
So , I 'm looking for a Powell family with a tradition about a son\/brother\/uncle who `` went missing '' around 1848 . 
No idea whether it 's any help , but many of his 13 ? 
children were given the middle name Llewellyn -LRB- including his daughter Marion ! -RRB- 
... and there were a couple of Gwyns , a Wynn , and a Gwynn . 
My gt-grandfather was the second of his sons to be named Ambrose -LRB- got a surprise when I found that - gt-grandma had always called him `` Wellyn '' so we 'd assumed he was Llewellyn -RRB- . 
Most of the children 's first names were `` English '' as opposed to `` Welsh '' ... but many had `` Welsh '' middle names . 
Thank you for your time . '' 
Caroline Arkinstall Victoria , B.C. Canada tells us a bit more about the Arkinstalls in response to a message from Dot Rochard . 
Caroline : `` In reply to your query about Arkinstall . 
My maiden name is Caroline Arkinstall . 
My father Samuel George Arkinstall , died at the age of 27 years of T.B. in 1938 . 
He had a brother R.V. Arkinstall . 
I am intersted in knowing more about this branch of my family . '' 
Lauri-Ann Lowe from Victoria , BC Canada wants to find out more about her Great Great Grandfather , Mr Thomas E Issard , born 1873 and who lived at Pentre -LRB- Pentre House ? -RRB- 
Aberhafesp , Newtown , Powys , Wales around 1873 . 
Liz Marlatt from Toronto is looking for information about a relative from the Marches . 
Liz : `` I have been trying to find information on her birth and parents but no luck . 
All I know is that she was born in Bishop 's Castle . '' 
Sara-Lee Salterio from Canada sent us this query in June 2008 : `` I am trying to find out the name of the community that Thomas Lloyd Dawson was in when he was the First Presbyterian Minister in Wales . '' 
Mick Lee has a response for a query sent in by Cheryl Mills from Wrexham Mick : `` Hi Cheryl . 
From the info below it looks like your Mills family moved to Wrexham between the years 1861 and 1871 , the move may have been for a better job , with a tied house and maybe more money , David went from a Labourer to Farm Labourer then on to a Waggoner . 
I also found a Death of Catherine Mills aged 61 Dec Quarter . 
Which ties in with her date of birth 1925 . 
1851 Census : David Mills -LRB- 28 -RRB- Labourer . 
Old Factory , Llanllugan . 
Catherine Mills -LRB- 26 -RRB- Jane Mills -LRB- 2 -RRB- 1861 Census : David Mills -LRB- 39 -RRB- Labourer . 
Llanfylin Catherine Mills -LRB- 36 -RRB- Jane Mills -LRB- 12 -RRB- David Mills -LRB- 7 -RRB- 1871 Census : David Mills -LRB- 47 -RRB- Farm Labourer . 
Catherine Mills -LRB- 46 -RRB- David Mills -LRB- 17 -RRB- 1881 Census : David Mills -LRB- 57 -RRB- Waggoner , Broughton , Denbigh . 
Catherine Mills -LRB- 55 -RRB- David Mills -LRB- 27 -RRB- Thomas Mills -LRB- 11 -RRB- If you need any more help then please contact me . '' 
John Harris needs your help to find out more about relatives who came from Montgomeryshire : John : `` I am still tying to trace John Lewis and Minnie Lousia Humphreys , They were married at the Zion Baptist Chapel , Newtown , on the 10th May 1902 . 
John was 22 and a farm labourer at Maesmawr , caersws , Llanwnog , his farther being Richard Lewis . 
Minnie Lousia Humphreys , 21 of Moat farm Llandinam , her father was John Humphreys . 
From my research I believe that her mother was Sarah Jones , born in Llanbadarn about 1860 , There were four daughters in all , Mary E. 1876 , Martha Maud 1881 , Minnie Louisa 1885 and Margaret 1889 . 
Richard died in1889 and Sarah remarried in1889 to Thomas Jones of the Moat Farm Llandinam and they had a son Richard in the same year . 
John and Minie had only one child that I know of , Eric Holden in 1912 when they were living at Leighton , Welshpool . 
I am unable to find any record of either of them after this date . 
Can anyone help ? '' 
Angela Booth from Sydney , Australia is looking for information for a number of ancestors from Montgomeryshire : Angela : `` I am looking for information on the following : 1 . 
John Jones , b 1788 Llanwrin , son of Richard Jones and Lowry Williams 2 . 
Evan Richards b 1808 Tynycornel , nr Talyllyn , son of David Richards and Catherine Richards 3 . 
Esther Evans b 1804 Glaspwll , ? 
daughter of Hugh Evans 4 . 
Ellinor Morgans b 1838 Llanwrin , daughter of Evan Morgans and Margaret Lewis 5 . 
David Jones b 1831 in Machynlleth , the son of John Jones and Mary Jones , and of his wife Catherine b 1834 also in Machynlleth , the daughter of Evan Richards and Esther Evans David and Catherine Jones married in Penegoes in 1855 and lived in Maengwyn St , Machynlleth where David was a cattle dealer and butcher . 
David and Catherine died within 6 weeks of each other in 1902 . 
On Catherine 's death certificate it states she died at Garth House . 
David and Catherine had the following children all born in Machynlleth : Evan Richards b 1856 - he married Elizabeth Lumley . 
He initially a butcher , but by 1901 is listed as an evangelist . 
John b 1858 - he married Catherine . 
He was a cattle dealer Esther b 1859 - she married John Micah , the widower of Catherine 's sister Elizabeth Richards . 
David b 1861 - still at home with his parents on 1901 census . 
He was a cattle dealer Mary Ann b 1864 - also still at home in 1901 Catherine Jane b 1865 - she married Edward Jones , b 1864 , Llanwrin , the son of David Jones and Ellinor Morgans . 
They married in 1886 in Dolgelly . 
They are my great grandparents and lived in Toxteth Park , Liverpool where Edward was a policeman on the 1901 census . 
I do not know what happened to them after 1901 , although according to my grandparents marriage certificate Edward was dead by 1920 . 
Catherine and Edward had the following children : David b 1888 , Talyllyn - my grandfather . 
I do not know what happened to him after his divorce from my grandmother c 1927\/28 Evan John b 1891 Machynlleth , Edward Owen b 1894 Toxteth Park , Robert Henry b 1897 Toxteth Park , Elizabeth b 1869 , Hugh b 1871 - he married Jane Roberts , d of Humphrey Roberts and Mary . 
Hugh was a cattle dealer . 
If you recognize any of the names above , I would be most grateful for any information . '' 
Tom Lewis has responded to John Lewis ' query about relatives coming from Cemaes in Montgomeryshire Tom : `` I stubbled on this completely by accident but I 'd like to share some info . 
I 'm the gg grandson of David and Margeret 's daughter Jane , born in 1868 . 
I descend from her son John born in 1891 who was illegitimate which is the reason why I retain the Lewis surname . 
I have an extensive family tree of David and Margaret 's ancestors going all the way back to the early 1600 's that I 'd be happy to share ! '' 
Carrie from Australia is looking for informaiton about her ancestors who hail from Beulah : Carrie : `` I am looking for information on David James who married Margaret and had a son Evan James who was born Beulah , Wales around 1750 . 
I think Margaret ' maiden name was Price . '' 
Bronwyn wants information about relatives who lived in Montgomeryshire in the nineteenth century : Bronwyn : `` I am trying to find out more about John and Susanna Edwards born approx 1802 and 1803 in Llawnog , Montgomeryshire . 
I believe John 's parents are John & Mary . '' 
Nick Davies wants to find our more about his great great grandmother from Ysbyty Ystwyth : Nick : `` My great great grandfather was a lead miner at Ysbyty Ystwyth in mid Wales . 
His name was Jacob Jacobs , born 1826 , died 21st March 1897 . 
His wife 's name was Ann , ne Bands , born 1829 at Tywardreath , Nr . 
St. Blazey , Cornwall . 
She died on 31st December 1890 , and they are both buried at Yspytty Ystwyth . 
I know a great deal about the Jacobs ' side of my family , but absolutely nothing about the family of my great great grandmother , born Ann Bands . 
The 1881 census merely describes Jacob Jacobs ' family living in Ysbyty Ystwyth , mentioning Ann Jacobs being born in Tywardreath . 
One of their children was given the name `` John Bands Jacob '' , which verifies his mother 's maiden name , apart from a record in the family bible . 
Does anyone have any information about the family and background of Ann Bands ? 
My great uncle Jacob Edwin Adams - the grandson of Jacob Jacobs above , married a Georgina and lived in Jones Street , Blaenclydach , Nr . 
Tonypandy , S. Wales . 
They had five children , David , Dulcie , Dorothy , Norman and Trevor . 
My father was very fond of his Uncle Jake and Auntie `` Ena '' , and remembers the family very well from the time he was a youngster in Tonypandy . 
He tells me that Auntie `` Ena '' was a very beautiful , loving lady with a most enchanting accent . 
Does anyone know what else became of my father 's cousins - the above offsprings , particularly Dorothy ? '' 
Gareth James from London sent us this request in April 2008 : Gareth : `` In preparation for a visit there in June , I 'm trying to trace the homes of my ancestors from mid-Wales in the late 19th century before they moved to South Wales . 
There are three threads that seem to involve farms , schools and factories . 
Farms called Panty Glo near Darowen , Penybank near Llanidloes , Cgfian at Llanwnog and Derlwyn near Carno . 
A school called Cadvans House in Pennal , Towyn 3 . 
Any help gratefully received . '' 
Lesley Bliss from Ontario , Canada is looking for information about relatives from Aberystwyth : Lesley : `` I am trying to find information on a shoe store owned by my husbands grandfather in Gt Darkgate St. Aber , surname Bliss probably in the 30 's . '' 
Lana from Sydney , Australia wants more information about relatives who lived in Newtown in the 19th century : Lana : '' `` Hello everyone in Newtown . . 
my 2xs greatgrand father was born in newtown in 1855 and his wife born in Llanonog 1855 . 
I would dearly love some photos of theses paces in about that time and would thank you dearly for your efforts . 
If you think you have a conection to this family do get in touch . 
Martin Morgan b 1855 Newtown . 
Ann Jones b abt 1855 Llanonog . 
Martins mother ; Elizabeth morgan nee Thomas Anns father ; Edward Jones Martins sibblins ; Charles Baathsheba Benjamin Martin and Ann Morgan arrived in Queensland on the Delharee in 1876 with one child Elizabeth . 
Later they baptised her as ELIZABETH DELHARREE MORGAN living and working in the Brisbane and Toowoomba Aarea . 
They had more children . 
JESSE MARY B 1878 my great grand mother . 
WILLIAM EDWARD THOMAS CHARLES MARTIN BURTON OWEN ALICE ANNIE JOHN LLEWELLYN MABEL GWENDOLIN PHYLLIS IRENE MARTIN AND ANN DIED IN BRISBANE IN 1941 A FEW YEARS APART FROM EACH OTHER . 
I AM NOW SEARCHING FOR Their Children . 
My great grandmother Jesse Mary Morgan moved to New Zealand ... '' ID Best from Canada wants information about the Evan Jones family of Carno : `` I have their daughter Mary born in 1646 Llanbrynamir . 
She married Richard Charles Evans in Mar 1867 Carno . 
He became a poet known as Carnofarrd while living in Carno . . 
Family records on the event states that Richard Evans recieved a letter from his brother-in-law . . 
about the land of opporunity in Richard 's stone-masonary and so he immigrated to join that in-laws until his family arrived the next year . 
Hayley Takacs from Oakdale has a response to a query about Cadogan Edwards : Hayley : `` Derek : Cadogan Edwards is my GG Grandfather . 
He died 15 Nov 1874 in suspicious circumstances . 
There was a coroners inquest . 
` He died of compression of the brain arising from concussion ' . 
His mother was Mary Isaac . 
His daughter -LRB- Elizabeth -RRB- Annie married Thomas Eustace Smith and their daughter Magdalen Mary was my Grandmother . 
I live in Oakdale not far from you in Rogerstone . 
I have some more info if you are interested . '' 
Moira Cholerton from Hertford has an update on queries by Pat Melville-Baker and Jane Feltham-Fletcher about relations in Llanidloes : Moira : '' I am seeking the descendants of a lady who was variously called Isabel Owen -LRB- s -RRB- , Isabella Owen -LRB- s -RRB- , Isabella Roberts , Isabella Bennett and Isabella Gibbons -LRB- 1830 - 1895 -RRB- . 
She was born in Llandysilio and after 1840 lived in Llanidloes until she married John Roberts in Shrewsbury in 1851 . 
All her children eventually took the surname ` Roberts ' although they were registered at birth with the surnames of their fathers . 
I have had difficulty tracing the life of Isabel 's daughter Catherine Ann Roberts -LRB- b 1854 , Llanidloes -RRB- after 1871 though she was present at the death of her grandfather , James Owen , in Llanidloes in 1886 when she was `` of the Royal Infirmary , Manchester '' . 
Catherine 's sister , Isabella Roberts -LRB- ne Isabel Ellen Roberts & b 1852 -RRB- , went to America , and settled in Pennsylvania with her husband , Robert L. Jones , and their five children . 
Latterly Isabel Gibbons , as she was known after she married George Gibbons in Llanidloes in 1870 , moved to Birkenhead with her three younger children . 
Her son Timothy Owen Roberts -LRB- ne Bennett & b 1862 -RRB- settled there and I have traced some of his descendants . 
Her daughter Victoria Roberts -LRB- ne Bennett & b 1864 -RRB- , had a large family and I believe all her children eventually took the surname of her long-term partner , Harry Starkey ; I was told that one of them was living in mid-Wales in the 1950s . 
At least one of Victoria 's sons , Frederick Starkey , was killed in WWI . 
Isabel 's last child was Elijah Trevellan Roberts -LRB- ne Elijah Trevellan & b 1868 -RRB- and I believe he too settled in Birkenhead . 
Any information about any of these people or their descendants would be much appreciated . '' 
Paul Smith is looking for information about the wife of his Meifod Grandfather . 
Paul : `` My gg grandfather Edward Daniels born in Meifod 1787 . 
Trying to find who he married in abt 1818\/20 . 
First son born about 1819 in Penybont . '' 
Bill Jones in Andover wants to know more about Aber 's projectionist . 
Bill : `` Seeking any information about a William Charles Jones , father of the late Billy Ball Jones who was the projectionist at the Coliseum Cinema . 
The family lived in Chalybeate Street and ran a newsagent\/grocery store . 
William Charles Jones was also a furniture dealer . 
He died in Aberystwyth in the 1920s . '' 
Sheridan Rudman in Melbourne is trying to find out more about Joseph Goode . 
Sheridan : `` I am looking for information about Joseph Goode , who was born in Crickhowell in 1824 and worked in Brecon as an attorney 's clerk . 
Any information would be greatly appreciated . '' 
Yvonne Gale would like more information about relatives who lived at Ysbyty Ystwyth . 
Yvonne : `` I am trying to trace my grandmothers sister and her family . 
Avarinah Lewis was born in Yspytty Ystwyth in about 1865 . 
She married Evan Edwards from Abergwesyn Brecon . 
They had five children , Jane , Lewis , Ann , Margaret , and Thomas Charles . 
Any information would be wonderful . '' 
Angie Ilich wants to find out more about a relative who emigrated to Australia in the 18th century . 
Angie : `` My ggg grandfather rowland edwards was transported to australia in 1791 as a convict for horse stealing from a morris evans of berthyneus carno . 
He was born about 1763 possibly around Carno . 
Would like any family connection . '' 
Louise from Glasgow is looking for information about relatives who lived on the English Welsh border . 
Louise : `` I have an Edna Clark -LRB- e -RRB- who married Pryce Jones . 
Pryce was bn 1895 Shrewsbury and all I know is that Edna died as a result of a fire , Pryce lived at Rhydycroesau , I do n't know if Edna was with him there , if this rings any bells to anyone I would be grateful for your help . '' 
Linda McGuire is looking for relatives who may have lived in Builth Wells in the 18th century : Linda : `` I am looking for the parents of a Stephen Vaughn b-19 July 1765 Wake Co North Carolina . 
The family is said to be from Bulith Wells Wales and\/or Abergavenny Wales . '' 
Denise Owen from Llanybydder has sent us this query about relatives who lived in Llanfyllin : Denise : `` I 'm looking for any information on Owen Owen -LRB- s -RRB- of Llanfyllin , son of Edward Owen -LRB- s -RRB- a shoemaker . 
If I have the right line he married Jane Thomas of Llanllyfni -LRB- N Wales -RRB- . 
Owen does n't appear on the 1901 census with Jane and David -LRB- his son -RRB- and I ca n't find him . 
My GG David Owen -LRB- s -RRB- lived in Cardiff and married Sarah Webb , eventually moving to England . '' 
Martin Holt has a response to Angela Coggan 's query : Martin : `` Angela , I read with interest your enquiries relating to the Micah Family . 
I lived and was brought up in Machynlleth in Pentrerhedyn st 1944 - 1971 . 
Your Message brought back memories of going across the road to the dairy to buy our milk from yes , Mr. and Mrs. Micah . 
There was also a Miss Micah who lived in Bank Street just off Pentrerhedyn St. There was a connection with an Evans family who lived in Derwenlas on the Aberystwyth Rd -LRB- a relative attended the High School at the same time as I attended -RRB- . '' 
Helen Carn is responding to an earlier message about the Richardes family . 
Helen : `` This is a response to Sue from Aberystwyth in Jan 2006 . 
I am also descended from the Richardes family and have info that another descendant , Coralie Potter has published in the Dyfed FHS journal of 1986 , if you 'd like to get in touch I 'd be more than happy to pass on info . '' 
Jan Mulligan hopes to find out more about boarding schools in Aberystwyth . 
Jan : `` My grandmother attended a boarding school in Aberystwyth for a time . 
This was before May 1919 . 
She had many fond memories that she shared with us , except for the name of the school ! 
Her home was in Brest , France . 
Her name was Madeleine-Marie LeCleac ` h. I was hoping to learn more ; can anyone refer me to schools that existed in Aberystwyth between 1910 - 1919 ? '' 
Mark Perry from Dobcross , Oldham , is looking for information about his Grandfather Derek Owens . 
Mark : `` Hello , I have been trying to trace back my family tree . 
My grandfather lived in Llangollen and was called Derek Owens he was part of the Fron Choir early on I think , he married Louise Valentine -LRB- now Owens -RRB- and moved up to Failsworth , Greater Manchester . 
The information I have is brief I know but if anyone has more I would be very grateful . 
Christine from Moore in Cheshire is looking for information about some of her Llanfyllin relatives . 
Christine : `` My father was born and brought up in Llanfyllin . 
I understand that his grandfather -LRB- my great grandfather -RRB- , Edwin Jones , was the Stationmaster . 
I know that my grandfather , Frederick Martin , was the Publican of the White Lion with his brother Charles in the 1901 census . 
Edwin 's daughter , Annie , married Frederick , but I have no date for the marriage . 
Edwin also had a son , Alfred Ernest who I know absolutely nothing about . 
So , if anyone living in Llanfyllin can help me I would really like to hear from them . 
Incidentally , my Aunt , Audrey Martin served at least one term as Mayor . '' 
Mrs J Powell is trying to find out more about her grandmother when she was in the Welshpool area . 
Mrs Powell : `` I am looking for information about my great grandmother Sarah Walker , born about 1846 or 49 and died about 1913 or 1914 in Welshpool . 
In 1891 she was working at Maesmawr hall , but I ca n't find out where she was after that . ' 
I believe she did some upholstery work for Powys Castle but I do n't know the dates . 
Any information would be gratefully received , thank you . '' 
Allan Poole of Cheltenham is looking for details about a relative who lived at Berriew in the 1880s . 
Allan : `` I know its along shot , but I would like to obtain any info regarding my Great Great GreatGrandfather , John Poole , Police Constable , living at Berriew nr Welshpool , in 1880 . 
Married to Mary with 4 children , Agnes , Frances , John Lambert & Mary E. I would be very grateful for any details however trivial . 
Stuart Pryce from Buckley contacted us in February 2008 : Stuart : `` I 'm visiting the site to try and find out some history of my family , which lived in Bettws Cedewain behind the Talbot Public House . 
The Pryce Family . '' 
Steve Jones from Kensington USA is ooking for any info on Elizabeth Owen from Llanidloes . 
Steve : `` I 'm looking for information on my great great grandmother Elizabeth Owens -LRB- maybe Owen ? -RRB- 
, b. 1814 in Llanidloes , Montgomeryshire . 
Her mother and 8 siblings died in a cholera epidemic , and she left Llanidloes at age 19 , and came to Granville , Ohio . 
She was baptised by Rev. John Jones at the Newtown Baptist Church . 
I 'd appreciate any ideas you might have . '' 
Jean Colley wants to find information about Edith Edwards of Llanfechain : Jean : '' She married John Colley . 
She died aged 92 in 1938 , I think in Brierley Hill , Staffs . 
She must have been born in 1846 or thereabouts . '' 
Keith Evans would like to find out about an important relative : Keith : `` I would like to find out more about the reportly very first Postwoman in Wales . 
Her name was Gwenllian Jones , and she was my Great , Great , Great Grandmother . 
I do n't have any further information that what I have typed in here . '' 
Dilys Lloyd from Denbighshire is looking for a relative who came from Meifod : Dilys : `` I am looking for my grandad `` s brother David Evans born 1863 . 
On the 1901 census he was living at Lletty Meifod as a shoemaker . 
I would be so gratefull if anyone can help . '' 
Dornell Wylie from Brisbane , Australia wants to find out more about relatives from Aberaeron : Dornell : `` I want to know if there are relatives still in Wales descended from John and Sarah Evans of Aberaeron . 
I am descended from their son , Thomas Morgan Evans , who came to Australia in the 1890s . 
He was a compositor . 
His mother Sarah , lived into her nineties . '' 
Mandy is reaearching her family tree and is looking for relatives from Knighton : Mandy : `` I am researching my family tree and have found out that my ancestors moved to Station Road in Knighton around 1875 . 
The head of the household named Amos Perry was the Manager of the Gas Works for around 30 years . 
I wondered if this still existed , or if not , has anyone got any information on it . 
It would be most appreciated . '' 
Delyth Jones from Carmarthen is looking for relatives who who emigrated to the New World : Delyth : `` A relative of my grandfather from Capel Seion , near Aberystwyth emigrated to Australia . 
Her maiden name was Louis Morgan . 
Some of her sisters were Gwen , Margaret -LRB- Peg -RRB- , and brothers Evan , Goro . 
Are there any ancestors out there ? '' 
John wants to trace relatives who once lived in Llandefalle : John : `` Trying to trace info on on Thomas Jones of New House , Llandefalle , listed as butcher on 1881 census . 
Thomas was a farmer on earlier census . 
1901 only Gwenllian and son Roger listed . 
Heard that Thomas the butcher who died in April 1887 had a big accident . '' 
Linda Jackson frokm Evesham is trying to trace relatives who lived in Llanfyllin in the 19th century . 
Linda : `` I am trying to find the marriage of my great grandparents , John Green and Jane Jones . 
Two Jane Jones 's are listed in 1855 2nd quarter at Llanfyllin , Montgomeryshire but the one John Green listed is unclear . 
Does anyone have a copy of the original parish record showing the ref . 
John Harris is trying to solve a family mystery from the turn of the last century John : '' John Lewis and Minnie Lousia Humphreys , they were married at the Zion Baptist Chapel , Newtown , in 1902 , they had a son Eric Holden Lewis in 1912 , born at the Rounabout , Leighton , Forden , and from that date I have unable to trace them . 
John was born in 1880 , his father being Richard Lewis who was married to Susan\/Susannah . 
In the 1881 census the family were living at Cefn Mawr , Llanllwchaiarn , Newtown , and consisted of John Lewis -LRB- head -RRB- 75 , Richard -LRB- son -RRB- 39 , Susan -LRB- daur in law -RRB- , Catherine -LRB- gr daur -RRB- 12 , Alfred -LRB- gr son -RRB- 8 , Stephen -LRB- gr son -RRB- 5 , Anne E -LRB- gr daur -RRB- 3 , John -LRB- gr son -RRB- 1 . 
By 1881 they had moved to the Slate House , Llanllwchaiarn . 
Minnie Louisa was born in1885 , her parents being John and Sarah Humphreys , they had three other children , Mary E born 1876 , Martha Maude born 1881 , and Margaret born 1889 . 
John Humphreys died in 1889 and the 1891 census shows sarah and her daughters living at the Moat Farm , Llandinam , using her maiden of Jones . 
Sarah married Thomas Jones in 1882 and they had a son Richard the same year . 
Eric Holden Lewis was brought up by Minnie 's sister Martha Maude , who had married Herbert Gwilt and was living at Four Crosses , Lieghton , Forden , only a few hundred yards from the Rounabout where Eric was born . 
The onle other reference to John Lewis I have is on Eric 's marriage certificate in 1938 which states that John is deceased , as for Minnie Lousia I have a possible reference to a second marriage in 1922 to either William Price Davies or Richard Jones . 
Any help in resolving this mystery would be vety much appreciated . '' 
Malcolm Bone , from Sydney , would like to find out more about the Amos family from Pontypridd . 
Malcolm : `` I would like to find out more about George Amos who worked as a miner and lived in Pontypridd . 
He married Ellen Gardler and they had a son in 1880 , Frederick James , who married Alice Morgan . 
Any further info about Alice Morgan would be appeciated also . '' 
Dan Roberts from Ohio , USA , is trying to trace relatives named Roberts from Radnor . 
Dan : '' I am trying to find the connection of my family name `` Roberts '' with those in Wales . 
History says that they came from either Radnor , or New Radnor . 
My parents visited Wales but were not able to find any records . 
How do I find the connection ? 
Any clues please let me know . 
The story goes that a distant relative made their way to Radnor from either Radnor or New Radnor Wales , however the male person died . 
A lady by the name of Mary Roberts made it to the farm where I live about 1832 . 
The names of the male generations that I know are : my father and mother ; Mary and Edgar H. Roberts ; grandfaher and mother ; Emery and Susanna ; greatgrandfather and mother ; Levi and Lettice Roberts . 
I do n't know any further back . '' 
Bronwyn would like some information about a Susannah Edwards : Bronwyn : `` I would like some help in finding her parents . 
Susannah was born abt . 
1830 in Llansainttfraid Yn Mechan , Montgomeryshire . 
She died in 1863 in Shropshire . 
She was married to John Davies . '' 
Albert Haworth wants information about relatives coming from Newtown : Albert : `` I am researching my family history , and would like to hear from anyone who might be able to throw some light on the family of my gr gr grandfather Jeremiah Morgan who was born in Newtown , Montgomeryshire about 1813 . 
his parents may have been Edward and Jane Morgan or Morgans but I can not find any record of their marriage . 
He was married Maria Jones who was born in Fint about 1816 . 
They were married in Liverpool in 1836 and had five children , three of whom were profoundly deaf and dumb . 
He was employed as a labourer in a sugar factory and died in Liverpool in 1871 . '' 
Dafydd Evans from Llangadfan has a message for Carolyn Sheldon . 
Dafydd : `` Hi Carolyn . 
I was interested to read your message . 
My name is Dafydd and my mothers ' maiden name is Isaac and was born and raised in Llanfiangel yng Ngwynfa . 
I currently live in Llangadfan and I have a long family tree here throughout the area . 
I know there are not many isaacs in this area and would be happy to share some information about my family tree on my mothers ' side . 
If you could get in touch with me with any details of your research to your family tree in this area , i will speak to my family who will fill in the blanks . 
I am sure we could help regardless if we 're family due to our knowledge of the area . '' -RRB- 
Sally Reeve is looking for information about relatives who married in Llandinam in 1875 . 
Grandmother Sarah Prue married William Breeze in Liverpool in 1859 . 
His family came from Lydney North in Shropshire . 
William was a corn merchant and maltster . 
Two children , William and Mary were born in Liverpool and then the family moved to Hadnall in Shropshire where they farmed . 
Two more children were born , George and Agnes . 
William Breeze Senior died in 1873 . 
In 1875 Sarah Breeze married Frederick Ward , gamekeeper from Walford Shrops . 
but the ceremony took place in Montgomeryshire in Llandinam . 
There were plenty of Breezes in the area but not related to her as far as I can tell . 
From here the family moved to Dorset and finally to Cowbridge in Glamorgan . 
Two more children were born , Bertha , Maggie and William , my grandfather , I have lost track of the four Breeze children apart from Georgr . 
e There is a chance that Mary went to Canada or the U.S. Can any one help ? '' 
Kathy Davis would like to know more about realtives from Meifod . 
Kathy : `` Looking for Davies family . 
I believe Edwin Davies would have been my great great great grandfather . 
He had son Solomon who came to the U.S. in 1870 when he was 19 and changed his name to Davis . 
I believe Edwin had a Sister and a brother named Joseph . 
All but Solomon remained in Wales . 
Solomon marr4ied Lena Funk in the U.S. in 1877 she was from Watertown , WI . 
Edwin and his family resided in Meifod , Montgomeryshire . 
any help would be appreciated . 
Anyone have census info ? 
he would have been born probably in 1830 's . 
Lived in Montgomeryshire . '' 
Michael Tomlinson from Caernarfon wants information about relatives from the Welshpool area . 
`` I am looking for help in tracing two brothers who emigrated to New Zealand from the Welshpool area . 
I have a photograph of one namely William Edward Morgan who joined the 4th Waikato Rifles Cambridge NZ . 
I was always lead to believe the family farmed at Fair View , if anyone can offer any information I would be very grateful . '' 
John Lewis is looking for relatives who lived in the Cemmaes area of west Montgomeryshire : John : `` My paternal grandfather , William Lewis , was born in 1873 , at Gwaliau -LRB- then a small holding -RRB- , Cemmaes , Monts . 
, the last of 10 children . 
His parents were David and Margaret Lewis -LRB- nee Davies -RRB- and I do n't believe all the children were born there . 
Willliam migrated to Penygraig , Rhondda , became a miner and married Rachel Ann Edwards . 
William 's siblings were John , Elinor , Edward , Mary , Lewis , David , Elizabeth , Margaret and Jane . 
I am the son of William and Rachel 's eldest child , David John Lewis . 
I would love to contact anyone who has any connection with this family . '' 
Oli Viv Parry has replied to Ben Winter from Hatherleigh 's query : Oli : `` There is a funeral report on the `` Death of Mr. Charles Ricketts , Trebarried '' in the Brecon County Times dated 27th . 
May 1898 and I confirm there is an article about Trebarried in Brycheinog Vol . 
The house and buildings have now been converted into luxury flats . 
Under RootsChat.com there is an enquiry from ` Netskip ' - `` Anyone heard of a place called `` Treborzied '' - select Wales , then Breconshire Look Ups . 
There is an interesting web site on Google entitled `` Trebarried , Llandefalle , Brecon Powys . 
Here is a funeral report of Mr. Charles Ricketts which appeared in the local paper `` Brecon County Times '' dated 27 May 1898 . 
DEATH OF MR CHARLES RICKETTS , TREBARRIED . 
A WELL KNOWN AGRICULTURISTS PASSES AWAY We regret to record the death of Mr. Charles Ricketts , which took place at his residence , Trebarried , near Talgarth , on Thursday , the 19th . 
The deceased who was in his 53rd year , had for some time suffered illness , but death came earlier than was expected . 
The late Mr. Ricketts was one of the most prominent agriculturists in the County of Brecon , and was well known as a breeder of excellent stock . 
He was greatly respected by all who knew him , and deservedly so , and his death will be regretted by a large circle of friends . 
The funeral took place on Saturday , the deceaseds remains being laid to rest in the family burying ground at Talachddu Churchyard , the officiating clergyman being the Rev. T.W. Davies , the rector . 
As the mournful cortege entered the church , the Dead March was played by Miss Morgan , the organist , and during the service the choir sung appropriate hymns . 
The chief mourners were : The Rev. B W Ricketts and Mr. W. Ricketts Trephilip -LRB- brothers -RRB- , Mr. William Morgan , Courtlacca ; Mrs. Bishop , Maesyronen ; Mrs. Bufton , Trebarried ; Mr C. Ricketts , Miss Alice Morgan , Courtlacca ; Mr. John Ricketts , Mr. Edward Ricketts , Mr. W. Ricketts , and Mr. Lloyd Ricketts , Trephilip ; Mr. R. Morgan , Mr. J R Morgan and Mr. C. Morgan , Courtlacca ; Mr. H. Bishop and Mr. T. Price Cross House , Talgarth . 
The funeral was private , and amongst those invited to take part in the obsequies were : - Mr. D. Price Powell , J.P. , Howey Hall , Mr. Rees Bridgwater , Mr. R.O. Rees , Dr. D.V. Rees , Mr. D.W.J. Thomas , Mr. Rees Williams , Dr. Hubert Williams , the Rev. T.H. Bevan , Bronllys ; Mr. W. Powell , Trewalter , Mr. W. Maraton , Lady Arbour , Eardisley , Mr. Jeffrey Rees , Coalbrook , Mr. W. Perrot , Penpentre , Mr. Arthur Mohun-Harries , Mr. Williams , Pontybat , etc. . 
The coffin was of beautifully polished oak , with handsome fittings , and was made by Mr. Thomas Price -LRB- Velinfach -RRB- . 
The whole of the funeral arrangements were satisfactorily carried out by Mr. J.O. Larkin , High Street , Brecon . 
Floral tributes were sent by the following : - The Rev. B.W. Ricketts , Mr. R.O Rees , the Courtlacca family , from the servants of Trebarried with deepest sympathy Mr. & Mrs. Bishop , -LRB- Maesyronen -RRB- , Mr. Williams -LRB- Pontybat -RRB- , Mr. J.T. Pinches , -LRB- Hereford -RRB- , Mr. Rees Bridgwater , Mr. Powell -LRB- Trewalter -RRB- , Mr. & Mrs. Herring -LRB- Gaer -RRB- , Mr. Rees Williams , etc. '' The BBC is not responsible for the content of external websites Lisa Green from Swansea is looking for information about members of her family who once lived in Newtown . 
Lisa : `` Hello I have recently started doing the family tree and have found out that my great grandfather was albert Henry Davies born around 1900 in Newtown , he moved to the Gower and married my great grandmother Annie Stock . 
Does anyone have any information about his family , I think they may have lived in a Ladywell Street . 
I also think his father may have been called Thomas and his mother Elizabeth but not really sure about it . '' 
Helen Hart from Swansea wants to know more about her family 's history : Helen : `` Can anyone please help me . 
For the past two years I have been tracing my past and I have come unstuck . 
I discovered that my grgr grandmother was named Catherine Lewis and I was told that she was from Seven Sisters , D.O.B. unknown . 
I discovered that in 1897 she had a daughter born in the union workhouse in Swansea , she named the baby Mary-Maud but the following day renamed her Alice-May Lewis , there was no mention of any husband or father . 
I have had the same problem with Alice 's details as there is no mention of her husband or father to her children . 
Alice had a daughter named Dorothy Marks born in April 1915 , but Alice has gone back to her original name of Mary-Maud Marks on Dorothy 's birth cert . 
But Alice is buried as Alice Marks not Mary-Maud . 
This whole thing has exhausted me and at times I have felt like giving up as my family will not help , they keep telling me to leave the past where it is . 
But I want to know about my family . 
The same thing has happened to my grandmother Dorothy 's children , she had two sons and one daughter - my mum , and again there is no mention on any birth certs of her husband or the childrens dad . 
I have three generations of my family spanning back to 1897 with no male bloodline . 
If anyone can offer any help I would be very grateful . '' 
Ben Winter from Hatherleigh would like to find out more about relatives from Breckonshire : Ben : `` Does anyone have any information or photos of the Ricketts family of Trebarried hall , Brecknockshire ? '' 
Ben Winter also has a suggestion regarding a query by Andrew Dawson : Ben : `` In response to Andrews Dawson 's query about John Thomas Powell , I suggest he gets a copy of an article in the Brycheiniog Society journal of 1993-1994 vol 26 . 
There is an article in it about the Williams family of Trawscoed and Talachddu . 
John Thomas Powell 's mother Margaret Williams is mentioned in this article and she is also in a family tree . '' 
Jane Luvian-Wade is trying to trace relatives from Brecknock . 
Jane : `` Can anybody help me with finding my G.G. Grandmothers siblings ? 
She was Eleanor Griffiths born 1859 to John -LRB- born 1833 Gwenddwr -RRB- and I think Margaret , she had an elder sister Margaret , and younger sisters and brother called Mary , Jane , Ruth , John James + Julia -LRB- twins -RRB- plus young step sister Catherine . 
They lived on a farm called Cwmtydu Isaf near Merthyr Cynog then father and his second wife moved to Heollas Farm , Cathedine with Margaret and Catherine . 
My gg grandmother ended up in Brighton , East Sussex but despite many , many hours of searching I have never been able to find what happened to her sisters and brother . '' 
Alan Breeze from Swinton , Manchester wants to know more about the Breeze family of Caersws : Alan : `` I am looking for any information on my gg granfather james breeze who was born in caersws around 1812 , or anything on the breeze family in the area . '' 
Kathryn Robson is exploring her family tree . 
Kathryn : `` Hi , I am searching for some Richards family tree members arund the mid 1800 's . 
There are about 7 of the children born in and around 1852 all in an orphanage in 1861 and thats all I have found with them . 
I have tried to find them as children in the 1851 census in the UK and Wales but nothing . 
They are all from Bala , wales . 
Can you help me please ? 
Sean Montgomery from Canada is researching the family name . 
Sean : `` Are there still Montgomerys living in or near the Town of Montgomery ? 
I am from Canada and have been investigating my heritage which leads me to this site as well as in Scotland and Ireland . 
Very interesting site visit , Thank You ! '' 
Anthony from Oldbury is searching for relatives from Caersws . 
Anthony : `` I am trying to track down the parents of John Owen - 1832 who was born in Caersws in Mongomeryshire . 
I do know that he was listed as John -LRB- jun -RRB- Owen so his father must be called John , he moved to Broseley where he married Ellen Hartshorne in 16 Apr 1855 and had one child also called John in 1856 . 
Any help with this matter would be gratefully received with thanks . '' 
Jen Humphries from Adelaide , South Australia is looking for information about a relation from Brecon who live in the 19th century . 
Jen : `` David Davies was born 1836 , at Beaufort , Brecon , son of Evan Davies , born circa 1795 at Merioneth , a chairmaker , and Jane born circa 1795 of Brecknockshire , Wales . 
According to 1851 census he had two sisters Ann was born 4 Sept 1829 and Hannah 1832 . 
Ann married Joshua Thomas and came out to Adelaide , Australia from Aberdare , Wales with 6 children on `` Devon '' in1880 . 
Hannah appeared on a 1861 Census aged 29 , dressmaker , living with an aunt , Elizabeth Riddle , but it is not known whether she is Jane 's sister or Evan . 
David married on 7th July , 1856 at Carmel Chapel , Beaufort to Ann Joseph , born 1834 , Beaufort , daughter of Evan Joseph , born circa 1807 , a filler , and Mary Williams , born circa 1807 in Wales . 
Ann was one of at least 7 children , two of which came to Australia , Letitia and Deborah . 
David and Ann came to Australia in 1863 on `` Mary Shepherd '' with two children , Eleanor born 1861 , Beaufort , and Evan , 1863 . 
In Australia they had 8 more children , one of them my grandfather . 
It is possible they had more children in Wales between 1856 and 1861 and twins were born in Aust . 
I also feel there had to have been more children for Evan and Jane Davies but have not found the 1841 census for them . 
As I am just about finished writing a book about them , I would be thrilled to know of any other members of this Davies family . 
David became involved in Local govt in South Aust and his house was named Beaufort House . '' 
Heather Jenkinson from Sheffield is looking for information about the Watkins Williams Wynn family . 
Heather : `` I have come up against a brick wall regarding my family history . 
My mother had always believed that we had a connection to the Sir Watkins Williams Wynn family . 
I have traced us back to Great Grandfather Thomas Harrison and his wife Mary Ann WYNN . 
Mary Ann Wynns parents were Thomas Wynn d.o.b. approx . 
1801 born in London but lived in Radnor at Tavern Trap in 1841 and 1851 according to the census . 
His wife was called Anne and she was born in Radnor Presteign d.o.b. approx . 
Mary Ann my great Grandmother was aged 15 in 1851 and lived with her parents at Tavern Trap . 
I still have yet to connect with Sir Watkins Williams Wynn whom I am told would have probably been the third baronet . 
Can anyone please help . '' 
Catherine McMillan from Witney made an appeal in September 2007 . 
Catherine : `` I am researching my great grandfather James Evans from Mid Wales , he had a daughter Amelia Evans and died before she married an Alfred Greasley from Ruabon . 
I have no idea about James wife . 
Anyone who may recognize a connection , please leave a message . 
It is possible that they lived in the Oswestry area and if not perhaps Montgomeryshire as it was known then . 
I do know that Amelia originally married a Charles Benyon -LRB- prior to Alfred Greasley -RRB- who was killed in France in 1917 . 
Any help will be much appreciated , as this will also help tie up loose ends for my mother who is now eighty four years old and did n't know any information about her mother 's -LRB- Amelia -RRB- side of the family . '' 
Jane Feltham-Fletcher from Jersey is looking for information about any relations of James Owen , b. 1808 Llansantffraed d. 1886 Llanidloes . 
Jane : `` My g. grandfather , James Owen was a sergt . 
in the police force of Llanidloes for 35 yrs . 
Would it please be possible to trace the history of his working life in the force ? 
Also could anyone help me find out if my G. Grandfather attended the school in Llansantffraid village . '' 
Roxy Potts from Warrenton , Virginia , USA is trying to trace a friend of her father 's . 
Roxy : `` I am trying to find out information regarding a woman my father , Nick Allison , knew in England during the end of World War II . 
The only information I have is that her name was Eileen . 
He was stationed near Tredegar Park , Newport area from Sept 1945 to Dec 1945 . 
Eileen corresponded with my aunt , Katie Allison Rector who lived in Virginia from 1945 to sometime in 1949 . 
Most of their correspondence was regarding Eileen 's son . 
Any assistance to this would be appreciated . 
I do not know if this lady lived in the Tredegar Park area , but I do know that she and her family were in the area in December of 1945 . 
Any help finding information regarding her or her son would be greatly appreciated . '' 
Mair Morgan has sent us a response to a query made by Ann Jones from Rhyl . 
Mair : `` There used to be a family called Felix living in Gwalia Hotel North Parade Aberystwyth . 
They have reletives with a Jewellery shop in North parade T.J. Davies and son John the son is a son of one of the sisters . '' 
Andrew Powell from Sevenoaks in Kent believes he is related to David Brynmor Jones Andrew : '' I have seen and the emails from Diane Hitchcock and Dorian Griffiths about David Brymor Jones . 
I believe that I am related to him as my great-great grandfather , Abel Jones , was the brother of Sir David Bynmor Jones 's father , the Reverend Thomas Jones . 
Do you have contact email addresses for Dorian Griffiths and Diane Hitchcock ? '' 
David Baugh from North Carolina is trying to trace his lineage back to Wales : David : '' My last name is supposed to be Welsh origin but my trail ends in the Gloucestershire area . 
The furthest back I can trace is Baugh of Pensham , Worcestershire born about 1512 and his son Edward Baugh of Twining , Gloucestershire born about 1535 . 
Can you help ? '' 
Dave : `` I am looking for information relating to Jacob Stephens Jones -LRB- Shoemaker\/Cordwainer -RRB- and wife Elizabeth Pugh living in Llanbister during 1841-1881 . '' 
Gary Williams from Wylie in Texas contacted us in September 2007 : Gary : `` I too am searching for information on Evan Williams as well as his son Williams Williams . 
If anyone has any additional information it would be greatly appreciated . '' 
Colin Davies from Plymouth is looking for information so he can build a family tree : Colin : `` Does anyone have information on Thomas John Davies who died on 21 May 1952 , who was married to Mary Jane Evans who died on 12 December 1952 and lived at 8 Riflemans Row Pentrechwyth Swansea as I 'm building a family tree for my grandson . '' 
Dorian Griffiths has some information about David Brynmor Jones in response to a query by Diane Hitchcox Dorian : `` As regards Diane Hitchcox from Vancouver query regarding David Brynmor Jones he married Florence Justina de Mattos Mocatta -LRB- nee cohen -RRB- widow of abraham de mattos mocatta in 1892 at Paddington registry office . 
In 1901 census they lived in 27 Bryanston square London . 
I do not think they had children but Florence had children from her previous marriage . 
One was Mabel Mocatta and son Abraham . 
Florence died August 5 1921 at majestic hotel Harrogate and is buried in balls pond cemetery in islington . 
David Brynmor died August 6 1921 at the Hotel Metropole in Minehead age 69 i do not know where he is buried , but his father and two brother are buried in danygraig cemetry Swansea . '' 
Maureen Mathews wants information about family from Cardigan . 
Maureen : `` I 've been doing my family tree for the past three years , and have discovered that my great grandfather was from Cardigan -LRB- Lledrod Lower -RRB- he emigrated to Canada I think in the early 1900s . 
His wife was Gwen , and she followed him later with her two children which was my grandfather and his sister Hannah . 
I 'm traveling to Cardigan in a few weeks to try and find out some more information about the family he left behind , I know he had four sisters and two brothers , John , Jeremiah , Mary Elisabeth , Anne and Jane , so I 'm hoping I 'll find his great nephews or nieces , if their is any , I 'm keeping my fingers crossed . 
I have found all the family he had in Canada , they invited us out there last year , and weve just got back after another this year , where they have been having a Joneses reunion for the past thirty four years . 
Is there any way you could help me find out if I have any family left in Cardigan . '' 
Nancy Heali from Toronto , Canada is trying to trace relatives in the Capel Bangor and Aberystwyth area . 
Nancy : `` Are there any remaing buildings from the early 1900 's remaining at Maesbangor Farm ? 
My greatgranparents lived there in 1906 . '' 
Sadie Rivers from Cardiff has some information about the Joneses of Bank Square in Builth Wells in response to a query by Jackie Sharp and a response by Margaret Morgan Sadie : `` Hi ! 
She is one of ten and lived at number 5 Bank Square . 
Her parents were William and Esther Jones . 
I recognize a lot of the names you have mentioned , they are aunts and uncles to my mother . 
I also know the Metcalfs , They lived opposite my family on the square . 
If you 'd like more info let me know . '' 
Ann from Barry wants to know more about relatives from the Newtown and Llandinam area . 
Ann : `` I am seeking informtion about my great-grandparents John Owen who married Sarah ... ? 
and lived in Llanllwchairn , Newtown . 
They married c1860 , John was born in 1835 in Llanllwchairn and Sarah in 1840 , possibly in Llandinam . 
Can anyone help please ? '' 
Malcolm Andrews from Adelaide is looking for information about a relative from Llanbister . 
His parents were Jacob Jones Stephens -LRB- Shoemaker -RRB- and Elizabeth Pugh . '' 
Carrie Carter from Eaton is searching for relatives from the Brechfa area . 
Carrie : `` I am looking for any infomation on my GGgrandfather Evan James native of Brechfa , his sisters name was Jane Humphreys . 
Evan lived in Queensland until his death , his wifes name was Mary Ann Tehan and they had 7 children . 
Can you help ? '' 
Williams Davies from Ystradgynlais wants to trace relatives from Abercraf . 
William : `` I would like to trace my family tree on my fathers side I can go as far back as my grandfather who was Morgan William Davies and was born at Cefn yr erw farm in Abercrave can anybody help me with any further information regarding the family tree . '' 
Derek Edwards from Rogerstone is searching for information about his grandparents . 
Derek : `` Firstly my grandfather James Edwards , Born 1871 , Battle , Brecon . 
Secondly my great grandfather Cadogan Edwards , Born 1842 , Llandew , Brecon . 
Thirdly my great , great grandfather Cadwgan Edwards , Born 1792 , Llangammarch Wells . 
I would be very grateful for any additional information on the family or areas mentioned . '' 
Robin Barna has been searching for a start on his family tree . 
Robin : `` I have a funeral book of my great-great grandmother . 
Her name was Mary Davies . 
She had a son , my great grandfather , named Timothy Davies who had five or six children and Timothy is buried in a cemetary in Hancock County Kentucky . 
He died in 1950 . 
Timothy had a daughter , also named Mary who was born in 1888 and died in 1931 . 
My grandmother , Louise Davies Wettstain , was 28 at that time . 
That would make my great great grandmother , Mary born around 1850s or so . 
My grandmother always told me we had ancestors from Wales . 
Can you help me get this started ? '' 
John Skelland from Liverpool wants to know more about evacuees staying at Ysbyty Ystwyth during World War 2 . 
John : `` I am searching for information regarding evacuees from Liverpool to Ysbyty Ystwyth , in particular details of the family my father Richard Skelland lived with . 
Are there any official records of child placements during this time . '' 
Jill Adams from Buckinghamshire , England want more information about relatives from the Oswestry area . 
Jill : `` I 'm researching my family tree and it has taken me back to Oswestry ! 
I 'm trying to find infomation on any Adams , really from Oswestry . 
I do have some names already but have many blanks to fill in . 
The earliest information I have is a William Adams b 01 October 1775 , Oswestry his parents may have been William And Susannah ? 
I am after some old photos of Oswestry too . 
If anyone could help me that would be great I do have many names of ADAMS from Oswestry if its of any use to anyone too . '' 
Brian Willoughby has sent a response to JOhn Cotton 's query : Place : Llanbadarn Fawr , St Padarn , Cardiganshire -LRB- Anglican -RRB- . '' 
John Cotton from Brisbane , Australia wants to know more about the Atwood family of Aberaeron and Aberystwyth . 
John : `` I am researching the Australian family of Alban Atwood , a son of John Jones Atwood of Aberystwyth , who arrived in Victoria in 1855 . 
I noted a response from David Jones of London `` who has done considerable research into the history of the Atwood family of Aberaeron and Aberystwyth '' . 
Is it possible to make contact with him with a view to sharing information ? 
Conrad Culliven from Weston Super Mare in Somerset is trying to trace relatives who come from Aberhafesp and Leighton . 
Conrad : `` I am trying to trace my Grandfathers family , who lived in Aberhafesp and Leighton areas . 
My Grandfather was Reuben -LRB- or Rueben -RRB- John Rowlands born October 1888 . 
His father was Edward , born 1847 in Aberhafesp , he married Mary Benbow -LRB- born 1850 in Aberhafesp -RRB- in 1871 , Edward was a Farm Baliff\/Cattle Stockman\/Farm Labourer , and he and Mary had 10 or 11 children . 
I have been to the local churchyard in Aberhafesp , and found graves for some Benbow 's and Rowlands , but none of the above , I would be grateful of any info , that someone may have of these families , either where their graves may be , or where they lived anything at all . 
I would also like to thank the 3 local people I met while visiting recently , the lady in the churchyard at Aberhafesp , who gave me directions to two residences that the Rowlands family where know to live at , and thank you also the the lady & gent at those addresses , who gave me further info regarding the property and possible details regarding life in the 1880 's . 
I hope to hear from someone . '' 
Peter Denzil Rogers from Beccles in Suffolk wants information about a relative from the Welshpool area . 
Peter : `` My great great grandfather . 
I would be delighted to hear from any other interested party about him . 
We are hoping to be in Welshpool in late August\/early September fro a few days and any pointers to help will be greatly appreciated . '' 
Iris Abbott from Australia wants to trace relatives in Tregaron before visitng the area in late 2007 . 
Iris : `` I am living in Australia but intend to visit Tregaron , Mid Wales at the end of the year . 
I am trying to trace my g-grandmother and g - grandfather . 
The information I have is gg was Winifred Rees born 1838 Tregaron , she married Thomas Bell from Leicestershire . 
They were married on 6th May 1865 Parish of Caron . 
Thomas died 6th May 1873 in Llangafelach , Swansea . 
Winifred Rees family lived at 168 & 33 Mill Street , Tregaron . 
When she married she lived at New Row ? 
Any information would be appreciated before we arrive in Wales . '' 
John Porridge from Llandinam has sent in a response to Helen Gwynne-Kinsey 's query . 
John : `` I have lived in Llandinam for 80 years , and can offer the following regarding Mrs Gwynne-Kinsey 's information request . 
The Kinsey I knew was a third-generation maths teacher , who taught me at Llanidloes High until I was forced to leave - this would have been about 1935 . 
His christian name was Wmffre - but my brother Malcolm , twelve years my senior , had been taught by Kinsey 's father , also a maths teacher , and called Omar . 
Improbable as it may seem , my grandfather was at the time friendly with another Kinsey -LRB- I can not remember a christian name -RRB- , also a maths teacher , and progenitor of the two younger maths-teaching Kinseys . 
Maths was the family business it seems , and Wmffre , whom I grew to know socially in his later years , was known locally as `` Wmff the Numbers '' . 
He was a lithe , spritely man , with a sharp mind , but I am not aware of his exact whereabouts now . 
We were all Welsh-speaking then but I certainly have no Welsh now ! 
Which is something I regret obviously . 
Please pass my communication onto Mrs Gwynne-Kinsey , and invite her to contact me should she require any more information -LRB- though I ca n't promise I 've got any ! -RRB- 
Tish Main from Perranuthnoe , Penzance has a query about a relative who came from Llandinam . 
Tish : `` My paternal G\/Mother Lilian Amelia Buckley of Malthouse Cottage , Llandinam . 
She worked in service in London . 
Does anyone know where\/when ? 
When did she return to Llandinam ? 
Does anyone have info on her sister Gertrude . 
Believe she married a Pryce\/Price poss lived in the Colwyn Bay area . '' 
Elizabeth Anne Humphries from Port Alberni , British Columbia , wants to trace relatives who came from the Montgomery and Churchstoke areas in response to a query by Jill Newell from Rotherham . 
Elizabeth : `` I suspect we have some relatives in common . 
My grandfather , Thomas Aaron Davies , was born in Churchstoke , Wales , in 1872 . 
his parents were Martha Ann -LRB- nee -RRB- Davies and George Edward Davies -LRB- grocer -RRB- . 
He married Elizabeth -LRB- nee -RRB- Davies who was from the Montgomeryshire district . 
Her father or grandad was a presbyterian minister . 
Tom and Bess moved to Chicago , where my aunt and mother -LRB- Mary Gwendolyn -RRB- were born in 1910 and 1912 . 
There are still some Evans relatives in Chicago , and I would particularly like to contact Jane . 
-LRB- born in 1911 -RRB- . '' 
Gill Rudge from Coedway has a message relating to an earlier query by George Beastall . 
Gill : `` I just wonder if the places you are looking for are Llandrinio and Llandysilio , Montgomeryshire , both very close together . '' 
Angela Coggan from Melton Mowbray is trying to trace relatives who lived in Machynlleth in the 19th century : Angela : `` I 'm researching my Ancestors from mid Wales , my 2 x Great Grandmother was Catherine Micah b c1847 in Machynlleth . 
She married Evan Edwards Evans in 1876 and I believe he was born in Rhayader . 
They married in South Wales in the Pontypridd registration district and had my Great Grandfather Albert John Evans in 1887 . 
I know nothing more of Evan 's family -LRB- I presume they moved to South Wales looking for work as he was a coal miner -RRB- but Catherine 's parents were John & Catherine Micah and John was a Tailor and had a shop in Pentre Rhedyn St in Machynlleth . 
His parents were Thomas & Ann and Thomas was also a tailor . 
According to the 1901 census , John was living in Dovey View , Machynlleth with his Grandaughter , Kate Micah , 12yrs . 
Micah seems such an unusual name yet there seems to be a number of Micahs in this part of the country . 
I 'm sure there must be a connection between them all . 
As for Evans , well , it 's like looking for a needle in a haystack ! 
Any help , no matter how small , would be a great help . '' 
Darlene Best wants to find out more about family members who came from Llanbrynmair . 
Darlene : `` Mary Ann Evans was born in Llanbrynmair in 1847 she married in 1867 to Richard Evans son of Richard Evans and Ann Ashton . 
Her sons were Richard who was born in 1868 and died in 1870 when he pulled scalding water over himself . 
Eva was next followed by Charles ; Richard ; and Edward . 
Her daughter were Annie born who died of diptheria ; Margaret and Annie . 
She is on the 1881 cenus living in Carno Wales with her husband and children . 
Their children Richard 1868 died 1870 , Annie 1970 died with diptheria 1873 with diptheria , Margaret Born 16 Feb 1872 , Evan Evans born 25 May 1874 , Annie Evans born 1 Oct 1876 , Charles Aston born 18 May 1879 , Richard John born 11 September 1881 . 
Legend has it that Richard in-law already in Columbus Ohio send a letter stating that as a `` stonemason ' Richard would reap in the land of opporunity in his trade . 
So he packed up all their earthly goods and packed all of it to the seaport and immigrated 12 April 1882 . 
Mary and their 5 remaining children immigrated March 1873 and she died 1885 in childbirth . 
He then married Margaret Hughes of South Wales . 
Any help would be greatly appreciated . '' 
Myra Duffy from Stretton under Fosse wants more information about a relative who lived in Radnorshire in the 19th century and has information for Liz Turner : Myra : `` I wonder if anyone can help me find out more about my gt gt grandfather Evan Powell ? 
on him and his family from the 1851 , 1861 , 1871 censuses but unfortunately he never seemed to know his date of birth -LRB- very inconsistent ! -RRB- 
or his birthplace -LRB- just as inconsistant but always in Radnorshire and always beginning with LL ... -RRB- His wife , Anna Maria -LRB- nee Edwards -RRB- always gave the same date of birth 1825 and mostly the same place of birth - Llanfihangel Rhydithon . 
Their first two children were also born in Llanfihangel in 1847 & 1847 respectively , and my father remembers his grandmother saying her parents -LRB- Evan & Anna Maria -RRB- were married in Llanfihangel Church . 
If the first girl was born in 1845 , I assume the parents may have been married c1844 - but can not find any record of the event anywhere . 
Can anyone help with advice or a look up ? 
I have found a record of Evan Powell aged 20 -LRB- Ag Lab -RRB- living in Abbeycwmhir in the 1841 census . 
It is the only mention of an Evan Powell of the right age in Radnorshire during that census so I would like to think it was of my gt gt grandfather . 
Does anyone know if or how I could verify the information ? 
Also , Evan was an Agricultural Labourer who -LRB- according to my father 's recollection -RRB- used to go to ` Jobbing Fairs ' to be hired as a labourer every so often . 
Does anyone have any information on this type of fair ? 
If so , I would be extremely interested to read about it . 
In response to Liz Turner -LRB- nee Evans -RRB- who said her gt gt grandad , Thomas Evan Evans , came from the Evans Farm at Abbey cwm hir . 
I have found on the 1841 census of Abbey cwm hir a reference to MY gt gt grandfather , Evan Powell -LRB- and his parents & sisters -RRB- . 
Both men worked as Agricultural Labourers . 
If you look for the 1841 census under Thomas Evans , you may find his name . 
Sorry , I do n't have any info . 
about the actual farm . '' 
Brian Bell from Heinsberg has an unusual query : Brian : `` On the 1901 census my great great grandfather put his birth place down as south beach and the only on I can find in Wales is at Aberaeron . 
At some time in his life he moved to Rhymney and from there moved to the Northeast of England . 
My question is does the name Bell and Aberaeron have a connection ? '' 
Glyn Davies has some information regarding James Bennets : `` I was intrigued by Julia 's query looking for James Bennetts 's sons James Bennetts and John BANDS Bennetts after 1861 . 
I may not have much information about them , but the following may help with other research . 
In 1851 -LRB- Ref : Census HO107\/2407 92 Page 14 -RRB- there was an Edward Bennets -LRB- 21 -RRB- and a John Bennets -LRB- 20 -RRB- -LRB- lead ore miners -RRB- from Cornwall , lodging with my great-great-grandmother -LRB- maternal -RRB- and family at Belvue -LRB- later Bellvue Inn -RRB- in Ysbytty Ystwyth -LRB- she was from St Neot in Cornwall -RRB- . 
The family name was BANDS . 
A James Bennetts -LRB- probably the elder -RRB- was witness to my great-grandparents marriage -LRB- Anne BANDS and Jacob Jacob -RRB- in Oct 1859 at Ysbytty -LRB- Ref : Marriage Certificate -RRB- , so they must have known each other . 
I have found a reference to a widower James BENNET age 51 from St Mary Tavey , Devon -LRB- and family -RRB- still living at Ysbytty in 1881 -LRB- Ref : Census RG11\/5450 77 Page 1 -RRB- . 
My interest in Julia 's query is why John Bennetts also carried the name BANDS . 
I have not found an historical relationship between the two families -LRB- Catherine Sarah Bands - my G.G. Grandmother -RRB- was formerly a DAVEY . 
Can Julia possibly help me with this ? '' 
Margi was adopted as a baby and is trying to find out about her roots in Knighton : Margi : `` I am looking for any information on a William Thomas Hammond . 
He married Eleanor Mary Jones in 1909 . 
His father was a baker , her father a joiner . 
William Thomas ' mother was Martha Davies , Eleanor Jones ' mother had a small shop in the viliage , not sure of her name , and Vincent Edward died in the war and his name is on a memorial in the town . 
Any help would be great , thank you . '' 
David Jones from Pecatonica , Illinois USA has unearthed information about people from the Tregaron area settling in Wisconsin . 
David : `` In doing my genealogical research of two towns in Southwestern Wisconsin settled by Welsh emigrants in the 1840-1850 period , I have discovered that many of them originated from an area around the Cors Caron bog . 
The movement from Wales , GB to Wales , WI and Genesee , WI was started by one person , Richard `` King '' Jones , who bought some 5000 acres at $ 1.25 per acre , and arranged for several hundred families to come to Wisconsin , where they purchased plots of land from him , ranging from 40 to 200 acres . 
My own ancestor , John M Jones , lived on a small plot on a hill overlooking the Southeast part of the bog . 
It is a mile or so from Tregaron . 
There is a raised ring there where an early structure once stood . 
The farm is now called Lwyn-Gwinau , and the Victorian Ordnance Map shows the former earthen structure listed as Castel Lwyn-Gwinau . 
John M Jones left the Tregaron area in 1847 with his family and moved to Southeastern Wisconsin , where the native Indians numbered 100 for every white man , according to his grandson , my grandfather . 
Welsh was spoken in these Wisconsin towns well into the 1930 's . 
The towns are about 20 miles west of Milwaukee . 
One can find more on the individual Welsh emigrants to this area in Wisconsin by searching Google for my treatise , `` The Welsh Pioneers of Waukesha County , Wisconsin '' . 
If someone in your family left Wales for Wisconsin during that time period , I would be interested in their names . '' 
Jean Farmery from Machynlleth suggests a website for people interested in family history : Jean : A very informative web site is www.genealogy.about.com It is an American site but gives lots of tips and information on how to find your family on other sites . 
It is very easy to read and follow . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external websites Phil is trying to find out about Gwynfryn Hall , near Criccieth , which Sir Hugh Ellis-Nanney had built in the late nineteenth century : Phil : I am trying to find out about Gwynfryn Hall , which Sir Hugh Ellis-Nanney had built in the 1870s . 
I believe from the 1950 's onwards it became a rest-home for the clergy , a hospital for old people , and subsequently an hotel . 
Does anyone have any more information and is the building still standing ? 
Louise Cass in London is looking for information about a Barmouth mother and son from the early 20th Century : Louise : I am trying to help a friend 's father look into his family history but am finding it quite difficult . 
I am looking for details on Jennie Anderson , she gave birth to a Joseph Henry Anderson 26th Jan 1910 at 5 Glasforth terrace , barmouth . 
There are no details of the father the birth details simply give her occupation as a Domestic servant at the Taly-Don Hotel . 
Joseph was brought up by an Ann Jane Williams . 
He later worked for a butcher called C. H. Rabbetts in Barmouth . 
I do n't really know where to look any more for details of Jennie or Joseph . 
A missing person advert was placed in a national Sunday paper 1955-1960 , for Jospeh , yet again I am not sure how I can follow this lead . 
Any help will be greatly appreciated Anne Alt from Radnor , Ohio , U.S.A. is looking for information about relatives who lived in the Castle Caereinion area in the 19th Century : Anne : `` My great great grandfather William J. Williams born 1820 in Caefn y coed in Llanfihangel-yng-Ngwynfa to John and Mary Williams -LRB- nee Williams -RRB- . 
John and Mary were married in Castle Caerenion in 1815 . 
The family left Llanfihangel by 1836 when their daughter Elinor -LRB- Eleanor -RRB- Williams was born . 
However American census states Elinor\/Eleanor was born in Wales . 
Elinor 's tombstone states she was born in December 1836 . 
Any suggestions\/help would be appreciated . '' 
Derek Edwards from Rogerstone wants to know more about relatives who used to live near Brecon : Derek : `` I would like to find out more about my great grandfather Cadwgan Edwards born 1843 and my grandfather James Edwards born 1870 who lived on a farm near Battle , Brecon . 
The farm at one time was actually called Battle Farm but I believe the name has changed since then . '' 
Suzanne Williams from Colorado is looking for relatives who lived in Llanidloes during the 19th century : `` I am seeking information about my Gr Gr Grandparents , Solomon Jones and Mary Owen married in 1871 in Llanidloes . 
They migrated to Newark Ohio in 1873 . 
Any information and family ties would be helpful . '' 
Lindsay Davies from Papakura in New Zealand wants to know about a relative who served in the Crimea during the 19th century : Lindsay : `` John Davies was born 1830-1840 in Aberystwyth , served in Crimea , went to New Zealand 1860s in the army . 
Married in New Zealand . 
Was killed New Guinea 1877 . 
Myron Evans wants to know more about realtives who lived in Ystradfellte during the 19th century : Myron : `` I would be most grateful if you could help with two points of genealogy concerning the Havard family . 
My great great grandfather was Thomas Havard of Ystradfellte , born in 1840 or 1841 at Ystradfellte in Powys . 
The 1851 Census appears to cite his grandfather David Havard , born in Defynnog in Powys in 1797 , but this may be an error , David Havard could be his father . 
Do you have any further information on Thomas Havard of Ystradfellte , born in 1840 or 1841 , and David Havard of Defynnog , born in 1797 ? 
I would also like to trace the ancestry of David Havard of Defynnog back to Sir Walter Havard of the eleventh century , who held the Manor of Pontwilym , only about ten miles from Defynnog . 
Is the Y chromosome of the Havard family known ? '' 
Ann Bradley from Burley-in-Wharfedale , Ilkley is looking for ancestors from the Welshpool area : Ann : `` My great grandma Alice Caroline Jones was born in Welshpool in 1859 . 
At some point she came to Oldham in Lancashire and was married to my great grandad James Thorley in 1878 . 
I am trying to find out a bit more about her parents and about the district she came from . 
Her father , Thomas , was a butcher but I do n't have any dates for him or a name for her mother . 
I would be grateful of any information or clues of how to find it . '' 
Marianne Morgan from New Jersey , USA , wants help to decipher information gained from tithe maps . 
Marianne : `` Since my first contact , I have received additional information from a distant cousin in Sussex , England . 
She has the following information from Tithe Maps found at the NLW : Bwlchygeuffordd , Morgan Morgan , Farmhouse tithes for same : 1 Buildings and yard 1 acre 8 perch paying 2 shillings 0 dinarius 2 Cae bach pasture 2 rods 8 perch paying 6 dinarius 3 Caer Odyer arable 4 acres 2 rods 23 perch paying 7 shillings 6 dinarius 4 Schoolhouse paying 2 dinarius 5 Caer pantyfynnow arable 1 acre 3 rods 12 perch paying 3 shillings 6 dinarius 6 Caer pasture and quarry 9 acres 2 rods 12 perch paying 16 shilling 6 dinarius 7 Cae Cyffiau arable 3 acres 1 rod 11 perch paying 6 shillings 6 dinarius 8 Cae Pistill pasture and arable 6 acres 36 perch paying 11 shillings 6 dinarius 9 Plantation -LRB- presumably a wood or copse -RRB- 2 rods 22 perch 10 Cae barlysbach arable 2 acres 22 perch paying 4 shillings 0 d 11 Cae Oddiaei yfford arable 3 acres 1 rod 21 perch paying 6 shillings 0 d 12 Cae Clover arable 2 acres 3 rods 6 perch paying 6 shillings 0 d 13 Cae Ysgybor pasture 2 acres 3 rods 16 perch paying 8 shillings 0 d 14 Cae Gwain Hay 5 acres 1 rod 10 perch paying 15 shillings 0 d 15 Cae Bryn arable 15 acres 3 rods 12 perch paying 1 pound 10 shillings 0 d 16 Cae Clyfyn Crych arable and hay 5 acres 34 perch paying 6 pounds 7 shillings 6 dinarius . 
Total 65 acres 1 rod 32 perch paying 6 pounds 7 shillings 6 dinarius . 
Gorse House and Garden , Richard Morgan : 1 Cae Danty arable and pasture 1 acre 3 rods 19 perch paying 5 shillings 6 pence 2 Cae Odiarty arable and pasture 1 acre 3 rods 20 perch paying 4 shillings 6 pence 3 Cae Canol pasture 1 acre 1 rod 3 perch paying 3 shillings 4 Cae Ucha arable 2 acres 0 rods 8 perch paying 4 shillings 6 pence Both properties were owned by my 4th Great-Grandfather , John Morgan , and bequeathed to his sons , Morgan and Richard . 
Morgan was the eldest son and my 3rd Great-Grandfather . 
I have just begun my quest for my long lost Morgans of Cardiganshire and would be most grateful for any help you can give me in deciphering this document . 
Heather Knechtel from Ontario in Canada has some information for Glyn Davies : Heather : `` Glyn , I am fairly sure you and I are closely related . 
My grandparents were Glyn Davies and Audrey Cuthbertson , of Edmonton , Alberta . 
Glyn was the son of Arthur Davies , born 22 Sept , 1862 , at Llanbadarn . 
Arthur 's father was James Davies . 
I have no date\/place of birth for James , nor do I have his parents . 
I wonder if your John -LRB- Arthur -RRB- Davies might be my James ' father ? 
If you think there might be a link , please contact me . 
I have a bit of info that might be of interest to you . '' 
Valerie Cooke wants information about a friend 's relative who came from Knighton : `` Geoffrey Neil Goodchild is trying to find out as much as he can about his mother who came from Knighton , Powys . 
Geoffrey only knows that his mother - Katherine Elfrida Slater - was born -LRB- he thinks -RRB- in 1899 . 
She was either orphaned or given up for adoption , but she worked -LRB- probably in service -RRB- at Mellington Hall , Churchstoke near . 
She left Wales for Australia , where she married , and gave birth to 4 children , but she died at around age 29 . 
Geoffrey Neil Goodchild was the baby of the family and was raised by his father , but his older siblings were given up for adoption . 
Geoffrey does know that his mother , Katherine Slater , was an accomplished pianist , but -LRB- for some reason -RRB- was forbidden to play for ` entertainment ' . 
So , possibly , Katherine was raised in a strict environment . 
Would you please be able to point me in the right direction ? 
If I could find out something more about Mellington Hall , it may shed some light about this lady and her life at this old mansion . '' 
Melanie Williams from Caerwys in Flintshire wants to know more about realtives from Llanfyllin . 
Melanie : `` I 've recently stared looking into my family history and have found that my great-great grand parents , Jim and Jane Roberts lived at 10 Bridge Street Llanfyllin Powys , in the mid-late 19th century . 
I know they had a daughter Rachel -LRB- my great grand-mother -RRB- but know very little else . 
I presume they or Rachel left Llanfyllin for Ruthin -LRB- North Wales -RRB- as this is where my grandmother -LRB- Rachel 's daughter , Jane Ellen Williams -RRB- was born and brought up . 
I would be very interested to hear from anyone who has any information about the above or about Llanfyllin itself . '' 
Patricia Edmonds from Rhayader is looking for a relative : `` The person who said he was another relative of mine . 
-LRB- Daniel Davies -RRB- . 
Benjamin Davies b1821 and Elizabeth Davies had a daughter called Margaret who married -LRB- James Evans -RRB- who was born born 1856 . 
Benjamin was my great great grandad . . 
and James Evans was my great grandad . . 
if you see this please write and maybe i can add you to my tree . '' 
Cerys Evans from Cwmtwrch is trying to trace relatives form the Ciliau Aeron - Aberaeron area : Cerys : `` I 've been trying to find my garandfathers family that lived in Aberaeron . 
I 've gathered some information and tried looking on census 's but I 've had no luck ! 
My grandfather John Lewis Ivor Evans born July 1920 in aberaeron apperently lived on a farm with many of brothers and sisters . 
I 've been told the farm 's name was Cwmyn or Cwmun near or in Ciliau Aeron . 
Theres not much that i know of his parents names but i think it was Tom or Thomas Evans . 
His father and Elizabeth Jane , or Eliza Jane Evans . 
His mother his brother maybe still alive today he moved to Australia years ago his name Morgan Evans . 
I think he 's younger than my grandfather . 
The family had their own business in Aberaeron Morfa Bakery\/cafe . 
Not sure of the dates when it was opened or closed . 
Tom Evans apparently worked as a miner he tragically drowned either at sea or elsewhere when my grandfather was very young . 
The family moved over to Cwmtwrch in the 40s or 50s and thats where my grandfather met my grandmother Kathleen . 
If anyone knew or has any info please help . '' 
Rowena Griffiths from Croydon has responded to a query made by David Woodall from Brierley Hill , West Midlands who wanted to know more about Richard Stephens , who lived in Newtown in the 19th century . 
Rowena : '' Your Gt Grandfather had a sister called Mary Ann Elizabeth Stephens born 2 Jan 1850 , Redgates Cottage , Berriew - she was my great grandmother . 
So I guess we are related . 
I have also had trouble tracking down this family & sent off for her brother 's birth certificate as a last resort -1 was so surprised when I did a Google search which came up with your query ! 
I do remember my grandmother talking about her Aunt Matilda as she had a few photos of her with possibly her daughters , one of whom Edith Mary died aged 26 , & I knew the surviving sister Elizabeth Jane married Frederick Meredith & moved to the Lichfield area . 
What I do know from what my grandmother told me & from all the research that my sisters & I have done is that Gt Gt Grandad Richard Stephens was born in Llanllwchaiarn abt 1818 & he died on 23 Sept 1885 , -LRB- his father was also called Richard . -RRB- 
On 23 Jan 1842 he married Mary Mantle in Aberhafesp Church -LRB- by Banns -RRB- she was born 1808 , Llandinam died 26 Jan 1890 , Berriew . 
Her father was called Thomas Mantle born circa 1776 , Llanbadarn , Radnorshire . 
I have come up against a brick wall trying to trace her mother or any of this family . 
Gt Gt Grandad was a Gamekeeper on the Glansevem Estate , although earlier info shows him as a labourer , & they lived in Redgates Cottage , Berriew . 
My Great grandmother Mary Ann Elizaneth Stephens married James Threadgold , also a Gamekeeper at Glansevern & they lived at Stone House Garthmyl , Berriew . 
They had 9 children , 5 of them died from consumption etc & they are buried in the cemetery at Berriew . 
3 sisters & 1 brother survived . 
Matilda is also buried there & her father John Ewing is buried in the next grave as he was living with her later on in life . 
It is difficult to trace the Ewings as most of the Irish records were destroyed in the fire but we do know that John married a Welsh girl from Newtown called Elizabeth . 
I am also intrigued by the fact that Richard Junior 's father is shown as Edward but today I obtained a copy of his marriage cert from the local office at Newrown & on that he is shown as Richard . 
I did wonder whether he may have been called Edward Richard . '' 
My maternal grandfather was Edward Wilson b1844 . 
He was later a lead miner and lived in Darowen - 1 , Bronyffynon . 
He married Elizabeth _____ and they had five children . 
I have n't been able to get back further than that , so I 'd appreciate any help . 
Diolch yn fawr . '' 
Dr Paul Graves-Brown has some information about Thomas Jones the poet preacher : `` He was the first minister at the independent chapel at Bryn Llanelli c.a. 1841 . 
I am reasonably certain its the same thomas jones as am currently researching the history of Bryn Chapel . 
However , there were a number of people described as `` the poet preacher '' so I ca n't be 100 % certain . '' 
Mary Rowlands from Quebec is trying to trace relatives who lived in Welshpool `` Looking for Ann Rowlands born in Welshpool in 1856 . 
On one census it states that she was born in Lanner Comlon but I ca n't find this place anywhere . 
Iwas hoping that this place would help me decide which Ann was mine . 
Her father was John Rowlands carpenter Ann Jones from Rhyl is trying to trace relatives named Felix who lived in Aberystwyth : `` I live in Rhyl and tracing my family tree . 
I am related to a family whose surname is Felix and believe that this family lived in Aber , owning a guest house on ? 
drive does anyone have any info . ? 
Sherry Lewis has a follow-up on her previous request for information regarding the Powell 's at Boughrood Castle : '' I read your posts from Debbie Jones -LRB- who has been very helpful and has emailed me -RRB- and Michelle Orai . 
Debbie Jones - Thanks so much for your helpful information ! 
I did find more info on Edward Powell . 
His father Thomas was born in Llowes about 1804 , mother Mary born in Clyro about 1806 . 
Their other children were John H. -LRB- b 1836 -RRB- , Hugh -LRB- b 1839 -RRB- , James -LRB- b 1840 -RRB- , Jeremiah -LRB- b 1845 -RRB- and Rebecca -LRB- b 1846 -RRB- . 
I know Edward came to the U.S. in 1870 , but I have no idea what happened to the other children . 
John and Edward were born in Llowes - all the other siblings were born at Boughrood . 
If there is anyone who has connections to the other siblings , I would love to hear from you . 
Michelle Orai - Appreciate your info as well . 
Lewis is my ex-husband 's name , so I doubt we are related but I wish you good luck with your search . 
My maternal great-grandmother was a Powell - Edward was her father . 
She went back to Wales many times and spoke until her death about the beauty of Wales and the warmth and kindness of the Welsh people . 
It is my dream to bring my mother over when I can arrange a visit . '' 
George Beastall is stumped about where two of his relatives were born in Montgomeryshire . 
`` Hello I am trying to trace my family tree and have come against a brick wall . 
My GtGt Grandfather was caller Robert Bowen and his wife was Elisabeth his d.o.b 1814 and her d.o.b 1858 and he was born at Landrinah Montgomeryshire and she was born at Landrsiella Montgomeryshire but i can not find such a place could you please help me . '' 
Brian Hamblin from Exmouth wants information about a relative living on the border . 
`` I would be grateful for any information about Frank Arkinstall , born about 1910 , lived in Shropshire and served in the Royal Navy during WW2 . '' 
Nora Howell Rumpf from Arlington , Virginia USA has a query about a relative who may have come from Ceredigion : `` Hugh Howell was born 17 April 1659 in Wales and died in America -LRB- New Jersey -RRB- in 1745 . 
We think he came to America sometime around 1680 , and may have sailed with two brothers . 
He may have come from Cardiganshire -LRB- specifically Llanbadarn Fawr Parish -RRB- . 
We 've been looking for Hugh for years , with no success . 
Any information would be much appreciated . '' 
Carol Evans Webb wants information about her father 's family : '' Edward Evans b , 1797 Basseleg Wales married Lydia ___ -LRB- 1809 , Brecon Wales -RRB- . 
They had a son John Evans b. 1822 , Risca Wales M. -LRB- 1 -RRB- Martha . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- Elisabeth _______ . 
John had a son Charles P. b 1844 Risca Wales , married Matilda Fry . 
Charles was my great grandfather . 
This branch of the family came to America , in about 1880 . 
John , had three other children . 
John b. 1842 , Edward b. 1848 , Martha S. b. 1850 . 
All born in Risca Wales . 
I would like to know more of Edward born 1797 , and if any of the other children in Wales may have descendants who know more of the family 's origins . 
Charles left the family sometime after 1884 while in America , and we have n't anymore information on what became of him . '' 
Ann Davies wants information about somebody who tried to trace members of her family three years ago : `` An add was put in curiousfox 2004nov . 
reads ` elizabeth davies : married lewis lewis at pontypridd in 1908 lived in 56park st abercynon . 
her parents were william and moria davies . 
first child was robert john lewis born 1909 . 
in 1901 cenus lewis lewis age 15 with father john lewis living 53park st. with mother elizabeth lewis both born Llanidloes Montogmery , any info would be grateful . ' 
I have contacted the site but the email given for the add is long gone as robert john lewis was my father it would be interesting to find out who this person is as the lewis family still own the home could u help please . '' 
Jane Feltham-Fletcher has manages to trace a relative : `` Thank you so so much I 've made contact with a cousin from my g grandfather , James Owen 1st marriage from llanidloes , it 's through your message board this was made possible . 
One more request please ! 
My g grandfather , James Owen b. 1808 & his wife Mary nee Morris b. 1851 , was in the police force in Llanidloes for 35yrs . 
He had two marriages & 11 children . 
I come from his 2nd marriage . 
It would be just wonderful to make contact with any of James ' 2nd family members . 
My grandfather , Maurice Handel Owen was one of 5 sons . 
their names being Llanwellyn , Herbert . 
James , not sure the 5th ! '' 
Susan Durston from Cardiff wants information about a relative who lived in Cardigan in the 19th century . 
`` My great grandfather was a stonemason from Penybont , Cardigan . 
He was born in 1861 and was Married to Mary born 1866 . 
He had children , Edith born 1892 , Eunice Maude -LRB- my grandmother -RRB- born 1899 , Margaret Jane born 1893 and Stanley born 1898 . 
His father was also James , a leadminer born 1830 . 
My mother insists that one of her grandmothers was Scottish so I have been trying to trace her roots to no avail . '' 
Edna Pierce from the USA wants information about a realtive who lived in Brecknock in the 19th century : `` I am researching the Williams from Breckinshire Wales . 
The name that I have is a Samuel Williams born May 15 , 1814 in Breckinshire Wales -LRB- found this information on his tomb stone -RRB- . 
He came to America when he was about 5 years old with his parents which I think is William Williams and Isabella Pugh . 
Both William and Isabella came from South of Wales . 
William Williams might have been born in 1770 and Isabella born about 1772 . 
Samuel siblings could have included Mary , David , William and John . 
Hope you can help . 
I have searched for the Williams family for some time with no luck to finding out for sure if William and Isabella are the parents of Samuel . '' 
Julia Hooper from Tasmania in Australia is trying to trace a relative who lived near Presteigne in the 19th century : '' I am trying to trace the father of a William Hooper who was born in Bestbrook , which I believe to be somewhere near Presteigne , in about 1806 . 
This William Hooper married a Susannah Swetman in Brecon , Hay in 1835 . 
At the time of his wedding William had St Peter 's Parish , City of Hereford as his address . 
William and Susan spent their early married life in the City of Hereford until Susan died in 1855 . 
William remarried in 1858 and moved to live in Budock , Cornwall for the rest of his life . 
I think William 's father 's name was Thomas Hooper and I am wondering if there are any records of a Thomas Hooper living and\/or working in Bestbrook or surrounds at the time of William 's birth . 
I would very much appreciate any help I can get . '' 
Heather Bann wants to get in touch with realtives of her grandfather - Charles Hammond , who was related to one of England 's greatest cricketers , Wally Hammond . 
`` Charles Edward Hammond was my grandfather he was born 1st March 1892 and was one of seven children , I do not have any names for any others , he married Annie Burns a nurse from Yorkshire in 1914 and they initially settled in Machynlleth where my mother Margery was born in 1915 . 
They did not have any other children . 
He was a police Sergeant in Llanidloes and Four Crosses before retiring in the 1950 's to Oswestry where he died in 1958 . 
I believe he was a second cousin of Wally Hammond the Cricketer and looked very like him . 
I would love to get in touch with any of his family . '' 
Pat Edmonds wants information about her ancestors from Rhayader , one of whom lived opposite the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley : `` I have been doing my family tree and my family came from Rhayader , married at Cwmdauddwr Church . 
It is such a beautiful town we are coming over to see it and I believe my great great grandfather had a farm in the Elan Valley of Rhayader , Benjamin Davis , whose daughter was my great grandmother and lived opposite Shelley The Poet . 
We have to come to find more information on my ancestors . '' 
David Woodall from Brierley Hill , West Midlands , wants to know more about Richard Stephens , who lived in Newtown in the 19th century . 
`` I am trying to find any information about the forebears of my great-grandfather , Richard Stephens , who was born 27 Jan 1844 at Dolforwyn Hall , Bettws . 
According to his birth certificate his father was a labourer , also named Richard Stephens and his mother was Mary Stephens -LRB- ne Mantle -RRB- . 
He married Matilda Ewing -LRB- born c1844 in Larne , Co. . 
Antrim , Northern Ireland -RRB- on 7 Oct 1869 at the Parish Church in the Parish of Newtown , Montgomeryshire . 
On this occasion Richard Stephens ' father is shown as a gamekeeper named Edward Stephens ! 
Matilda Ewing 's father is shown as a shoemaker named John Ewing . 
If anyone has any information , I should be grateful if they could let me know . '' 
Margaret Morgan has some information regarding queries by Emma Mitchell and Jackie Sharp : `` Re Emma Mitchell 's Grandmother who was brought up in an orphanage in Rhayader . 
Do n't know about an orphanage but there was a '' workhouse '' in Rhayader about the date that she gives . 
It has been `` done up '' etc & is now the trendy Brynafon Country House Hotel on the edge of town in South Street Rhayader . 
Re Jackie Sharps request for information on the Jones family from Builth Wells . 
I worked at Builth Wells Post Office in the 1950 's & have lived locally all my life . 
There is also a Len Jones living in Rhayader who I think is connected to the Jones 's of Bank Square . '' 
Mike Andrews from Reading wants to contact relatives from the Four Crosses area of Powwys . 
`` I 'm researching my family 's history which I can trace to the Llanymynech\/Carreghofa\/Four Crosses area in the 19th century . 
Family names in this area were Baugh , Rogers , Edwards & Humphrys\/Humphreys . 
My Great-Great Grandfather was Mr L.J. Baugh , Innkeeper at the Cross Keys , Llanymynech . 
The family later moved to Wallasey . 
I know a great uncle , George Rogers , lived at Lower Garthmyl , Berriew during the first half of the 20th Century . 
He was married to Ada Rogers and they had a son , Alan . 
I would be most interested if any descendents would like to contact me . '' 
I 've recently stared looking into my family history and have found that my great-great grand parents , Jim and Jane Roberts lived at 10 Bridge Street Llanfyllin Powys , in the mid-late 19th century . 
I know they had a daughter Rachel -LRB- my great grand-mother -RRB- but know very little else . 
I presume they or Rachel left Llanfyllin for Ruthin -LRB- North Wales -RRB- as this is where my grandmother -LRB- Rachel 's daughter , Jane Ellen Williams -RRB- was born and brought up . 
I would be very interested to hear from anyone who has any information about the above or about Llanfyllin itself . 
Nancy Fermazin wants information about Radnorshire : `` I am wondering if you could give me some history of Farming in Radnorshire , Wales circa 1842 or why natives were leaving Wales at this time to go to US ? 
Was there a famine ? 
or wars or ... I have a great grandfather who was born in 1819 in Llanano , Radnorshire , Married in 01 Oct 1842 and left Wales for US in June of 1844 with his wife and child . 
My ancestor was an agricultural laborer . 
His father in law , John Ingram born in 1794 worked at a mill Llwynbeddw Mill , Llannano Radnorshire Wales . 
John Ingram and wife also left Wales for US circa 1844 ? '' 
Susan Brown from Boreham in Essex wants information about relatives living in Knighton in the 1920s . 
`` This is a huge appeal and i would appreciate any imformation no matter how big or small that u can give me . 
I 'm looking into my family 's past and really want to visit Knighton but want to visit the correct place . 
I 'm looking for any relatives of Annie Francis Morgan Evans of anyone that knows of this family which lived in the area till 1927 when they sold their property Treburvaugh which I 'm now lead to believe is a bed and breakfast ? 
I 'm asking if anyone can come forward with information about the building or the family . 
I dont know if any of the relatives are still living in the area . 
I really need the help of the locals with this one . 
Please come forward . '' 
Moira Cholerton from Hertford has asked for more help in tracing relatives from Llanidloes : `` The one line I have been unable to trace is that of his daughter Isabel -LRB- aka Isabella -RRB- Owen\/Owens -LRB- b 1831 , Llandysilio , Mont. -RRB- . 
In 19 August 1851 , at Trinity Church , Shrewsbury , she married John Roberts of Bangor , a miner and son of a farmer , John Roberts . 
Their daughter Isabel Ellen Roberts was born on 25 November 1852 in Llanidloes . 
At that time John was living in Corris , Merionethshire . 
A second daughter , Catherine Ann Roberts -LRB- Newtown 1854 4th qt -RRB- , was born in Llanidloes on 12 November 1854 . 
At the time of the 1861 census Catherine was with her grandparents , James and Susannah Owen , in Montgomery whilst her sister and mother were living in the parish of Llandysilio , Mont. . 
Isabel was a dressmaker , as she had been in 1851 , and her husband was not with the family . 
In the 1871 census Catherine , 16 , was with her aunt , Sarah Ann Shelby and family in Bersham , Denbighshire and her occupation was `` NK '' . 
However Catherine was present at James 's death in May 1886 when she was `` of the Royal Infirmary , Manchester '' so she may have become a nurse . 
I have been unable to find any of the family in later UK censuses . 
I was informed that one of her daughters , Nellie -LRB- presumably Isabella -RRB- , married James Slater and had children , Bella and Idris . 
Further , that James was a quarry proprietor in Delta , Pennsylvania . 
In the US census of 1880 I found an Isabella Roberts , 18 , born in Wales of Welsh parentage living in Philadelphia . 
This is likely to be the Isabella I sought as I 've found no other young lady of that name , of the appropriate age and born in Wales in previous censuses . 
Unfortunately the only other member of the household is a housekeeper . 
I was also told that a great granddaughter of Isabel -LRB- nee Owen -RRB- was living in North Wales in the middle of the last century . 
Julia Hooper from Tasmania is looking for information about a relative born in Bestbrook : `` I am searching for the birth of a William Hooper who was born about 1806 in Bestbrook , Radnorshire . 
I have not been able to find any record of this birth in Bishops Transcripts so far . 
His father may be a Thomas Hooper who could have come from Hereford or even possibly from Cornwall . 
Can anyone help ? '' 
Moira Cholerton from Hertford has a response to queries by Pat Melville-Baker and Jane Feltham-Fletcher about relations in Llanidloes : `` James Owen of Llanidloes was also my gg grandfather . 
I am descended from his son Elijah . 
Elijah and his brother Elias were quite close . 
I have a photo of them together at a great-aunt 's wedding . 
Both were teachers at neighbouring schools and both graduated from TC Dublin before going into the church . 
I have written an account about James Owen , Susannah Morgan and their descendants that I update as I learn more and send to distant ` Owen ' cousins I have traced . 
There are kinsfolk all over the world but some of Elias Owen 's descendants still live in the Llanllechid area . 
I would be delighted to exchange information and also to learn more about James 's second family . 
I had been told that a descendant of Maurice Handel Owen was called George Holford Owen , that he was a solicitor in Johannesburg and that he visited England in WWII when he was in the navy but efforts to trace Maurice 's line in S Africa proved fruitless . '' 
Vanessa Dutton -LRB- nee Morgan -RRB- is looking for relatives from Llanidloes . 
`` I am looking for info about my grandfather and great grandparents from Llanidloes . 
My great grandparents were Margaret Morgan -LRB- late Jones -RRB- -LRB- formerly Williams -RRB- and David Lloyd Morgan . 
My grandfather Morley Bennett Lloyd Morgan was born on 23 March 1880 in Great Oak Street , Llanidloes . 
If anyone has any info on this family I would love to hear from them . 
Martha Jane moved to Canada alone at the age of 16 . 
Her mother Mary 's maiden name was Davies and her parents were Edward and Ann Davies . 
Mary and Richard had 12 children in total . 
The others names were : Jack , Mary -LRB- Williams -RRB- , Hannah -LRB- Walsham -RRB- , Gertie -LRB- not married -RRB- , Richard , Ted , Millie -LRB- Evans -RRB- , Reg -LRB- moved to Australia -RRB- , Val , Glyn , Ron . 
Any information regarding any of these people and who their grandparents were would be most appreciated . '' 
Julie Howells from Perth was looking for information about the Howells family from Hay-on-Wye : `` I am interested in any history about the Howells family in Hay . 
My suname is Howells and I am from Hay but do not have much info about the history . '' 
This reply from John S Batts pointed a picture of a possible relative on the BBC Mid Wales website : `` There is a picture of `` Bumper '' Howells , aged 10 on the LHS of the old photograph of Hay Hockey Team , 1910 , amid the photographs of Old Hay on the Eric Pugh webpage . '' 
Eleanor Cole from Kings Clipstone is looking for relatives who once lived at Oswestry and Llanfechain : `` I am looking for any half brothers and sisters descendants of Pryce Morris who was born in 1840 in Oswestry . 
After his mothers death his father married Ellen nee Edwards in 1843 . 
They lived for a while in and around Llanfechain . 
Pryce married -LRB- although I can , t find a record -RRB- Anne Rees from Shropshire and eventually settled in Aberdovey . '' 
Jennifer Middleton from Aughton is looking back 200 years to try and find some information : `` Griffydd Evans and his wife Margaret were born in Llanfair around 1801 can you help ? '' 
Diane Hitchcox from Vancouver , Canada has been researching information on Sir David Brynmor-Jones and has picked up on information from Dorian Griffiths inquiry : `` My grandmother Elizabeth Mary Berry -LRB- nee Warman -RRB- was in service as up-stairs maid to Lord and Lady Brynmor-Jones for 10 years dating from 1904-1914 at their residence Bryanston Square London . . 
As she died in 1960 I never got to ask her all the questions I would loved to have known about her life with this family . 
I do know that she went to Ascot with them and the opera etc. . 
She left Bryanston Square to come to work at Government House in Victoria , BC ... this was arranged by David Brynmor-Jones as he was friends with the Lt. Gov. at that time . 
The Brynmor-Jones ' presented my grandmother with a beautiful gold pin watch with a lovely inscription from them for her 10 years of service ... she also has a small gold locket with the birth\/death date of a 4year old child and a lock of hair ... but with no name . 
I would like to know who Lady Brynmor-Jones was -LRB- maiden name etc. -RRB- and what children they had and where they are buried ? '' 
This was Dorian Griffiths ' query : `` I am seeking information about Rev Thomas Jones , born Rhayader 1819 died Swansea 1882 , he was father of John Viriamu Jones first principal of Cardiff University . 
His father , John Jones is buried in Rhayader , if possible I would like to know where he is buried , also if the Rev Thomas Jones had any brothers or sisters , what were their names etc. the Rev Thomas Jones was a well known person he was called the poet preacher , his other sons were Sir David Brynmor Jones and Leifchild Stratten Jones , both were Liberal M. P 's . '' 
Andrew Dawson of Norwich is trying to trace relatives of his great grandfather : `` John Thomas Powell was born in 1852 in Brecknockshire , the son of John , born 1820 in Llandrindod and Margaret , born in 1819 in Trawscoed . 
John Thomas Powell 's siblings were : David Price Powell , Phillip W Powell , Margretta E Powell , Mary Ann Powell and William Lewis Powell . 
They lived in Church Street , Llanelly . 
Their father John was a bank clerk . 
In 1871 , my great grandfather John Thomas Powell was working as a railway porter at Keighley station in West Yorkshire . 
John Thomas Powell was ordained in 1881 . 
Before moving to Castle Acre , he was curate at St Marks in Birmingham , St Andrews in Plymouth and St Peter and Paul in Swaffham . 
Between 1885 and 1888 , he was assistant secretary of the Lords Day Observance Society . 
John Thomas Powell died in 1925 . 
A Pryce from Leeds has a query about her Trefeglwys-based relative : `` I am trying to find out why my great , great grandfather Robert Pryce -LRB- married Mary Anne Jones in 1851 -RRB- is not registered as staying with his family in Trefeglwys in the 1861 and 1871 censuses . 
All I know is that for some time he was a slate quarrier in Arthog Merionethshire . 
Would anyone out there have links in their family tree to the Pryce 's of Trefeglwys , Montgomeryshire ? 
These include Mary Anne Pryce -LRB- nee Jones -RRB- born 1831 , who married Robert Pryce in 1851 . 
Robert Pryce 's mother was Elizabeth Pryce born 1798 in Trefeglwys according to the 1861 census . '' 
Pat Melville-Baker has written a response to Jane Feltham-Fletcher 's query : `` I am also descended from James Owen of Llanidloes although from his first marriage . 
His son Rev Elias Owen MA is my GG Grandfather so we are distant relations . '' 
M. Jane Feltham-Fletcher from Jersey wants any relatives of James Owen , who was a police sergeant at Llanidloes , to contact her . 
`` My g. great grandfather , James Owen b. 1808 in Llansantffraed d. 1886 in Llanidloes , married twice & had 13 children . 
His 2nd wife , Mary Owen nee Morris b. 1851 in Trefeglwys d. 1906 in Llanidloes , was my g. great grandmother . 
James Owen 's 11th child , was my grandfather . 
My grandparents , Maurice Handel & Margaret Ellen nee Mills married in Llanidloes on the 8th July 1902 & shortly after left for Cape Town , South Africa , where my father , Derwent Holford -LRB- Taffy -RRB- was born on the 7th Nov. 1903 . 
It would be wonderful to hear from any family . '' 
Sue Rogers from Carmarthenshire wants to trace a member of her family in Montgomeryshire : `` My ancestor Richard Tibbot was born in Montgomeryshire in abt 1788 , moved to South Wales to work on the Swansea Valley canal system , he married Mary Powell of Defynnog at Capel Callwen on 23rd December ,1815 . 
He died in 1876 Aged 88 at Cilybebyll . 
Interested in finding his family line from Montgomeryshire please . '' 
F Pawsey from North London wants to know more about a cottage near Penrhynoch : `` My great aunt , Mrs Edith English , lived in Bancydarren , in a cottage called ` Gwelfor ' -LRB- or something similar -RRB- , back in the 1940 's and\/or 1950 's . 
I would love to locate the cottage , even though it 's name may have changed . 
Can anyone help me , please ? '' 
Glynn Davies wants to correct comments that he posted in December 2005 . 
`` The information I posted on your site proved to be incorrect . 
My Gt Gt Grandfather John -LRB- Arthur -RRB- Davies was born in 1818 in Llanbadarn Fawr , son of Simon Davies , a Maltster . 
John married Mary Owen from Pembrokeshire in Newport , Monmouthshire in 1853 , and lived in the Abersychan area for the rest of his life . '' 
Denise Browning wants to know if anyone else is researching the family tree of Robert Hughes of Llanidloes . 
`` Robert Hughes was born in 1840 in Llanidloes , Montgomeryshire , Wales . 
He married Caroline Moore born 1843 , Hatfiel . 
I think Robert 's father was William Hughes born 1798 of Llansaintffraid , Montgomeryshire . 
I think Robert 's mother was Mary Madox or Ruddox . 
Robert moved around to Bury , Ulverston , Milnthorpe and finally settled in Lancaster . 
They had a son Ephraim 1870 Ulverston who died aged 2 . 
Louisa 1878 Durham . '' 
Phil Abberley wants more information about a woman born in Welshpool in 1922 . 
`` Trying to trace any record of birth certificate for olive jean tompson , later titley . 
No matches on any ancestor sites . 
Born1922 , Welshpool , married 1944 , died1976 Colwyn Bay . '' 
Dorian Griffiths has found out more information about Rev Thomas Jones : `` I would like to thank Christopher Hill for his information on the Rev Thomas Jones . 
I have found his burial place in dany graig cemetery in Swansea . 
He is buried along with his sons viriamu , glasfryn and irvonwy . 
However could anybody tell me where the rev thomas jones 's parents are buried in Rhayader as i wish to visit the place in the spring . '' 
Peter Williams is interested in finding out about anyone living in the Llanfair Caereinion and Meifod areas who could be related to his parents : `` Could you please help with my family history . 
My father was born in Llanfair in 1903 to John Thomas Lloyd and Rachel Jones and were married in the church in Meifod where Rachel lived with her parents in 1900 . '' 
Suzie from London wants to know more about relatives who lived in Machynlleth : `` I am interested to find out any information about the Morris family who lived in Machynlleth . 
My grandfather was Louis Jervis Morris b. 1886 , his mother I believe to be Anne C Morris b. 1858 . 
Family folklore paints a stern picture of her ! 
They may have had an ironmongers in Mach . 
Hilary from Brecon has a suggestion about Jackie Sharp 's query regarding the Joneses of Builth Wells : `` Why do n't you put a letter , with your query , into the local weekly Newspaper called The Brecon and Radnor Express at The Bulwark , Brecon , Powys . 
It could well be read by Builth residents who would have known the family . '' 
Ann Hughes from Chester has this query : `` I am trying to find out about the children and grand-children of Pryce Pryce-Jones of Newtown can anyone help . 
Kenneth R Lloyd from Maesteg wants to know more about a relative who was born at Bettws Bledrws , near Lampeter : `` Can anyone provide me with the data on Elizabeth Davies 's husband ? 
She was born in Bettws Bledrws , Cardiganshire , Wales & moved to Cellan Cardiganshire , Wales . 
She is listed as head in 1881 census as living at ` Plasnewydd ' , Cellan , with two children & two granchildren . 
One of the Grandchildren -LRB- John -RRB- was my Grandfather . 
Christopher Hill has a response from a query by Dorian Griffiths about Thomas Jones of Rhayader . '' 
The first chapter of the Life of John Viriamu Jones , written by his widow , Kathareen -LRB- Johm Murray , London , 1921 -RRB- , gives a brief acount of the life of Thomas Jones 1819 - 1882 . 
Thomas had two brothers , the youngest died when Thomas was 17 . 
His older brother was the father of the Rev Morlais Jones of Lewisham Congregational Chapel in south London . 
The brothers were brought up by their grandfather - their father died when Thomas was 4 . 
Thomas moved to Swansea in the 1840s . 
He had become a Congregationalist minister , having found the Wesh Calvanism he was brought up with too restricting . 
He traveled thoughout Wales preaching , gaining an increasing reputation . . 
In 1858 he moved to Camden , north London where his preaching attracted intellectuals and literary figures such has Browning . 
He returned to Swansea in 1861 . 
in 1877 he moved to Melbourne , Australia for three years of ministry . 
In 1880 he returned to Swansea -LRB- Minister , Walter Road Chapel -RRB- He died in 1882 . 
He had five sons : David , Leifchild , Irvonwy -LRB- drowned in Swansea Bay 1886 -RRB- , Moralais -LRB- engineer d. 1905 -RRB- , John Viraimu and a daughter , Annie . 
It was his wish that his body should be buried in the highest and windiest part of the Swansea cemetery , overlooking the bay . 
I assume this to be Morriston Cemetery . 
His son John Viriamu is also buried there so should be easy to check . 
Richard Powell from Ludlow has a response to Pat Springer 's query : `` Pat -LRB- Powell -RRB- Springer from Indiana USA , was looking for any information on the Powell family of Breconshire . 
I do not have much and the name is very common now in all parts of Wales and the borders . 
My grandfather William Powell farmed at the Neuedd Blemaeneau farm Maesmynis near Builth Wells . 
He was born about 1850 , had two sons who had seven girls and one son -LRB- me ! -RRB- . 
I have one son to carry on the name from 1850 . 
Let me know if we are related . '' 
Delyth Evans wants to find out about her relatives ' connection with Union Workhouses at Brithdir and Islawrdref : `` I 'm looking for information regarding these workhouses . 
My grandfather and his mother were both there in the 1901 . 
Mt grandfather was a 1yr old . 
I would like to know how I get information as to how long they both stayed there and if possible where they moved to ? '' 
Emma Mitchell from Leighton Buzzard wants to know more about her grandmother , who was brought up in Rhayader : `` My Nanna was brought up in an orphanage in Rhayader in the 1920 's and thirties , but I can find no information about it . 
I am hoping to use this as a starting point , although I am not sure she was abandoned in Rhayader , just that she was left at a vicarage , and brought up in Rhayader . 
Any help greatly appreciated . 
Patricia Hammond from Victoria , Australia wants to know more about a trial that took place in Brecon 160 years ago . 
`` I am searching for the trial record for one Joseph Lawler ex East End of London - tried we believe in Brecon c. 1845 for misdeeds undertaken locally to Brecon . 
Thanks for help . '' 
Julie Dowland from Rownhams in Hampshire wants to know more about her relatives movements in Brecon and Ystradgynlais : `` My great grandfather , George Havard , was born at Penwern Farm , Boughrood in 1873 . 
He got a family maid -LRB- Elizabeth Annie Davies born 1878 -RRB- `` into trouble '' and was disowned by his father for it . 
They wanted to be together so saved enough to emigrate to Patagonia at some point in the late 19th century . 
I know that several of my great aunts & uncles were born out there , but I am unable to establish where my grandfather -LRB- William John Davies Havard -RRB- was born , as they moved back to Wales at some point . 
They eventually settled in Ystradgynlais , but I have a feeling they went back to the Brecon area first . 
Has anyone any thoughts as to how , as a fulltime worker living in Hampshire , I might be able to find this information out . 
I have already looked at websites for Patagonia which gave me the details of the great uncles and aunts concerned . '' 
Averil Page from Pensby in the Wirral wants to know more about her family : `` I would be very grateful for help in finding my grandmother , Susannah Edwards ' birth details . 
She was born in Llanfair , Montgomery in 1839 according to the 1881 census . 
On her marriage certificate of 1859 , her father is given as Elias Edwards , shoemaker and the address was in Liverpool . 
Also John Edwards is shown as a witness . 
She married Christopher Ibbotson , milk dealer and joiner , and they eventually moved from Liverpool city to Waterloo\/Crosby . 
My grandmother was Beatrice Ibbotson who married James Ross . 
I can not find Susannah 's details in the GRO index and those certificates I have sent for have failed to be the right ones . 
Phil Hawkins from Bristol wants to know more about his family at Llanbadarn Fawr : `` I am trying to find out about Evan Davies , my grandfather , who was the miller at Llanbadarn Fawr near Crossgates until 1900 . 
He had quite a large family and his son , John , took over the mill when he died , I believe . 
My branch of the family moved to the Rhondda , but I 'd be very interested to hear about what happened to the family that remained . '' 
Wendy Witton -LRB- nee Jones -RRB- would like to find out if she has any relatives still living in Builth Wells : `` My grandfathers name was Thomas Harry Jones of Dolgerdon Park Rd he was a builder and undertaker . 
His children were Harry Leslie , John Elwyn , Maldwyn Price , Elsie Myfaney , Phyllis Emily and the youngest my father Thomas Harold . 
My grandmother 's name was Sarah Arabella nee Price . '' 
Dorian Griffiths wants more information about a family who lived in Rhayader in the 19th century : `` I am seeking information about Rev Thomas Jones , born Rhayader 1819 died Swansea 1882 , he was father of John Viriamu Jones first principal of Cardiff University . 
His father , John Jones is buried in Rhayader , if possible I would like to know where he is buried , also if the Rev Thomas Jones had any brothers or sisters , what were their names etc. the Rev Thomas Jones was a well known person he was called the poet preacher , his other sons were Sir David Brynmor Jones and Leifchild Stratten Jones , both were Liberal M. P 's . '' 
Dorian Griffiths had made this query : `` I am seeking information about Rev Thomas Jones , born Rhayader 1819 died Swansea 1882 , he was father of John Viriamu Jones first principal of Cardiff University . 
His father , John Jones is buried in Rhayader , if possible I would like to know where he is buried , also if the Rev Thomas Jones had any brothers or sisters , what were their names etc. the Rev Thomas Jones was a well known person he was called the poet preacher , his other sons were Sir David Brynmor Jones and Leifchild Stratten Jones , both were Liberal M. P 's . '' 
Jennifer Mathias has information for people 's relatives who have emigrated to America : `` Norma Maddox Garwood from Cleveland , Ohio is trying to find when her relative Thomas Wesley Maddox entered the USA around 1900 . 
From a brief search there is one Thomas -LRB- Morgan -RRB- Maddox who entered the States around this time ; his last residence given as Treorchy . '' 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external websites . 
Andrew Bebb from Liverpool wants to find out more about his great-grandparents ' birthplaces : `` My grandfather , Richard Bebb , was born in Manafon in Montgomeryshire in 1856 . 
I have a list of his seven children including my father , Vincent , born in 1900 . 
My grandfather , Richard , was the son of Thomas Bebb and Mary Jones . 
Thomas is listed as a farmer and Mary was obviously not able to sign her name as the informant of my grandfather 's birth and simply made her mark . 
Richard was a liveryman when he moved to Yorkshire . 
He moved around Yorkshire -LRB- and Salford -RRB- quite a bit . 
I would love to get some information on my greatgrandparents birth places - presumably in the 1830 's . 
Phil Lumley has recently started to trace his family tree and wants to know more information about relatives who lived in Aberystwyth in the 19th century : `` I have recently started to trace our family tree and have found John Lumley Jones born 1871 in Aberystwyth who seems to be my great great grandfather 's sister son - my great great grandfather being George Lumley . 
There is family talk of him and his wife emigrating to America and then returning soon after . 
Is there any connection with this link ? 
Sian Jones from Marldon in Devon wants people from Eglwysfach to help her trace the history of her family : `` I am looking for anyone who was born or lives at Eglwysfach , Cardiganshire . 
My great grandfather , Thomas Edwards , was born and went to scool there . 
His father was Lewis Edwards and mother Gwen . 
Thomas married a Mary Parry and left the village . 
Has anyone any information on any other Edwards that lived in the village . 
Anything will help with my family reserch . '' 
Wilfred Owens from Tennesses , USA is looking for information about members of his family from Aberystwyth : `` I am trying to locate the family of Mrs. Ronald -LRB- Gwyneth -RRB- Thomas . 
In the 1940 's she lived at East Carlton Park Nr Market , Leic . 
She had a son Geoffrey , and a daughter , Sylvia . 
Her parents were Elizabeth -LRB- Polly -RRB- and John Lumley Jones , Aberystwyth . 
Grandparents were Ann and Joseph Owens , Aberystwyth . 
I am also trying to locate family of Mr. Edwin Thomas that lived at Stuart St. Treorchy in the 1940 's . '' 
Colin Harvey from Tongwynlais is looking for information about two families in Trefeglwys : `` I have been researching the DAVIES and OWEN families of Trefeglwys Montgomeryshire and have become a little stuck . 
Richard DAVIES worked on the railways and was living in Caersws in 1861 . 
He married Mary OWEN from Caersws about 1861 . 
I 'm unsure exactly where , as by 1863 he was living in Tenby where my grandfather , Edward DAVIES was born . 
Anyone with further information would be a great help . 
Frankie from Hay has this reply for Janet Edge who posted below : `` I live in Hay and it 's registration is Herefordshire so your search may have covered the wrong admin area , Clyro is sometimes Powys sometimes Hfds ! 
From experience , particularly with welsh ancestry , the middle name is the mother 's maiden name , so the surname of one of the wives may have been Worpell . . ? 
Do you have any particular details of the marriage date , location cos Hay is 10mins away and Clyro the same , I could contact the people concerned and get them to check the records . '' 
Jackie Sharp is trying to keep up with the Joneses of Builth Wells . 
`` Hi I 'm searching for information on Jones families from Builth particularly Bank square in the 1940s\/50s . 
I do not have any first names except there were two sisters living together , who would have been connected to an Arthur and Alfred jones born circa 1875 and 1883 , Arthur lived in Llanidloes for a while . 
Alfred lived all over Penybont , Knighton , Leintwardine , working as a farm labourer , his wife was Gertrude -LRB- Gerty\/mary -RRB- nee Bishop , Arthur jones married her sister Celina -LRB- lena -RRB- . 
They had large families between them - some names are John , Alfred , Fred , Dennis , Leonard , Harold , Edwin , Nelson , Gerty , Freda , and Rose . 
Arthur 's children were Dilwyn , Price , Lewellyn , Byron , Albert , Mary poss more . 
Poss connection to a Lewellyn and Rachael Jones nee Metcalf or Sidney and Bertha Jones Nee Warner . 
Liz Turner -LRB- nee Evans -RRB- sent in this query about Abbey Cwm Hir . 
`` My father told me that his great-grandad came from a farm called ` Cwm Grenlyn ' -LRB- not sure of the spelling -RRB- in Abbey Cwm Hir . 
I think his name was Thomas Evan Evans and he married a lady called Alice Burley . 
I think they ran away or at least left without the family 's blessing , and settled in Birmingham , I suppose about the 1870 's or a little later , where they had 4 sons , Thomas , Richard , Griffith and Harold . 
Does anyone know anything of either family or whether the Evans farm still exists under the same name ? '' 
Trevor Owens from Mt. Claremont in Western Australia submitted the following query : `` I am trying to trace my family history of the `` Owens '' family including Thomas and Mary Owens who lived in Cardigan and or Aberystwyth . 
I believe they migrated to Australia , but may have lived some time previously in the USA . 
Any assistance would be appreciated . '' 
Wilfred Owens from Tennessee , USA , wrote in about her Aberystwyth connections : '' My Dad was Thomas Owens , one of his sister 's was named Mary and they lived in Aberystwyth before Dad came to America . 
Thomas Owens lived in Aberystwyth before he came to America , one of his sisters went to Australia . 
He had a brother Joseph that lived in Newport . 
Joseph had a son , Trevor that lived in Evesham in Wiltshire . '' 
Yvonne Gale -LRB- nee Owens -RRB- sent this information in reply in July 2006 : `` My Owens family came from Aberystwyth , and Thomas migrated to the USA in 1914 , a sister Edith migrated to Australia and her married name was Jones . 
There was also a Trevor Owens , he was the son of Joseph Owens . '' 
If you can add any more information , please get in touch . 
In July 2006 , we received this response from Eileen Arkinstall : `` Seeing your enquiry re ARKINSTALL family : _ I was born in 1940 , Eileen Mary Arkinstall , daughter of Frank and Eileen Arkinstall . 
Frank , my father , was born 1910 , born and lived most of his life in Shropshire . 
I have quite a bit of his family tree going back about 6 generations . 
Many of the Arkinstall branch were from Shrops , Staffs etc. . 
I am now Woodcock and know no more Arkinstalls as our branch appears to be coming to an end . 
I have one sister - no offspring , and have one daughter myself , so the name is no longer carried on . '' 
Pauline Statham also responded in July 2006 : `` I have in my possession a picture painted by E Arkinstall -LRB- no date -RRB- . 
Was left it by my mother who inherited it from her step sister who lived in West Bromwich in the West Midlands . '' 
Janet Edge from Liverpool is hoping for help in solving a long-standing mystery : `` I would like to know if anyone who has been doing their family history in the Hay and Clyro area has come across the following people with wives from Hay , whilst looking at the various census sites with one Ancestry now going back to 1841 . 
The various census entries read like this with the date of birth usually a year ahead : - Thomas Howard born about 1795 Lathom Publican Ann Howard born about 1801 Hay 1841 - Windle nr St Helens Lancashire 1851 & 1861 - Prescot also in Lancashire . 
One child Thomas was probably the one we found baptised in Clyro 1825 - 1826 and another Frances Ann baptised in Over Hulton Lancs Jan 1833 . 
They both had the same mother Frances named in the parish records . 
Samuel Worpell born about 1795 Romford Essex Publican Sarah Worpell born about 1795 Hay Brecknockshire They were at the Hulton Arms Pub Over Hulton , Deane -LRB- Near to Bolton -RRB- Lancashire from 1841 until the 1861 census . 
I know that Sarah died in Bolton 1864 . 
In the 1851 and 61 census return they had Elizabeth and Frances Ann Howard living with them listed as nieces . 
The Powys Archives office has done a search but has come up with no marriages featuring Thomas Howard and Frances or an Ann or Frances Ann in the Hay or Clyro area . 
Can anyone help me with this dead end to solving a mystery in our family history for 20 years to find out why my mum 's grandfather was called Thomas Worpell Howard b Liverpool abt 1857 and maybe provide the surnames of the 2 wives mentioned above ? 
Thank you everyone in Mid-Wales as my mum and her sisters were evacuated in the Knighton Llanfair Waterdine and Lloyney area in World War 2 . '' 
Lynda Cook from California is trying to trace the source of information she found on the web : `` I 'm looking for information on William Williams , b. 29 Sept 1731 in Eglwysfach . 
His father is supposedly Evan Williams , b. 1699 m. Dorothy Unknown , b. 1703 same location . 
William married a Jane -LRB- possibly Woodward -RRB- about 1750-1760 . 
By the early 1760s they had immigrated to America , living first in Chester Co. . 
This information is on the internet , but no sources are provided . 
Can anyone suggest where I can find source data to either prove or disprove this information ? '' 
Rita Tyrrell from Dunedin in New Zealand is looking for information about her great great grandfather 's family : `` He was Isaac Jones b C 1808 in Denbigh . 
His wife Mary Hughes b C 1812 in Meifod . 
Isaac was an Attorney at Law and practiced in Llanfyllin , Oswestry , Salop & Llanymynech . 
The family lived at 6 High St , Llanfyllin in 1851 , 1861 at 15 Penybruhn -LRB- Hard to decipher from Census -RRB- . 
There was a family of 6 children , Felix , Ann , Elizabeth , Frances , Mary & Alice . 
I have data on Frances & Alice only . 
I would be very grateful for any further data . '' 
Linda McCarthy from America has a query about the surname Tyrrell : `` Do you have a Lewis Connection in your family tree ? 
I have Norman Earl Lewis married to Helen L Tyrrell 1907 Darlinghurst , NSW , Australia . 
His father , Arthur Earl Lewis was from Wanganui , NZ and grandfather was Edward Lewis from England ? '' 
Marjorie Lloyd Thompson Sparks thinks her family may hail from a border town in Mid Wales : `` I have been searching for my x3 great grandfather 's roots for 15 years . 
Here is what I know : Humphrey LLOYD married Elizabeth BARKLEY 10 Aug 1797 in the Parish Church in Ellesmere . 
This was done by licence AND bond of 500 GBP . 
I have a copies of both documents from the Litchfield Record Office . 
Humphrey occ was slater . 
On the IGI , I see a christening of a Humphrey 22 Aug 1760 Meifod , Montgomery , Wales . 
Parents Lloyd TUDOR and Jane JONES . 
This seems a possibility . 
Humphrey and Elizabeth had 9 children : Rebeckka 1803 Chr Dudleston , Chapel Parish of Ellesmere ; Peter , 1804 , Chapel Parish of Ellesmere ; John 1806 Chapel Parish of Ellesmere ; Edward 1809 Chapel Parish of Ellesmere ; David 1811 Chapel Parish of Shrewsbury ; Joseph 1813 Chapel Parish of Shrewsbury ; Daniel 1815 Chapel Parish of Shrewsbury ; Elizabeth 1817 Chapel Parish of Shrewsbury ; Martha 1819 Chapel Parish of Shrewsbury . 
I do not think that Humphrey was from Ellesmere , Shropshire even though the licence shows that . 
I think he probably comes from a border town in Wales . 
If anyone has heard of my family , please get in touch . 
I have read many many microfilms of parish records at our LDS Family History Center . 
Neither Humphrey nor Elizabeth are on the 1841 . 
Any suggestions welcome . '' 
Norma Maddox Garwood from Cleveland , Ohio is seeking information on how his Grandfather came to America : `` I am trying to find out how my Grandfather arrived in the USA from Liverpool or Wales some time in the 1900s . 
His name was Thomas Wesley Maddox from Montgomeryshire , Wales . '' 
Yvonne Gale from Cardiff sent in this query regarding family in the Ysbyty Ystwyth area : `` I have traced my grandparents Sarah Lewis and John David Owens , they were living in Ysbytty Ystwyth in the 1901 census . 
Sarah Lewis was born in Ysbytty Ystwyth and had 1 sister Avarinah , and 3 brothers William , Richard and Lewis Lewis . 
I know Richard moved to Pontypridd to work in the mines , as he is in the 1901 census living there with his 8 children . 
I would like to know if any of the Lewis 's or Owens 's are still in the district . '' 
Joy Davies has sent some further information regarding a query from Ian Frank Davies -LRB- see below -RRB- : `` I have a copy of a family tree for John Davies of Morda Mill which was given to me by my mother-in law , it was compiled about 20 years ago . 
I assume that you also have a copy as it was sent to a large number of the family . 
I have not been able to add to this as the older members of the family have long since died . 
I think our branch of the family are through John born in 1841 . 
I am interested in the fact that he died in a rail accident , do you know anymore about this . 
I have traced him and his family on a couple of census forms but it is a dead end from there . '' 
Ian Frank Davies from Halesowen , Birmingham , is looking for family connections in the Oswestry area : `` I am trying to trace John Davies 1811 , who was a millwright at Morda Mill in Morda , Oswestry , 1830-1860 ? 
He married Mary Williams in 1816 and they had several children , including Thomas -LRB- 1843 -RRB- , Mary Marther -LRB- 1849 -RRB- , Joseph -LRB- 1856 -RRB- , James -LRB- 1846 -RRB- and John -LRB- 1841 -RRB- who died in a railway accident in Brecon in 1882 . '' 
If you can help , please email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk . 
Helen Gwynne-Kinsey is looking for information about a farming family from Llanidloes : `` I am searching for information about a man called Solomon Kinsey . 
He was a farmer from Llanidloes , married to Elizabeth , and was born around 1800 -LRB- give or take a few years -RRB- . 
As far as I know , they had four children : Mary Kinsey born c. 1827\/8 ; Anne Kinsey b. 1829 ; Jemima Kinsey b. c. 1831\/32 and Evan Kinsey b. 1834 . 
my family is descended from Evan who moved to South Wales in the 1850s . 
Is there anyone out there who has information or connections to this family ? 
I 'd be very much obliged if someone local could help . '' 
Linda Wood from Huddersfield is looking for Lewises ... `` Are there any Lewises still around in newtown montgomeryshire ? 
Are you related to a David Lewis who went to Australia ? '' 
Sandra Wyman from Leeds is seeking information about the Davies family from Llanarth : `` Looking for any information on my grandfather , Ben Davies ' family who came from Rhydfechan , Llanarth . 
My great-grandparents , Evan and Mary Davies , are listed there in the 1901 census along with their sons Evan , David , Tom , John and James and daughter Eliza . 
I believe two of the sons may have emigrated . 
I know very little of the family : my grandfather joined the police force in South Wales after World War I and there seems to have been very little contact afterwards with his side of the family . '' 
In April 2006 , we received these comments from Jay : `` I am also seaching for Mary Davies & Evan Evans marriage poss 1901 . 
If the Mary -LRB- Edith -RRB- Davies and Evan David Evans had five children ... Minerva , Gwyn , Walter , Edgar , and Raymond -LRB- my dad -RRB- 16.11.1910 , we are looking for the same grandparents . 
Either Evan or Mary had a sister named Minnie . 
Mary died 1910\/11 at 33 or 35 , Evan 1923\/4 at 45\/47 . 
I believe both in the Cardiff area . 
I have found a few marriages of these names and will pass on any info I have to help in your search . 
If this rings any bells with you , please make contact because I am just working from my dad 's Birth Certificate only . 
I do not have their address for the 1901 census but do have an address for 1910 and a picture of Mary standing outside house in Cardiff . '' '' 
Pat -LRB- Powell -RRB- Springer from Indiana is looking for information about the Powell family from Brecon : `` Would like to know about the line of Powells in Brecon or Breconshire . 
Need help with a Lewis R. Powell born 1792 and his brother Pressly Powell born 1787 , both born in Virginia USA , but records are lost . 
All family info and photos about these two brothers will be found in the albums . 
Other members of the family will be on this website also : The BBC is not responsible for the content of external websites . 
Kenneth L Howell 's ancestors left Aberystwyth for the New World back in the 17th century : `` John Howell , progenitor of Howell 's , from Aberystwyth to Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , USA in 1697 with his three children . 
Who was he in Wales and can he be traced to King Hywell , Dda . 
John Howell is my GrGrGrGrGrGrGrandfather . 
Who was his wife and what was his trade ? '' 
Annette Clarke from West Bromwich is tracing her Llandysul roots : `` On the 1851 census , Richard Davies is listed as being born in Landessel , Wales . 
I think this is now called Llandysul -LRB- Cardigan ? -RRB- . 
His father was David Davies and they were both farmers . 
I think Richard moved into Wellington , Salop at some point in his life , but he ended up in Sedgley , West Midlands where he married Ann COX . 
Any help would be much appreciated , in finding the Welsh roots . '' 
Sian from Llandysul responded with this information : `` This may be of help . 
In 1896 a book was published tracing the history of the Parish of Llandysul and it lists all the local farms . 
The book was called Hanes Plwyf Llandysul and it was published by Gwasg Gomer which is based in Llandysul . 
The book was published again a few years ago . '' 
In March 2006 , Gwawr Jones from Bangor made this suggestion : `` Annette Clarke from West Bromwich asks for more information about an ancestor who lived in Llandysul . 
As the ancestor moved into Shropshire and then the Midlands , may I suggest that the Llandysul referred to is possibly Llandyssil , Powys , lying near Montomery , rather than the one in South Wales ? '' 
If you can add any more information , please email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk Helen Riley sent this in response to Cynthia Haycock and Rhiannon Williams ' comments below : `` There are a lot of Haycock names in and around the Welshpool area of what was Montgomeryshire -LRB- now Powys -RRB- . 
I too am a Haycock descendant and suspect that the James Haycock born ca 1855 , referred to by Rhiannon Williams , is the brother of my ancestor Elizabeth Haycock , as many of her family stayed in and around Risca and the Pontypool area . 
Elizabeth 's father John was born in Welshpool , and was the son of an innkeeper who was originally from Shropshire . 
Elizabeth and her sister were born in Abertillery - is it possible that this could be the `` Abertibi '' , as it was then part of the district that sounded much like , and often confused with , Aberystwyth , ` Aberystryth ' ? '' 
Cynthia Haycock from the United States was unsure as to where her family connections lie : `` I am trying to trace my family history . 
My grandfather , Sam Haycock , emmigrated to the United States in the late 1800 's when he was a little boy . 
He always said he was from a small town between Aberystwyth and ` Abersoken ' called ` Abertibi . ' 
Of course , the only town I can spell correctly is Aberystwyth . 
Is ` Abertibi ' Aberteifi ? 
What is the correct version of ` Abersoken ? ' 
Once I 'm convinced I have the correct place , I 'd like to continue my search for myself and my children . 
I believe his surname was origninally spelled Haecock or Heacock , does either version seem more likely to a Welsh-speaking version ? '' 
Rhiannon Williams got in touch with this suggestion : `` I wonder if the ` Abersoken ' referred to is not near Aberystwyth but , instead in South Wales . 
Could it be Abersychan , near Pontypool ? 
Probably a longshot , but I am descended from a Haycock family from the Pontypool\/Abersychan area and know that a number of relatives from that area emigrated to US -LRB- probably name of Perry as well as Haycock -RRB- in late 1800s - and resided in Pennsylvania , California , Ohio , Illinois -RRB- and I believe my grandfather , James D Haycock , spent some time in Canada and US . 
James Haycock -LRB- b approx 1855 , d. 1880 in Risca -RRB- is my great grandfather . 
I 'm separately researching other parts of my family in the Aberystwyth\/Dolgellau area , but have n't spotted Haycock as a local name . '' 
Marilyn Rees from Cardiff has roots in Ceredigion : `` I have traced my great grandfather , a Jenkin Rees , born in 1835 in Cilie -LRB- Ciliau -RRB- Ayron in Cardiganshire and married to Elizabeth born in 1838 from Llanbadarn near Aberystwyth Cardiganshire . 
I would like to trace his parents and any siblings he may have had . 
Anyone got any ideas ? '' 
Julia from Victoria BC Canada is seeking information about two lost relations : `` This is a long shot as I have spent months looking for these two relations !! My great great grandfather moved up to Cardigan to work in the tin mines - he was James Bennetts -LRB- bn Cornwall c 1828 -RRB- his wife was Mary Ann . 
They were married in 1850 in Swansea . 
They had two sons , John Bands born 1859 in Llanfihangel who was my great grandfather and James born Yspytty Ystwyth in c 1854 . 
After the 1861 census I can find no trace of either of the James ' - no records of their deaths at all . 
I 've tried every conceivable spelling of the surname and ... nothing ! 
If there is a kind kind local person who could check the parish records or graveyard for me I would be eternally grateful . 
Mary Ann and John Bands were back in Swansea where Mary Ann remarried in 1865 so the time scale is short . '' 
Sue from Stayton is seeking information about the Bebb family from Llanbrynmair , Montgomeryshire : `` My Grandparent Edward Bebb born aprox . 
1800 is from here he was married to Margaret Evans b. aprox . 
I would like to find out more about them , the family from this area . '' 
Eirwen Roberts is seeking information about family in the Llangyniew area : `` I am looking for information about Margaret & Thomas Davies who lived in the Llangniew area in 1861 and also their family . 
I think that their eldest child was Pryce born c1859 . 
There was also John , Mary -LRB- known as Polly -RRB- and Edward Gomer . 
Any help would be welcome . '' 
Ruth Gates from Swansea got in touch trying to trace family in the Meifod area : `` I am trying to trace my family in the Meifod area , my great grandfather was George Evans a saddler b. 1879 and his sons were Harry , Jack -LRB- who was disabled -RRB- and Arthur -LRB- my grandfather -RRB- . '' 
In January 2006 , Judy Buckley from Kent sent this information in response to Ruth 's request : `` My 2 gt grandfather was John Evans , a blacksmith born in Cardiganshire c. 1820 who married Jane Rowlands of Dinas Mawddwy , Merioneth and they lived in London c.1850-1874 . 
Their only daughter Kate married Victor Youatt -LRB- pianoforte make -RRB- 1877 had two childern and died 1882 . 
Might there be a link ? '' 
Carolyn Sheldon from America has replied with census information for Ruth also : `` 1881 Census : Living at 2 Rosemary St. , Tregynon . 
Evan Evans 27 , saddlerWife Ann , 26Son George , 2Daughter Annie Jane , 2 monthsAll born in Meifod , Montgomeryshire 1891 Census : Possible - Living at Waterloo Place , Meifod , Mont. . 
George Bennet 62 , grocer , b. Tarvin , Cheshire wife Jane , 64 , b. Newtown , Mont. grandsons George Evans 12 , b. Meifod , Mont. & John Evans 8 , b. Tregymon , Mont. . 
Did n't find a George Evans born in Meifod in the 1901 Census . '' 
Anne Anderson from New Zealand has had several responses to her appeal for information about the Humphreys family from the Carno area : `` My grandmother Jane Humphreys was born at Oerffrwdd Mill , Llanwnog on May 8th 1875 , She had a brother Edward but he was born March 31 1877 and also an Uncle Edward . 
My mother a great Uncle Edward . 
Jane 's parents were Stephen Humphreys March 1st 1837 and Elizabeth Ingram December 1846 . 
The family moved to the New Mill at Carno in the early 1900s . 
I would be pleased if you have any information to add to mine . '' 
Siwan Humphreys from Carno sent this response in December 2005 : `` Anne Anderson mentioned a Humphreys family , who moved from Oerffrwd Mill in the early 1900s . 
My great grandfather moved from said place to live in the Mill in Carno in 1905 - give or take a few years . 
My great grand father was called David , his son -LRB- my grandfather -RRB- is called Stephen , who recalls names of various uncles and aunts . 
This ca n't be very helpful I know , but it interested my family and I when we read your query . '' 
Dai Humphreys from Carno contacted us in January 2006 after seeing Siwan 's comments above : `` My niece Siwan Humphreys raised my interest by responding to Anne Anderson 's request for information on the Humphreys Family from Oerffrwd Mill . 
This prompted me to look up the Family Bible , originally owned by Stephen Humphreys and Elizabeth Humphreys -LRB- nee Ingram -RRB- , who were married on 30th June 1866 . 
The Family Register in the Bible shows they had 11 children : Elizabeth 4-3-1867 ; Martha 18-3-1869 ; Anne 15-4-1871 ; Mary 25-2-1873 ; Jane 8-5-1875 ; Edward 31-3-1877 ; Sarah 17-8-1878 ; John 1-6-1881 ; David 25-6-1883 ; Stephen 17-6-1885 ; Margaret 25-5-1889 . 
Stephen died as a 10 month old baby in 1886 , and Martha died aged 34 in 1903 , the others lived to old age I believe . 
The family members moved to different areas of the country , one group to Beaumaris and three , I think , to the London area . 
I share the name of my Grandfather David Llewelyn above who eventually became the Miller with his father at New Mill - Carno , he married Elizabeth Hamer in September 1922 , I 'd be interested if his sister Jane was at the wedding and how her family ended up in New Zealand . '' 
Kevin Curtis from Newcastle Upon Tyne also posted a query about a Humphreys family from Llanwnog : `` Has anyone info on Edward Lewis Humphreys born 1869 in Llanwnog his father was called Evan . '' 
If you can add any more information , please email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk Glynn Davies from Monmouth is looking for family ties to Llanbadarn Fawr near Aberystwyth : `` I am researching my family tree and have got back to John Davies , my Gt Gt Grandfather , who was born in Llanbadarn Fawr in 1819 . 
He moved away some time after 1841 to Mynyddislwyn in Monmouthshire and from there to Abersychan . 
I believe his parents were probably David and Elizabeth Davies -LRB- nee Thomas -RRB- who married in St Padarn Church , Llanbadarn on 23.1.1818 . 
They lived in Dolberllan all their lives and David , a Turner by trade , was in his in his eighties when he died . 
David 's other children were David -LRB- b1826 -RRB- , William -LRB- b1828 -RRB- , Elizabeth -LRB- b1827 -RRB- , Lewis -LRB- b1834 -RRB- , Anne -LRB- b1837 -RRB- . 
David Jnr was a Lead Miner and also lived at Dolberllan with his family , but most of the others moved away . 
Any information on the family or Dolberllan would be appreciated . '' 
Bronwyn Lock from Western Australia posted this query in October 2005 : `` I am looking for any information on David Evans 4 x grandfather , a blacksmith from Llanilar village , Cardiganshire . 
Gayle from Western Australia responded in December 2005 : `` Re . 
Bronwyn Lock 's Richardes enquiry , Oct 05 , I can probably help as I have two volumes of Richardes of Aberystwyth history . 
Also , I am in Western Australia . '' 
Sue from Aberystwyth contacted us in January 2006 , saying : `` My grandmother was a Richardes and I have quite a lot of information about the ancestors . 
I am very interested in the mentioned Richardes books . 
I am happy to share the info I have . '' 
Sam from Kent is looking for information about her grandmother : `` I 'm trying to trace my grandmother Elizabeth Jones who was born circa 1909-1915 in Wales -LRB- possibly Lampeter ??? -RRB- She left Wales to go into service in London where she fell pregnant with my father in 1935 . 
She lived in Lewisham , SE London during this period . 
I have very little information on Elizabeth except that her middle name might have been Arllette . '' 
Stephen Golding from Davyhulme , Manchester , was looking for family links in Llanfair : `` I am trying to locate a Robert Jones . 
b 1854 in Llanfair , Montgomeryshire . 
M. Elizabeth E. In Dayhulme in 1901 . 
Possible son of Evan . '' 
Carolyn Sheldon from America got in touch with the following information : `` Possible : in the 1861 , 1871 , 1881 , & 1891 Census ' living at Hen Gefn farm in Llanfair , Montgomeryshire . 
Father Evan Jones , mother Ann , brothers Evan and Thomas and sister Lydia . '' 
Jim Batten from Cambridgeshire is looking for family in the Aberystwyth area : `` I am trying to trace any information on John Elwyn Roberts & William Charles Williams born around 1910 , who were known to live in Cricklewood NW2 between 1934-1939 . 
Family had connections with Mid-Wales as parents had or run a Post Office probably in the Aberystwyth area . 
Any information however small would be most welcome . '' 
Carolyn Sheldon 's ancestors moved from Montgomeryshire to the USA in the 19th century : `` I am looking for information about my great great grandmother Jane Isaac nee Lloyd , b. Jan. 1792 , in Llangadfan , Montgomeryshire ; died Dec. 1876 . 
She married John Isaac , b. May 1789 in Llanfihangel Yng Ngwynfa , who died 1856 . 
Their children : David 1820 , Jane 1822 , John 1826 -LRB- my great grandfather -RRB- and Maurice 1829 . 
John -LRB- 1826 -RRB- married Esther Richards -LRB- 1832 -RRB- Llanfair C. and they imigrated to the US in 1867 with 8 children . 
Thank you for any help you can give me . '' 
Jacqui Mills from Toronto in Canada returned to Newtown a few years ago to look for information about her grandmother Bertha Griffiths . 
She sent a school photo taken in 1908 . 
More ... John Calvin Lewis from Neath is looking for further details about his grandparents who kept a pub in Hay-on-Wye during the first half of the 20th century : `` My grandparents John and Mary Lewis were resident at the `` Holly Bush '' Inn on the road between Glasbury and Hay from 1911-1937 . 
He also worked for the L.M. & S Railway company untill his eyesight failed him . 
His son -LRB- my father -RRB- Thomas Goode Lewis and his sisters Gladys and Ada were also living there . 
My father Thomas Lewis was captain of Hay St Mary 's First X1 1921-1922 . 
Thomas and Ada Lewis attended Llanigon school 1911 . 
My Grandparents moved to No 1 Sackville in 1937 . 
My Grandfather died at 86 in 1946 and my Grandmother died at 97 in 1961 . 
Both are buried in the cemetery in Hay . 
Gladys Lewis married Albert Morgan at St Mary 's Church in 1920 . 
Ada Lewis married William Wadsworth at St Mary 's church in 1923 . 
My father Thomas Lewis married my mother Catherine in Neath in 1930 . 
I have been researching my family history over the past years and any information available would be very welcome . '' 
Lois -LRB- Pugh -RRB- Watts from Florida in the USA is searching for a particular family link with Velindre in Powys : `` I hope that someone can help me find my great-great-grandfather John Pugh who was born about 1835 . 
Several sources states that he was born in Velindre , Herefordshire , England . 
I believe that I found him in Velindre , Hay , Breconshire , Wales as a shepherd working in 1861 on Jane Probert 's 400 acre farm . 
He is listed as an Agr . 
laborer on the 1871 Wales census report , age 30 . 
His year of birth was 1842 according to that census . 
He died , however , before 1881 when his wife Eleanor was listed as a widow . 
I do believe that the 1835 birth year is correct and that he died in 1879 at the age of 43 . 
My problem is , that I am unable to locate him in 1851 or as early as 1841 . 
He is not listed on those reports on the Free BMD\/Census site and Ancestry.com does n't include those years in their UK census collection . 
His son Thomas , my great grandfather was a coal miner and coal hewer in Trevethin and Tredegar , Monmouthshire . 
Any help in finding my great-great-grandfather and his family would be most appreciated ! '' 
Roderick Williams makes this suggestion : `` Try the Powys Family History Society . '' 
If you can add any further information , please get in touch . 
Susan Farquhar from Hertfordshire is looking for family links from Lampeter : `` I have been told that members of my grand dad 's family moved from Llanrwst to Lampeter . 
As I have just started to try and trace my ancestors , I would appreciate any advice or help . 
Harry\/Henry Davies , wife Annie nee Evans from Oswestry ; children - Margaret , Mary , Samuel , John , Llewellyn , Robert , Willie and I think a Gwiliam -LRB- not sure -RRB- . 
Rumour has it that Llewellyn emigrated to America . 
One of the nephews became a priest , I think by the name of Gerald Davies . 
Would love any information . '' 
Margery Hallesey from Pontypridd is looking for information about the Hamer family of Llanidloes : `` I am a descendant of this family through my grandmother Mary Ann Williams -LRB- nee Hamer -RRB- who was born at Ty 'n Wtra Farm , Old Hall , Llanidloes . 
Her father moved the family to Treherbert in the 1840\/50s . 
Any information would be appreciated . '' 
Rachael Jones emailed in May 2005 with a possible lead : `` My guess is that Mary Ann Hamer 's father was likely to have been involved in the lead mining industry in Van near Llanidloes and moved to Treherbert for coal mining . 
In the 1901 census for Van , there are several Hamer households where members give their place of birth as Llanidloes . 
take a look at history.powys.org . 
html for more information about Van . '' 
After reading Rachael 's suggestion , Margery Hallesey got back to us with further information : `` I know that he was not involved in the lead mining at Van , as he inherited the farm Pen-y-Banc , Llanidloes from his father . 
He then sold it to his brothers who farmed it for a while before selling it to the Jarman family . 
The farm is now owned by Lord Hooson , married to Shirley -LRB- nee Hamer -RRB- who is my cousin . 
So the farm is still in the family one way or another . '' 
Rachael Jones suggested another possible reason for why Margery 's great grandfather may have left the Llanidloes area : `` In that case , perhaps Mary Ann 's father decided to move away because of the Chartist troubles . 
The date is right see history.powys.org . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external websites . 
If you can add any more detail , get in touch . 
Lorraine Whitelaw Speers from Surrey , BC Canada has received two replies to her appeal for information about her great grandmother , Mary Ann Williams who was born in Llanfair Caereinion : Researching the family line of my great grandmother , Mary Ann Williams who was born 25th June 1854 Llanfair Caereinion . 
She married Dr. James Snodgrass Mathews March 6 , 1889 , Atcham , Shropshire England and lived in Machynlleth , Wales until 1911 before immigrating to Winnipeg -LRB- Belmont -RRB- Manitoba , Canada . 
After Dr. J.S. Mathews died in 1911 , Mary Ann and children ; David , Maglona and Gordon immigrated to Canada . 
Huge question is ... why ?? Mary Ann died July 11 , 1924 in Belmont , Manitoba . 
Son David James William Mathews was KIA in France October 26 , 1917 . 
Daughter Maglona Mary Margaret Mathews died in Winnipeg , Manitoba in January 23 , 1953 . 
Son Gordon Kyle Armstrong Mathews died in Vancouver , BC January 18 , 1978 . 
Mary Ann 's marriage certificate states her father was David Williams - Farmer and a Jane Williams was a wittness . 
Her death certificate states her father was John Williams - this info given by nephew C.H. Hardy of Winnipeg . 
If anyone has information or ideas pertaining to my research I would be most interested in hearing from you . '' 
In May 2005 , Richard Davies from Charlotte , New Carolina got in touch : `` I have much data at home about Grandfather Thomas and Grandmother Elizebeth Jones who migrated to the Winnipeg area early 1900s . 
Can access for you if you think there is a link . '' 
In February 2005 , Stan emailed with this information : `` I have no clues why Mary Ann & her children moved to Canada . 
However , I can give details of her parents and other members of family as at the 1851 & 1861 censuses . 
My apologies if this info is already in your hands . 
1861 census David Williams -LRB- 42 -RRB- fmr .23 acres Rhydwen , Llanfair Caereinion b. Llanllugan ; Mary Williams -LRB- 36 -RRB- his wife b. Llanfair ; Mary Ann Williams -LRB- 6 -RRB- , Jane Williams -LRB- 5 -RRB- , John Williams -LRB- 3 -RRB- , David Williams -LRB- 8m -RRB- - all children born Llanfair . 
1851 census - living at Tynyllwyn , Llanfair - C. Evan Jones -LRB- 45 -RRB- unmarried farmer of 88 acres b. Llanfair ; Mary Jones -LRB- 67 -RRB- his widowed mother , midwife , b. Llanllugan ; Mary Jones -LRB- 17 -RRB- his niece , housemaid b. Llanfair ; David Williams -LRB- 32 -RRB- his brother-in-law , farmer -LRB- 26ac -RRB- b. Llanllugan ; Mary Williams -LRB- 26 -RRB- David 's wife , sister to Evan , b. Llanfair ; Sarah Williams -LRB- 2m -RRB- niece to Evan , and presumably David\/Mary 's first born child b. Llanfair ; Price Thomas -LRB- 10 -RRB- nephew to Evan , farm boy , b. Llanfair . 
Hope this is of some interest . '' 
If you can add any more detail , get in touch . 
Maggie Severns from California is looking for information about the origin of her surname : `` It has been said that the name came from the River Severn or the Valley Severn . 
It has also been said that it may have originated from the Roman Sevius . 
A John Severns b. 1604 came to America in 1634 with the Massachussetts Bay Colony . 
He was very successful here as were his descendents . 
However , the origin of the name has remained a mystery . '' 
If you can help , please email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk Father Kevin D. Simons from Colorado Springs in the USA is looking for information about his Great Great Grandfather : `` Jack Simons came from Wales in the 19th century . 
Does anyone have any clue where he came from and who his parents were ? 
His son Billy was my great grandfather . 
My grandfather was born in 1897 and so I am guessing his grandfather came here around 1870 . '' 
Rita from Surrey has a query about the Meifod area : `` I 'm looking for any information on Richard Foulke Jones born in Meifod approx 1824 . 
Would be so pleased to receive any information about him and his family at that time . '' 
If you can help , email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk . 
Jodie Gwilliam wants to know if she 's related to other Gwilliams from Mid Wales : `` I know my Nan and Grandad , both of which have died , were from Mid\/North Wales . 
My grandad was Bill Gwilliam and married my nan Daisy . 
The had 4 children . 
They moved to Pontesbury in Shropshire . 
I do n't konw if there is any connection with any of the Gwilliams on this site ? 
If you can help , email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk Karen Hallewell -LRB- Davis -RRB- is picking up where her father left off : `` Years ago , my dad started researching our family history . 
The farthest back he got was that James J. Davies married Hannah Price in 1873 and that he came to America in 1880 . 
They lived in Talgath - I 'm assuming it 's Talgarth . 
Do you know of anyone I could contact to get any more information ? '' 
Roderick Williams makes this suggestion : `` Try the Powys Family History Society . '' 
If you can add any more information , email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk Richard Burton from Milton Keynes is looking for links with Builth Wells : `` I am trying to trace my Great Grandfather Richard Burton who came to Builth Wells with his parents in the 1890s . 
His father Charles was killed working in Mr Lant 's quarry in September 1901 . 
In addition , I have tried to pin down the C. Burton named on the town war memorial as having fell in the First World War . 
I beleive this to be Richard 's brother Charles '' Rich from Newbridge on Wye says he knows the Burtons from Builth Wells : `` The Burton family are still in Builth today . 
There 's plenty of them . 
All Mr Burton has to do is look in the phone book for Builth . 
I went to school with them . '' 
If you can add any more info , please email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk . 
Jeanette Garret from Shropshire is looking for family links in Llanfyllin in Powys : `` My Great Grandfather was called Richard Eli Davies , known to many people as Eli . 
He was born in Llanfyllin in 1900 , but ca n't seem to find him on the 1901 census . 
His father was John Davies and possibly his mother was Elizabeth -LRB- not 100 % sure as of yet -RRB- . 
Eli had some brothers called Maurice and Gwilliam , there was others but names unknown at present . 
Eli 's grand-parents was Richard and Catherine Davies who also lived in Llanfyllin . 
If anyone knows of the family , please get in touch . '' 
Dave Gwilliams thinks he 's spotted a connection : `` Catherine Davies is part of my family tree . 
My great-grandfather is Bertram Gwilliam -LRB- s -RRB- , as the `` s '' was added later in life . 
I am attempting to get records of our family tree to possibly make concrete links with Catherine Davies . 
jpg of your family tree showing Catherine Davies ? 
If so , I can access our own Gwilliam -LRB- s -RRB- family tree and make the connection . 
Jeanette got back in touch with additional information about the Davies family : `` Hello Dave . 
My family tree is on genes reunited , are you a member ? 
Here are the details i have so far regarding the Davies family : Richard Davies born app 1835 Llangadfan John Richard Davies born app 1873 Llanfyllin Margaret Davies born app 1875 Llanfyllin Benjamin married Sarah Ann ? 
and lived in Oswestry . 
Richard married Alice Humphreys and stayed in Llanfyllin . 
John Richard married Elizabeth -LRB- I think -RRB- . 
Richard Eli was one of their children . 
Hope this is of some help to you . '' 
If you can add any more detail , get in touch . 
Irene Percival from Caerphilly has had a reply to her appeal for information about her Great Great Grandfather : `` My Great Great Grandad was a solicitor in 1800 . 
His name was John Jones Atwood . 
He married Aferina Robertson who was the daughter of the family that originally owned the land the University of Wales Aberystwyth was built on . 
Is it possible to find any information on that ? 
His name is in the book `` Footsteps in the Sands '' . 
Would be glad if anyone could tell me more . '' 
After reading Irene 's message , David Jones from London got in touch , saying : `` I have done considerable research into the history of the Atwood family of Aberaeron and Aberystwyth towards a history of the Town of Aberaeron . 
I am happy to share my knowledge of the Atwood family with Ms Percival whom I presume is a descendant of Ernest Cornelius Atwood . 
There is a link with the Richardes -LRB- not Robinson -RRB- family of Penglais -LRB- now owned by the University of Wales Aberystwyth -RRB- but through Maria the daughter of John Jones Atwood . '' 
Fran Palmer from Derbyshire was born in Aberystwyth and had lots of relatives in the area : `` My mother 's maiden name was Short and she orginated from the Cardiff area . 
We had relatives in Aberystwyth , where I was born and Quakers Yard , Treharris . 
We lived in Brecon where she had a Drapers Shop . 
I 'm trying to build my family tree . 
My father 's name was Donald Charles Mayhew Palmer , he was in the army . '' 
Margaret Chadwick went back to Llanfair Caereinion in August 2004 in search of her roots . 
`` I lived in the village of Llanfair Caereinion in the early 60s . 
My mother 's name at the time was Gwen Crossland . 
We lived at the top of the hill in a cottage with a wood at the back . 
We went to school in the village . 
Our names were David , Joseph , Margaret , Annette , Denise . 
We left about 40yrs ago when my mother met Jack Binns and moved us to Birstall , Yorkshire . 
I know very little about my mother 's family and would like to trace any that are out there . 
i am coming to the village in the next few weeks to see it again . 
Any one with any information please let me know as I do n't know where to go next . '' 
Lut De Bruyne from Belgium is helping a friend with some research : `` I 'm trying to find out if there are -LRB- or were -RRB- any Mc Clarens in Mid Wales -LRB- near Llandovery -RRB- in the beginning of the 20th century ? '' 
David Williams from Reston in the USA is looking for information in the Lampeter area . 
`` William Williams was born in Caio , June 8th , 1827 . 
I do n't have his birth certificate but his marriage to Mary Jones from Cellan , on March ,1850 lists his father as Simon Simons . 
I am seeking proof of this and information on Simon Simons . 
Any help will be greatly appreciated and help me over this roadblock . '' 
Terry Evans from Jonesville , Michigan , has only got a name to go on : `` I am trying to research my father 's ancestry . 
My great grandfather 's name was Evan Logan Evans . 
His father was John . 
My great grand father was the last of his family to speak Welsh . 
I would appreciate any information . '' . 
Mrs Irene Cassidy from Barrie Ontario , Canada is looking for information from the Lower Cwm-twrch area , near Ystradgynlais : `` I was evacuuated to South Wales , Lower Cwm twrch -LRB- I hope I have spelt that right -RRB- . 
I was just 4 years old and living in Seaforth , Liverpool in 1939 . 
The people I stayed with and looked after me so well I would like to try and get in touch with as over the years I have lost touch with them . 
Their name was Pitts and they had a son called Alistair . 
My husband and I are now retired and live in Canada and have children and grandchildren of our own . 
I remember going to the mumbles beach in Wales with the Pitts and enjoying the time with them , they were very good people , they used to call me Margaret Cave and not Irene , my second name was Margaret . 
My married name now is Cassidy . 
Any information that you could obtain for me would be most appreciated . 
Adam Stones from Llansantffraid in Powys has emailed with this request . 
`` I am , looking for info about Beryl Davies from Llanidloes - her father , mother and place of birth . 
I would also like to know her middle name and who she was married to ? '' 
David Evans from Stockport is looking for information from the Llanfyllin area : `` I am trying to find my grandfather 's place of birth . 
He was born at a farm called Wern-y-Glyn Bwlch y Ddar in 1870 and his birth was registered at Llanfyllin . 
His name was John Evans . 
I would like to know where the farm was also who his father was ? '' 
Andrew Brown sent this response to David 's appeal for information : `` The farm is on the attached map -LRB- although it is not marked -RRB- . 
It is located between the farm Tyn Y Pistyll and the hamlet of Bwlch y Ddar . 
Hope this helps . '' 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external websites Cheryl Mills from Wrexham is looking for information from the Montgomeryshire area : `` My husband 's grandfather was born in Llanfair Caereinion in 1870 . 
His name was Thomas J. Mills , his parents were David Mills born 1823 also in LlanfairC . 
and Catherine -LRB- nee Hughes -RRB- born 1825 in Llangadfan . 
They moved sometime pre-1881 to Wrexham -LRB- as they are listed here on the census of that year -RRB- . 
I have been unable to find any information of their life in Montgomeryshire and wondered if anyone could help please ? 
I would like some idea of why they should move to this area - would it have been for possible employment perhaps ? 
Sheila Francis from the Swansea area has a query about family connections in the parish of Llanfihangel y Creuddyn . 
`` Can a local person who is interested in family history tell me how easy it will be to find a Morris family in a village and area where there are at least about 50 at the last count , and unfortunately a JOHN Morris !!! . 
The village is Llanfihangel y Creuddyn . 
My ancestors were there in the mid 19th c and were lead miners as were so many others . 
i took a quick trip down that area last year . 
I am also very interested in the chapel which I saw at TRISANT , any info on that area AND who can I contact -LRB- a family history society -RRB- who can help me as I live in the Swansea area . '' 
Rosey Bidwell from Bournemouth wants to find out more about her ancestors : `` I am trying to get some details on my great Grandfather , the only information I have is his name - Edward Maelor Edwards and the story from my father -LRB- now deceased -RRB- that he was a Bard of one of the Eisteddfods . 
I would be grateful for any information ... '' Jill Newell from Rotherham has emailed us with this query : `` I am searching for information on my great grandad Evan Llewellyn Davies and his family . 
He was born in Newtown or Kerry , Montogomeryshire about 1859-1862 . 
He married in Sheffield in 1881 to Ann Davies from Monkland , Herefordshire . 
His farther was William Davies -LRB- Police Officer -RRB- . 
I can not find any of them on the 1881 census . 
If anyone can help I would be greatful . 
If you can help with any of the queries on this page , email us at wales.mid@bbc.co.uk and we 'll pass on the information . 
