Krauthammer 's Hail Mary Rule : You get only two per game . 
John McCain , unfortunately , has already thrown three . 
The first was his bet on the surge , a deep pass to David Petraeus who miraculously ran it all the way into the end zone . 
Then , seeking a game-changer after the Democratic convention , McCain threw blind into the end zone to a waiting Sarah Palin . 
She caught the ball . 
Her subsequent fumbles have taken the sheen off of that play , but she nonetheless invaluably solidifies his Republican base . 
When the financial crisis hit , McCain went razzle-dazzle again , suspending his campaign and declaring that he 'd stay away from the first presidential debate until the financial crisis was solved . 
He tempted fate one time too many . 
After climbing up on his high horse , McCain had to climb down . 
The crisis unresolved , he showed up at the debate regardless , rather abjectly conceding Obama 's mocking retort that presidential candidates should be able to do `` more than one thing at once . '' 
-LRB- Although McCain might have pointed out that while he was trying to do two things , Obama was sitting on the sidelines doing one thing only : campaigning . -RRB- 
You ca n't blame McCain . 
In an election in which all the fundamentals are working for the opposition , he feels he has to keep throwing long in order to keep hope alive . 
Nonetheless , his frenetic improvisation has perversely -LRB- for him -RRB- framed the rookie challenger favorably as calm , steady and cool . 
In the primary campaign , Obama was cool as in hip . 
Now Obama is cool as in collected . 
He has the discipline to let slow and steady carry him to victory . 
He has not at all distinguished himself in this economic crisis -- nor , one might add , in any other during his national career -- but detachment has served him well . 
He understands that this election , like the election of 1980 , demands only one thing of the challenger : Make yourself acceptable . 
Once Ronald Reagan convinced America that he was not menacing , he won in a landslide . 
If Obama convinces the electorate that he is not too exotic or green or unprepared , he wins as well . 
When after the Republican convention Obama 's poll numbers momentarily slipped behind McCain 's , panicked Democrats urged him to get mad . 
He did precisely the opposite . 
He repositioned himself as ordinary , becoming the earnest factory-floor , coffee-shop , union-hall candidate . 
In doing so , he continues his clever convention-speech pivot from primary to general election . 
In a crowded primary field in which he was the newcomer and the stranger , he rose above the crowd on pure special effects : dazzling rhetoric , natural charisma , and a magic carpet ride of transcendence and hope . 
It worked for two reasons : Democrats believe that nonsense , and he was new . 
But now he needs more than Democrats . 
Obama understood that the magic was wearing off and the audacity of hope wearing thin . 
Hence the self-denial perfectly personified in his acceptance speech in Denver . 
He could have had 80,000 people in rapture . 
Instead , he made himself prosaic , even pedestrian , going right to the general election audience to project himself as one of them . 
Ordinariness was the theme . 
His self-told life story ? 
Common man , hence that brazen introductory biopic that shamelessly skipped from Hawaii grade-schooler to Chicago community organizer with not a word about Columbia and Harvard . 
His riff on American concerns ? 
His list of programs ? 
All pitched as his middle-class remedies . 
He 's been moderate in policy and temper ever since . 
His one goal : Pass the Reagan '80 threshold . 
Be acceptable , be cool , be reassuring . 
Part of reassurance is intellectual . 
Like Palin , he 's a rookie , but in his 19 months on the national stage he has achieved fluency in areas in which he has no experience . 
In the foreign policy debate with McCain , as in his July news conference with French President Nicolas Sarkozy , Obama held his own -- fluid , familiar and therefore plausibly presidential . 
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. famously said of Franklin Roosevelt that he had a `` second-class intellect , but a first-class temperament . '' 
Obama has shown that he is a man of limited experience , questionable convictions , deeply troubling associations -LRB- Jeremiah Wright , William Ayers , Tony Rezko -RRB- and an alarming lack of self-definition -- do you really know who he is and what he believes ? 
Nonetheless , he 's got both a first-class intellect and a first-class temperament . 
That will likely be enough to make him president . 
