May 11 : A ship lowers the top hat device at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf . 
AP2010 ON THE GULF OF MEXICO -- Political patience was whittling away for BP executives who ca n't stop a broken underwater well from pouring oil into the Gulf where crews tried the latest solution -- submerging a second containment box designed to funnel the gusher to a waiting tanker . 
In back-to-back U.S. Senate inquiries on Tuesday , lawmakers chastised officials from BP PLC and its drilling partners over attempts to shift blame to each other . 
They were asked to explain a `` cascade of failures '' that led to the catastrophic explosion on aboard a drilling rig and the blown-out wellhead that has spewed at least 4 million gallons of oil into the Gulf over three weeks . 
`` If this is like other catastrophic failures of technological systems in modern history , whether it was the sinking of the Titanic , Three Mile Island , or the loss of the Challenger , we will likely discover that there was a cascade of failures and technical and human and regulatory errors , '' said Sen. Jeff Bingaman , D-N.M. , chairman of the Energy and Natural Resources Committee . 
Later Tuesday , a crane lifted the new box from the deck of the Viking Poseidon , one of the more than a dozen boats helping the containment effort , and lowered it into the sea about 50 miles off the Louisiana coast , a process expected to last several hours or more . 
The first box sunk last week weighed 100 tons and company officials had hoped it could contain 85 percent of the oil . 
However , it was never tried at such depths -- about a mile below the surface -- and in 40-degree water . 
A slushy mixture of gas and water clogged the opening in the top of the peaked box and it was cast aside . 
The latest box is much smaller -- just 2 tons . 
It wo n't be placed over the spewing well right away because engineers want to make sure everything is configured correctly and avoid the same buildup , BP spokesman Bill Salvin said . 
Crews also planned to pump in heated water and methanol so ice wo n't amass . 
It could be in place by Thursday . 
Lawmakers ' focus was on what failures may have led to the disaster . 
The corporate finger pointing prompted an admonishment from Republican Sen. Lisa Murkowski of oil-rich Alaska that `` we are all in this together '' in trying to shut off the oil and find a safer way to exploit vital energy . 
`` This accident has reminded us of a cold reality , that the production of energy will never be without risk or environmental consequence , '' she said . 
Still , she said , `` there will be no excuse '' if operators are found to have violated the law . 
`` Let me be really clear , '' Lamar McKay , chairman of BP America , told the hearing . 
`` Liability , blame , fault -- put it over here . '' 
He said : `` Our obligation is to deal with the spill , clean it up and make sure the impacts of that spill are compensated , and we 're going to do that . '' 
By `` over here , '' McKay meant the witness table at which BP , Transocean and Halliburton executives sat shoulder to shoulder . 
And despite his acknowledgment of responsibility , each company defended its own operations and raised questions about its partners in the project gone awry . 
In the crowded hearing room , eight young activists sat in quiet protest , with black T-shirts saying , `` Energy Should n't Cost Lives . '' 
Several wore black painted spots near their eyes to symbolize tear drops made from oil . 
The spreading disaster in the Gulf intensified the political impatience all the way to the White House . 
`` The president is frustrated with everything , the president is frustrated with everybody , in the sense that we still have an oil leak , '' spokesman Robert Gibbs said . 
Uncertainty over what was happening a mile underwater seemed to confuse Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano , who was touring the Alabama coast . 
While admitting it had not been verified , she said there was cause for hope that the spill was slowing down because tests indicated less oil and more natural gas was coming out . 
But BP spokesman Mark Proegler said there has always been a mixture of gas and oil coming up and that scientists have n't noticed any significant change in the leak . 
Senators sought assurances that BP PLC will pay what could amount to billions of dollars in economic and environmental damages . 
McKay repeatedly said his company would pay for cleanup costs and all `` legitimate '' claims for damages , and not try to limit itself to an existing federal limit of $ 75 million on such damages . 
BP was the exploratory well 's owner and overall operator , Transocean , the rig 's owner and Halliburton , a subcontractor that was encasing the well pipe in cement before plugging it in anticipation of future production . 
The April 20 explosion is thought to have begun with a surge of methane gas from deep within the well , and while the cause is still under early investigation , testimony provided some insight into what might have been involved . 
Republican Sen. Jeff Sessions of Alabama grew frustrated grilling the executives on why engineers replaced a heavy `` mud '' compound in the well with much lighter sea water when they were temporarily capping the site for future exploitation . 
`` I 'm not familiar with the individual procedure on that well , '' McKay said . 
Steven Newman , Transocean 's president and CEO , and Halliburton executive Tim Probert repeatedly told Sessions they did not know how often sea water instead of the compound was used to seal Gulf wells . 
`` Well , you do this business , do you not ? '' 
`` You 're under oath . 
I 'm just asking you a simple question . '' 
New Jersey Democrat Frank Lautenberg remarked in the day 's other hearing : `` The conclusion that I draw is that nobody assumes the responsibility . '' 
McKay said that a key piece of safety equipment , the aptly named blowout preventer , had failed to work and made it clear it was owned by Transocean . 
`` That was the fail safe in case of an accident , '' said McKay . 
But Transocean 's Newman said offshore production projects `` begin and end with the operator , in this case BP '' and that his company 's drilling job was completed three days before the explosion and there 's `` no reason to believe '' the blowout protector mechanics failed . 
Halliburton 's Probert said his company followed BP 's drilling plan , federal regulations and industry practices . 
