Tuesday 19 April 2005 08.43 BST Marla Ruzicka , who has been killed by a car bomber near Baghdad airport , was an extraordinary , one-person American aid agency , who worked tirelessly to get compensation for victims of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq . 
Though only 28 when she died , she was an unusual mixture of charm , ebullience , adventure-seeking and tireless dedication to helping ordinary people whose lives had been shattered . 
She lobbied journalists and diplomats with equal persistence , but loved nothing better than to sit with wretched families after the spotlight had moved on , record every detail of their stories , go out and campaign for official apologies and compensation - and then stay in touch to keep them informed . 
On the day she died , on Iraq 's most dangerous road , she had been out talking to bereaved families . 
Her driver\/translator , Faiz Al Salaam , who also died , worked with her for almost two years . 
An unemployed pilot when she hired him , he had started flying for Iraq Air again , and , as the father of a two-month-old daughter , wanted to give up the danger of his work with Marla . 
But she was due to leave Baghdad this week , and he stayed on out of loyalty . 
They were driving , by chance , near a convoy of foreign contractors ' vehicles , which were the bomber 's target . 
Dressed in a long black abbaya , the head-to-toe covering which most western women now wear in Baghdad as protection , Marla used an ordinary car . 
Looking like a teenager - and with her bubbly enthusiasm and girlish shriek of a laugh - she was not always taken seriously when she arrived in her first big war zone , Afghanistan , just after the Taliban were ousted in December 2001 . 
Unlike most aid workers , she cultivated journalists , and wanted to know where the next party was . 
But her commitment to getting help for the forgotten was ferocious . 
One of her first actions in Kabul was to help organise a visit by American women who had lost family members on 9\/11 . 
They wanted to meet Afghan families whose homes had been destroyed by American bombs . 
Marla campaigned relentlessly by telephone and email , as well as by personal lobbying , and persuaded US Senator Patrick Leahy to put an amendment into a foreign aid bill to give $ 2.5 m for Afghan victims . 
It was not described as compensation , since the US did not wish to take formal responsibility , but Marla visited families all over Afghanistan , drew up lists of names , and helped to ensure that the money was distributed to the right people . 
In Afghanistan , she was working for Global Exchange , a non-governmental organization based in San Francisco . 
After the Iraq war , she created her own charity , CIVIC -LRB- Campaign for Innocent Victims in Conflict -RRB- . 
One aim was to keep a running account of the number of civilian deaths , but it quickly became an effort to help individuals . 
In an essay sent to Human Rights Watch shortly before she died , Marla wrote : `` A number is important not only to quantify the cost of the war , but , to me , each number is also a story of someone whose hopes , dreams and potential will never be realized , and who left behind a family . '' 
She continued her lobbying and got $ 20m for victims in Iraq . 
She also developed contacts in the US military , trying to get them to describe otherwise unreported incidents , and take responsibility . 
In a typical entry from her journal , published on AlterNet on November 6 2003 , she reported : `` On October 24 , former teacher Mohammad Kadhum Mansoor , 59 , and his wife , Hamdia Radhi Kadhum , 45 , were traveling with their three daughters - Beraa , 21 , Fatima , 8 , and Ayat , 5 - when they were tragically run over by an American tank . 
`` A grenade was thrown at the tank , causing it to lose control and veer on to the highway , over the family 's small Volkswagen . 
Mohammad and Hamdia were killed instantly , orphaning the three girls in the back seat . 
The girls survived , but with broken and fractured bodies . 
We are not sure of Ayat 's fate ; her backbone is broken . 
`` CIVIC staff member Faiz Al Salaam monitors the girls ' condition each day . 
Nobody in the military or the US army has visited them , nor has anyone offered to help this very poor family . '' 
Born in the small town of Lakeport , California , Marla became politically active at the age of 15 , when she was suspended from high school for leading a protest against the first Gulf war . 
While at Long Island University , she traveled extensively , visiting Cuba , Guatemala , southern Africa and the West Bank . 
She was already working as a volunteer for Global Exchange . 
Despite her exuberant exterior , she was not always happy , and her activism was sometimes both an obsession and a therapy . 
For exercise in Baghdad , she regularly stormed up and down the pool at the al Hamra hotel , the headquarters of the newspapers which preferred not to have large , guarded villas . 
Last new year 's eve , she emailed friends : `` 2005 is going to rock for you all and me too ... I write to you from the Himalayan mountains , where I am on a seven-day trek . 
Wow , is my mind clear , and I have many goals for 2005 . 
After my trek , I 'll work on a campaign to protect Nepalese activists - there have been over 3,000 disappearances here - more than Colombia . 
Then I am off to Afghanistan to check on the families who lost loved ones in Operation Enduring Freedom . '' 
Marla had also been planning to spend more time fundraising in the US . 
She had an initial grant from George Soros 's Open Society Institute , but wanted to develop more sources . 
After the Iraq election in January , she decided to make another trip to Baghdad . 
Medea Benjamin , her original mentor at Global Exchange , tried to dissuade her because of the increased danger . 
`` I thought it would be better to wait for a while and see if the situation got better than to put her life at risk , '' she told the Los Angeles Times . 
`` She was determined to go because the people she worked with did n't have the luxury not to be at risk . '' 
Marla Ruzicka , activist , born December 31 1976 ; died April 16 2005 Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : Selected tweets from the Guardian 's global development team and our supporters GdnDevelopment : Relying on leaves for food . 
