The man who would not die Ten months ago , a BBC journalist and Irish cameraman set off on a seemingly safe assignment in Saudi Arabia . 
The trip left the reporter fighting for his life and his colleague dead . 
Now , for the first time , Frank Gardner tells his extraordinary tale of survival . 
By James Meek In spite of all he has endured , Frank Gardner retains his BBC voice - clear , measured , concise , registering on my old tape recorder perfectly through the din of helicopters and passenger jets passing over the cafe where we meet . 
His wheelchair is pulled up to the table . 
He has put back a little of the weight he lost in hospital . 
It 's a glorious early spring day , in a pleasant spot , 10 months after he was shot , but on his face , almost all the time , apart from the occasional smile , is an expression of frowning concentration , such as you see on the face of TV reporters who are first on the scene of a terrible disaster . 
It is quite unaffected : Gardner is still reporting from inside himself , from the war which entered him last summer , scene of his grief at the death of his colleague Simon Cumbers , his anger towards the killers , and the physical destruction of his body , which goes on causing him pain - pain that ca n't be eased without punishing side effects . 
`` I just think it 's cowardice to shoot somebody who 's defenceless . 
That is n't brave , that 's not making a stand for your beliefs , that 's just cowardice . 
What kind of a battle is that ? 
It 's one thing for them to be taking on the police in a shootout , but taking on a couple of unarmed , defenceless journalists ? '' 
There were times when Gardner and Cumbers would feel nervous about where they were going , but June 6 2004 , in Riyadh , Saudi Arabia , was n't one of them . 
The district of the Saudi capital they were visiting had , it is true , been the scene of a shootout between security forces and Islamist fundamentalist militants six months earlier - that was why the two BBC men were going , to film some general footage of the area - but they did n't feel they were taking a risk . 
This was n't Fallujah , or some Taliban stronghold in southern Afghanistan . 
This was neat , rich , outwardly modern , usually safe Riyadh . 
Gardner , the BBC 's security correspondent , a fluent Arab speaker at home in the Gulf , and Cumbers , an experienced cameraman , had waited for permission from the Saudi ministry of information before going . 
They even had a government minder with them , and a government driver in a government van . 
It was their last job , on the last day of their assignment to Saudi . 
Their flights to London were booked for the next day . 
In war zones , journalists on their final day tend to get jumpy but this was n't a war zone . 
The only anxiety left was over the story - had they got good material ? 
- blending with warm anticipation of going home . 
Gardner and Cumbers reached the area in the late afternoon . 
`` It looked a completely normal Gulf residential suburb ... peachy colored villas , bougainvillea coming down the walls , very average , a couple of kids playing in the street , nobody suspicious lurking in doorways and whispering or anything like that , '' says Gardner . 
They filmed for half an hour , and prepared to leave . 
Cumbers was taking his camera off its tripod . 
They might as well have been on the plane home already . 
Gardner registered a car parking a short distance away , but it did n't come to a halt with a screech of tires and brakes . 
The banal sound of car doors , the two nondescript young men strolling towards them in ordinary white Saudi tunics : at first Gardner assumed they were friends of the driver . 
Too late , as the men advanced , Gardner understood . 
One of them - a beardless , completely average young man , in Gardner 's description - took out a pistol . 
`` I shouted , in Arabic , stupidly : ` No , do n't do this ! ' 
as soon as I saw him pulling out the pistol , '' says Gardner . 
`` He was probably 30 metres from me and I took off at once - and I presume Simon ran at the same time . 
We ran in different directions . 
We had no time to make a plan . '' 
Gardner ran from the gunman , deeper into the district . 
He heard a shot and something stung his shoulder . 
A bullet had passed through him . 
There were more shots . 
He was hit in the leg , his leg bone was fractured , and he fell , on a patch of waste ground . 
`` The adrenalin was really pumping so initially the shooting did n't hurt . 
It felt like a massive thump . 
With each bullet that went in it was like being picked up by a giant hand and slammed on the ground . '' 
Still , these were not deadly wounds . 
He would have made a full recovery . 
But the militants were n't finished . 
A second vehicle drew up alongside him , a cargo van . 
Gardner found himself looking up into the side doorway of the van where three militants crouched , looking at him . 
One of them was pointing a pistol . 
`` I pleaded with them in Arabic not to shoot me , '' says Gardner . 
`` They had a very quick discussion among themselves . 
I could n't pick up what they were saying . 
Then they emptied the pistol into me at pretty much point-blank range . '' 
Four 9mm bullets smashed into Gardner 's spinal nerves , pelvis and abdomen . 
Gardner remembers the expression on the face of the man who shot him . 
`` It was a sneer . 
It was a sneer of contempt , of hatred . 
Maybe he saw in me President Bush , Tony Blair , Ariel Sharon , Donald Rumsfeld , all rolled into one . 
I do n't know . 
He did n't see me as a non-partisan reporter who 's simply just trying to report what 's going on . 
He saw me as the enemy . '' 
Gardner found himself lying on his front , amazed to be still alive and conscious . 
He closed his eyes and pretended to be dead . 
He heard the feet of one of the militants walking around him and prepared to die . 
`` I thought this is it , this is going to be the execution shot in the back of the head . '' 
He felt the gunman rooting in his back trouser pockets . 
In one , he found Cumbers ' radio mike . 
In the other he found a miniature Qur ` an of the kind Gardner often gave out as gifts . 
That discovery , Gardner believes , may have saved his life , by giving the killer pause for thought . 
The militants drove off , leaving him bleeding in the dust . 
Gardner rolled over and cried for help . 
His legs were paralysed . 
`` My cries were just a sort of animal pain ... it was almost beyond pain . 
I 'm amazed I did n't black out . 
Maybe some of the stomach acid had leaked , I do n't know . '' 
The locals who gathered at the scene astonished Gardner by their behavior . 
It was as if , by being shot , he had put himself in a world beyond them . 
`` They did n't help at all . 
To me this was extraordinary , they offered no reassurance , no glass of water , no blanket , no cushion , nothing . 
They were discussing the cartridge cases around . 
They were saying , ` Look , I think he 's been shot , has he been shot , yes , he has , look at the bullet cases there , ' as if I was just an exhibit in a museum . 
It was bizarre because I 've had so much hospitality in the Middle East , so much kindness . '' 
Instead of an ambulance , two police cars arrived . 
He was manhandled into the back of one of them and driven off , screaming in pain , to hospital . 
`` It took them a long time to get me out of the police car and on to a hospital trolley , there was pulling and pushing and arguing . 
I remember them wheeling me into the operating theater and me shouting for painkiller and somebody injected me - and then I was out and I did n't come back up for eight days . '' 
When he woke up , he saw his wife , Amanda . 
`` It was fantastic to sort of swim up the surface of consciousness and open my eyes and see her there and although I was pretty groggy I asked a number of questions . 
I said : ` What 's happened to Simon ? ' 
And she said : ` He did n't make it . ' '' 
Cumbers , Gardner found out later , ran at right angles to him . 
He managed to run for about a kilometre , carrying his heavy Betacam camera , but could n't find any cover . 
The militants shot him in the head . 
In his eight days of drug-induced unconsciousness , Gardner himself came close to death . 
The first team of surgeons was well-intentioned but inexperienced . 
While they tried to patch him up , bullet hole by bullet hole , his life was slipping away . 
Two things saved him . 
One was that the governor of Riyadh heard what had happened and dispatched an emergency team , with a mobile intensive-care unit , from one of the city 's best hospitals , the King Faisal . 
The other was that the team was led by a South African , Peter Bautz , who happened to specialise in gunshot wounds . 
Bautz 's team operated on Gardner for the next 40 hours as he went in and out of surgery . 
They operated on his stomach so many times - nine - that they did n't even close it up between operations , just kept it covered . 
`` My intestines were very shot up , they had to take out quite a lot of them , there was internal bleeding , there was pus , fecal matter in there , there were infections , I had acute lead poisoning from one of the bullets . 
Dr Bautz told me one bullet went in , out and in again , somehow . 
So I was in quite a state . '' 
This was the beginning of a medical ordeal that continues . 
The Saudis paid for Gardner 's air ambulance back to Britain . 
Months of operations and recovery followed at the Royal London - where , despite superb care from a constellation of specialists , Gardner endured weeks of fever and vomiting as the result of infection from a feeding tube - and the Chelsea and Westminster . 
Incredibly , his major organs - liver , kidney , lungs , liver , stomach , heart - are relatively undamaged , and he now digests his food . 
He has lost part of his colon and his intestines , but has been told that he can do without them . 
His shoulder and leg wounds have healed . 
Even his spine is largely intact . 
Yet none of this is much comfort to Gardner and his family , because he still can not walk , and will never fully recover the use of his legs . 
The militant 's bullets severely damaged the cascade of nerves connecting the spine with the legs . 
Some were cut , and they do n't grow back . 
Gardner has not experienced any of the symptoms of post-traumatic stress as a result of the horror he experienced . 
All his troubles now are related to being suddenly thrust into the ranks of Britain 's estimated 40,000 spinal cord injury sufferers . 
`` The most stressful thing is coping with being disabled . 
Spinal injury is a complete life changer , '' he says . 
`` There is life before the injury and life afterwards and in a way that has dwarfed the horror of what happened . '' 
After the attack , when he was lying in the dirt , says Gardner , `` I never reconciled myself to dying , no , absolutely not . 
I never , ever thought this is all too difficult , I 'll just give up and die . 
It was thoughts of my family that kept me going . 
I love my family so much I want to carry on being a father and a husband to them . '' 
Now the family - Gardner and his wife have two daughters , aged six and seven - are reunited , and it has been hard . 
`` My wife has just been an amazing support , she has been so understanding . 
She married an able-bodied person and she 's now got a disabled husband . 
That 's tough for her as well . 
Physically , I 've gone from being a runner who 's quite robust to being somebody who 's in a wheelchair and quite vulnerable , essentially . '' 
`` The younger one has taken it in her stride , I think she 's fine . 
The older one , it 's been quite tough for her . 
She was very shocked when it happened , she was wandering round the playground in a daze . 
She was asking , ` Why did n't they shoot daddy with a water pistol ? 
Why did it have to be bullets ? ' 
For a six year old , as she was last year , she should n't be having to ask questions like that , she should n't even know what a bullet is . 
`` They 're much better now that I 'm back home . 
I was away in hospital for seven or eight months . 
At least now I 'm able to read them their bedtime story every night . 
The tough thing is that I was very physical with them before . 
Particularly with the older one . 
I 'd take her rock climbing and teach her rollerblading and take them swimming every weekend ... I 'm getting stronger , but when I first came back from my operation in January I would eat a few morsels of food and then have to go and lie down feeling sick . 
So I 've not had the same energy and dynamism that I had before . 
But I 'm having to find new things to do with them , like chess . 
They both love chess . '' 
Gardner 's fascination with the Arab world , which took him around the Middle East as an investment banker and , since 1995 , as a BBC journalist , began when he was 16 . 
His mother took him to meet a friend , the late Wilfred Thesiger , the writer and explorer who had lived among the Arabs of the Empty Quarter in Arabia and the marshes of Iraq . 
Sitting in Thesiger 's little flat in Chelsea , drinking tea , the young Gardner was not put off by the veteran 's disgust with the modernisation of the oil-era Middle East . 
He was inspired by Thesiger 's pictures and stories from the older Arab milieux of the 1940s and 1950s , and resolved to become an Arabist . 
He read Arabic and Islamic studies at Exeter , but found the academic course tough going . 
It was only when the university sent him to Cairo for a year that he blossomed . 
He stopped going to classes , moved in with an Egyptian family in one of the city 's medieval slums , and acquired fluent Arabic . 
A few years later he spent time living with the Bedu in Jordan , in the desert near Aqaba . 
`` By day I would go out with the shepherds and we 'd wander for miles with the goats and sheep over the dunes , drinking goat 's milk , but then when it was Ramadan we had to fast , and I fasted with them , and at night there would be these huge feasts , tribes would come from all around ... it was a wonderful time . 
They would tell stories under the stars and somebody would play a rababo , a stringed instrument that makes a very mournful sound , and then somebody would recite traditional poetry . 
`` Since then I 've made many Arab friends , mostly Muslim , some Christian . 
I 've loved living in the Middle East . 
It has been good to us . 
I met my wife in the Gulf . 
Some of the nicest people I 've ever met were in Bahrain , Oman and Saudi Arabia . 
`` Would I go back to Saudi Arabia now ? 
I would n't put my family , my parents , through that , even if I wanted to . 
Also I would n't want to go back and be seeming to thumb my nose at al-Qaida and say ` Na-na-na-na-na , you did n't get me . ' 
I 'm sure they were n't deliberately targeting me because of the job I do . 
If they were , it 's an own goal , because they knocked out almost the only western broadcaster who bothers to explain what al-Qaida 's complaints are , what their motivation is , so taking me off the air for nearly a year would be a pretty stupid thing to do . '' 
Gardner has just gone back to his old job at the BBC - effectively , the Corporation 's `` war on terror '' correspondent . 
He remains a tough critic of the Iraq war , dismissing the popular US belief that there was a link between Saddam Hussein and al-Qaida . 
But would what had happened to him influence his wider reporting ? 
By way of an answer , Gardner says he had found inspiration in Daniel Pearl , the Wall Street Journal reporter executed by Islamic radicals in 2002 . 
Before his death , he had used his knowledge of these terror groups to explain , not condemn . 
Gardner says that having survived a similar execution attempt he wanted to show that , by targeting journalists who sought to explain the reasons behind their actions , the militants were only hurting their cause . 
Not that this means forgiving the individuals who shot him and Cumbers . 
`` I will try very hard to be as objective as I was before . 
Do I forgive the people who did this to me ? 
No , of course not . 
They have n't apologised , they showed no mercy . 
I 've had no little note saying , ` Gosh , we feel sorry about what we did . ' '' 
The Saudis claim that two of the five men who shot Gardner and Cumbers have been killed in subsequent shootouts , but have not made clear how they reached this conclusion . 
Nor have they allowed British investigators to talk to the unarmed government minder , whose actions during the attack remain a mystery to Gardner . 
`` It 's particularly tough for Simon 's widow , because , of course , she 'd like to know that the people who killed her husband have been brought to justice or that there 's some kind of accountability . '' 
Gardner gets tired easily these days , but seems astonishingly busy . 
Besides going back to work , writing a book and spending time with his family , he is doing all he can to start walking again . 
He is undergoing physiotherapy at Stanmore hospital . 
`` By the time this piece comes out I will be starting to walk with calipers , but only for an hour or two a day , because it 's pretty exhausting , and it 's not terribly efficient either , which is why a lot of spinally injured patients tend to just stick with a wheelchair , '' he says . 
`` There is still hope , but the prognosis from Stanmore is that I will be a long-term wheelchair user . 
The best end point I think I can hope for is that I will only need splints from the knees downwards . 
I 've been told I will never get my feet back ; my feet are gone , basically . 
They 're still there , but I ca n't feel anything . 
I have continual nerve pain in my legs . 
It keeps me awake at night . 
I never thought that nearly a year on from the injuries I 'd still be in so much pain . '' 
Gardner 's pain specialists have told him they can not increase medication without giving him side effects such as drowsiness and headaches , which he refuses to countenance . 
What he had not realized before about spinal injury , he says , is that feeling sorry for someone in a wheelchair because they ca n't walk is not the half of it . 
`` What you do n't see is the internal stuff . 
When you 're spinally injured you also usually lose control of your bladder and bowels . 
In my case mine were so shot up that I had to have things like catheters and bags anyhow , so it 's irrelevant for me , but for other people , that is one of the hardest things . 
They 're having to use suppositories to empty their bowels , they 're having to put these awful catheters up their genitals - it 's really tough . 
Which is why I think a lot of spinally injured people have this sort of pained expression on their face . 
`` Several things have kept me smiling : being back with my family , writing a book and improving with physio . 
I think there will come a time when my locomotive improvement will hit the buffers , and I think that will be quite a depressing time . 
At which point I 'll start investigating disabled sports such as disabled skiing and scuba diving . 
Life 's got to go on . 
`` I want my life back . 
I accept it 's never going to be the same as the life I had before injury but I 'm determined to make the most of it . 
And one day I 'll go off and do something completely different . '' 
