LONDON | Mon Apr 11 , 2011 8:14 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The most prominent Libyan defector said on Monday his country could become `` a new Somalia '' unless all sides involved in the conflict stopped it from descending into civil war . 
`` The unity of Libya is essential to any solution and settlement in Libya , '' former foreign minister Moussa Koussa Koussa said in a prepared statement to the BBC , which broadcast his comments with an English translation . 
`` I ask everybody , all the parties to work to avoid taking Libya into a civil war , '' Koussa said . 
`` This will lead to bloodshed and make Libya a new Somalia . '' 
Koussa , speaking publicly for the first time since defecting to Britain last month , said he was no longer in contact with the Libyan government of Muammar Gaddafi . 
Libyan Social Affairs Minister Ibrahim Zarouk al-Sharif told reporters in Tripoli he would not comment on the interview . 
`` I will not comment on anything he says while he is captured and -LRB- being held -RRB- hostage in a hostile country . '' 
`` How do you know he went there -LRB- to Britain -RRB- ? 
Maybe he was kidnapped . '' 
Scottish police interviewed Koussa last week over the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie , Scotland , hoping he would provide intelligence over the attack . 
A former spy chief , Koussa was a close adviser to Gaddafi since the 1970s and is believed to have played a key role in the release of the only person convicted for the bombing . 
He told the BBC he decided to resign `` when the Libyans started to lose security and stability . '' 
Koussa is the highest profile of a number of Libyan ministers and ambassadors who have resigned , some of them joining the opposition to Gaddafi . 
`` The solution in Libya will come from the Libyans themselves , through discussion and democratic dialogue , '' he said . 
-LRB- Reporting by Karolina Tagaris in London and Maria Golovnina in Tripoli ; editing by Michael Roddy -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
