Has Volkswagen discovered the Holy Grail of carmakers ? 
Full Article Libyan rebels reject African Union peace plan BENGHAZI , Libya | Mon Apr 11 , 2011 10:29 pm IST BENGHAZI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan rebels swiftly rejected an African Union peace initiative on Monday , saying there could be no deal to end a two-month-old civil war unless Muammar Gaddafi left power . 
The initiative collapsed hours after South African President Jacob Zuma , head of an African Union mission , said Gaddafi had accepted the plan , including a ceasefire proposal . 
As African presidents negotiated with the rebel leadership in their stronghold of Benghazi , residents said Gaddafi 's forces bombarded the besieged western city of Misrata where residents reported heavy fighting . 
Western leaders also rejected any deal that did not include Gaddafi 's removal and NATO refused to suspend its bombing of his forces unless there was a credible ceasefire . 
NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen told a Brussels news briefing that Gaddafi 's government had announced ceasefires in the past , but `` they did not keep their promises '' . 
Rebel leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil told a news conference after the talks in Benghazi : `` The African Union initiative does not include the departure of Gaddafi and his sons from the Libyan political scene , therefore it is outdated . '' 
NATO said its air strikes against government armor , which have recently increased , would continue as long as Gaddafi targeted civilians . 
A resident of the coastal city of Misrata , which has been under siege for six weeks , told Reuters heavy fighting was under way on the eastern approaches and in the center . 
Rebels told Reuters Gaddafi 's forces fired Russian-made Grad rockets into the city , where conditions for civilians are said to be desperate . 
Earlier Al Jazeera television quoted a rebel spokesman as saying five people died and 20 were wounded in Misrata , a lone rebel bastion in western Libya . 
Zuma did not travel from Tripoli to Benghazi with other AU delegates , to the rebels ' surprise , but issued a statement when he got home saying the mission was `` a huge success '' . 
Libyan officials have repeatedly said that Gaddafi , who holds no official state position , will not quit . 
The AU delegation was met in Benghazi by up to 3,000 demonstrators holding banners reading : `` African Union take Gaddafi with you '' and `` Gaddafi has committed genocide '' . 
They pushed up to the doors of the hotel where the talks were held , yelling `` the people want the downfall of the regime '' . 
Officials from NATO , which is bombing Libyan government armor under a United Nations mandate to protect civilians , said they took note of the African Union plan but the alliance would continue operations while civilians were at risk . 
Human Rights Watch accused Gaddafi 's forces of indiscriminate attacks on civilians in Misrata which violated international law . 
It said about 250 people had died . 
The African Union does not have a good track record in brokering peace deals , having failed recently to end conflicts or disputes in Somalia , Madagascar and Ivory Coast . 
At the front outside the eastern rebel-held town of Ajdabiyah , rebels buried the charred bodies of Gaddafi troops killed in air strikes and said they were advancing westwards . 
But there were only light skirmishes on Monday on the contested road to the oil port of Brega , 70 kms -LRB- 45 miles -RRB- further west , in contrast to Sunday 's heavy fighting in Ajdabiyah when rebels repelled a government assault . 
NATO stepped up attacks on Gaddafi 's armor over the weekend , destroying 25 tanks around Misrata and Ajdabiyah after rebels accused them of acting too slowly . 
An AU statement after the Tripoli talks spoke of a transition but made no mention of Gaddafi 's future . 
Asked if the issue of him stepping aside was discussed , Ramtane Lamamra , AU Commissioner for Peace and Security , told reporters : `` There was some discussion . '' 
However he added : `` I can not report on confidential discussions because first of all I was not part of them . '' 
The AU proposal included an immediate cessation of hostilities , effective monitoring of the ceasefire , the delivery of humanitarian aid and the protection of foreigners . 
In Washington , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said the United States wanted to see `` the departure of Gaddafi from power and from Libya '' , but avoided comment on the AU plan . 
The rebels had previously rejected a negotiated outcome to what has become the bloodiest in a series of pro-democracy revolts across the Arab world that have ousted the autocratic leaders of Tunisia and Egypt . 
The NATO attacks outside Ajdabiyah on Sunday helped break the biggest assault by Gaddafi 's forces on the eastern front for at least a week . 
The town is the gateway to the rebel stronghold of Benghazi 150 km -LRB- 90 miles -RRB- north up the Mediterranean coast . 
On Monday upbeat rebels were putting burned and mangled bodies into blankets by blackened government vehicles outside Ajdabiyah and dragging them into the desert for burial . 
`` We have been able to advance because of the air strikes , '' said rebel Belgassim El-Awami . 
It was not clear how far west the rebels had moved along a front which has swung back and forth for more than a week in a fight for the oil port of Brega . 
Opposition fighters have been overwhelmed by Gaddafi 's firepower in western Libya , close to his base of Tripoli , but are increasingly using guerrilla tactics to weaken his hold . 
Tripoli residents said there had been several attacks on army checkpoints and a police station in the last week and gunfire can be heard at night . 
