WASHINGTON | Mon Apr 11 , 2011 2:10 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The United States reacted cautiously on Monday to a peace plan for Libya rejected by the rebels , saying it was waiting for details and shedding no light on whether the proposal required Muammar Gaddafi to step down . 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton repeated the U.S. view that the Libyan leader , embroiled in a civil war against rebels seeking to overthrow him , must leave power and the country but she did not include this on a list of `` non-negotiable '' demands . 
While a State Department official said the omission was not intentional , it suggested Clinton might be trying to leave some negotiating room to keep alive the African Union peace plan despite its rejection by the Benghazi-based opposition . 
It is unclear how the conflict may end given the apparent stalemate between Gaddafi 's forces and the rebels , who are being assisted by NATO air power . 
President Barack Obama , seeking to extricate U.S. troops from long wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , has ruled out sending U.S. ground forces to Libya , a North African oil exporter which the United States long accused of sponsoring terrorism . 
The rebels said there could be no deal to end the two-month-old civil war unless Gaddafi , who has ruled the country for more than four decades , left power . 
Earlier , South African President Jacob Zuma , head of an AU delegation , said Gaddafi had accepted the plan , including a ceasefire proposal . 
Clinton largely sidestepped a question at a news conference about the U.S. view of the peace plan , saying she had received accounts of the proposal and how it was received by both sides but said she was waiting to get `` a full readout . '' 
She did not directly address a query on whether the proposal required that Gaddafi step down . 
`` We have made it very clear that we want to see a ceasefire . 
We want to see the Libyan regime forces pull back from the areas that they have forcibly entered . 
We want to see a resumption of water , electricity and other services to cities that have been brutalized by the Gaddafi forces . 
We want to see humanitarian assistance reach the people of Libya . 
These terms are non-negotiable , '' Clinton told reporters . 
`` We believe , too , that there needs to be a transition that reflects the will of the Libyan people and the departure of Gaddafi from power and from Libya , '' she added during a news conference with Finnish Foreign Minister Alexander Stubb . 
A State Department official said her choice not to put Gaddafi 's departure among the non-negotiable terms was not deliberate . 
It `` was not intentional . 
Our position remains that Gaddafi has to go , '' said the official , who spoke on condition that he not be identified . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
