\* Crude oil falls , Goldman Sachs advises taking profits \* US stocks mostly lower ; Alcoa reports strong Q1 profit \* US dollar firmer after US government shutdown avoided -LRB- Adds details , comment , updates prices -RRB- NEW YORK , April 11 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Crude oil prices fell sharply on Monday on concerns high prices could erode demand and threaten economic recovery , while a sell-off in energy shares and jitters about corporate earnings hit U.S. stocks . 
Brent and U.S. crude oil also came under pressure earlier after the African Union said Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi had accepted a road map to end the civil war , including an immediate ceasefire , though rebels said any settlement would require Gaddafi step down . 
For details , see -LRB- ID : nLDE7390JP -RRB- Analysts were skeptical about the peace deal , and even if an end to the civil war were in sight , it will be some time before Libyan exports return to pre-conflict levels . 
Goldman Sachs told clients there is a strong chance commodity prices may reverse , recommending they take profits . 
-LRB- ID : nN11303064 -RRB- `` Not only are there now nascent signs of oil demand destruction in the United States , but also record speculative length in the oil market , elections in Nigeria and a potential ceasefire in Libya that has begun to offset some of the upside risk owing to contagion , '' the investment bank 's commodity research team , led by Jeffrey Currie , said in a note . 
Brent crude oil for May LCOc1 ended $ 2.67 lower at $ 123.98 a barrel , dropping as low as $ 123.62 after reaching a 32-month peak of $ 127.02 . 
U.S. crude CLc1 fell $ 2.87 to settle at $ 109.92 , pulling back after reaching an early $ 113.46 peak , the highest intraday price since September 2008 . 
U.S. stocks ended mostly lower as falling oil prices weighed on energy stocks and on fears that corporate earnings may not justify a big run-up in equities . 
But Alcoa Inc -LRB- AA . 
N -RRB- , the first Dow component to release results , reported a large first-quarter profit on Monday , after a loss a year ago as the price of aluminum , its primary product , rose sharply with demand for the metal . 
Profits in the first quarter of 2011 at S&P 500 companies are seen rising 11.4 percent from a year ago , according to Thomson Reuters data . 
For details , see -LRB- ID : nN07256466 -RRB- `` There 's a question of whether companies can meet the fairly optimistic expectations , '' said John Carey , portfolio manager at Pioneer Investment Management in Boston , which has about $ 260 billion in assets under management . 
`` There 's potential for disappointment , but if they come in line or above , the market could experience a continued rally . '' 
The Dow Jones industrial average . 
DJI ended up 1.06 points , or 0.01 percent , at 12,381.11 , but the benchmark Standard & Poor 's 500 Index . 
SPX fell 3.71 points , or 0.28 percent to 1,324.46 . 
The Nasdaq Composite Index . 
IXIC lost 8.91 points , or 0.32 percent to 2,771.51 . 
World stocks as measured by MSCI . 
MIWD00000PUS were down 0.2 percent , with emerging markets . 
MSCIEF off 0.6 percent . 
European stocks fell , with the FTSEurofirst 300 . 
FTEU3 index of top European shares down 0.2 percent . 
The International Monetary Fund said on Monday it did not believe that rising commodity prices will derail the global economic recovery but warned that inflation will remain elevated for a while . 
The U.S. dollar firmed against the euro after the U.S. Congress on Friday reached a last-minute federal budget deal that avoided a government shutdown . 
However , a focus on the U.S. debt ceiling debate could limit any gains , traders said . 
A rebound in the dollar was also overdue after it fell sharply against the euro on Friday continuing its downtrend of the past four months . 
For the month of April , the dollar was still down about 2.0 percent . 
On Monday the euro EUR = fell 0.4 percent to $ 1.4426 , after hitting a 15-month high around $ 1.4486 on Friday . 
`` The euro 's drop is nothing more than white noise and the pullback should prove shallow , '' said Jessica Hoversen , foreign exchange and fixed income analyst at MF Global in New York . 
Hoversen said the dollar 's negative tone should continue as long as the Federal Reserve keeps interest rates low and while central banks abroad , namely the European Central Bank and Bank of England , move closer to more normal borrowing costs . 
Expectations of another rise in European Central Bank interest rates by July kept the euro close to recent highs and pushed euro zone government bond prices lower . 
German Bund yields DE10YT = TWEB briefly rose above 3.5 percent for the first time since August 2009 . 
The yen was off an 11-month low against the euro and a 2-1\/2 - year trough versus the Australian dollar as another earthquake in Japan led some investors to close riskier bets funded by cheap borrowing in the Japanese currency . 
