Syria crisis : Conflicting reports of Tremseh killings The UN confirmed there had been `` continuous fighting '' on Thursday in the area of Tremseh There are conflicting reports from Syria about mass killings on 12 July in Tremseh , a village in Hama province . 
UN observers have now reached the village but were able to say little other than heavy weapons had been used - a violation of Syria 's commitment to a UN-backed peace plan . 
The observers saw pools of blood and bullet cases but have not determined the number of dead , who they were , or exactly who carried out the attack . 
They did say the attack appeared to target specific houses or buildings used by army defectors or opposition activists . 
This runs counter to some of the villagers ' accounts , which said that army tanks had randomly bombarded the village for several hours before pro-government militiamen swept in , shooting and stabbing victims , including civilians , at close range . 
Some reports say up to 200 people were killed . 
But the government now says that only 37 people , including two civilians , died in the attack . 
It also strongly rejected UN allegations that it used helicopters , aircraft or heavy weapons , saying only troops carriers and small arms , including rocket-propelled grenades , were deployed . 
The government said five buildings housing what it termed `` armed terrorists '' had been targeted and that the area was too small to use tanks . 
Activist groups have been unable to determine a death toll . 
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights group said it had the names of 103 dead , including 50 rebel fighters . 
Other activists say many more bodies are lying in fields that residents can not reach because of army checkpoints . 
The observers are continuing their investigation . 
Correspondents say evidence has not yet been produced of any civilian massacre , although this remains one of the deadliest single incidents since the beginning of the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad in March 2011 . 
Tremseh is a predominantly Sunni Muslim farming village about 35km -LRB- 20 miles -RRB- north-west of the city of Hama , surrounded by villages dominated by Alawites , the Shia heterodox sect to which President Assad belongs . 
According to initial accounts from activists and witnesses , a convoy of more than a dozen vehicles , containing uniformed soldiers and members of a pro-government militia - known as `` shabiha '' - as well as tanks and artillery , surrounded Tremseh at about 06:00 -LRB- 03:00 GMT -RRB- on Thursday , searching for members of the rebel Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- . 
An image said to show relatives grieving for the dead in Tremseh A resident of the nearby Kfar Hod , Abu Mohammed , told the New York Times that the soldiers and tanks were deployed to the east of the village , from where they opened fire with heavy weapons and machine-guns . 
Shabiha were deployed along the western edge of Tremseh and `` fired at anyone or any car that tried to leave the village '' , he added . 
The River Orontes provided a natural barrier to the south . 
An account published on Thursday afternoon said the electricity and telephone lines were also cut , causing people to gather in the streets `` in a state of fear and panic '' , `` unable to flee because of the blockade '' . 
It appears that there were members of the Free Syrian Army in the village , but it is not clear how many and to what extent they resisted . 
Activists and witnesses said shabiha militiamen swept into the village after the bombardment . 
Many people were shot or stabbed , and dozens of bodies were burned or dumped in the streets , they added . 
The UN Stabilisation Mission in Syria -LRB- Unsmis -RRB- confirmed there had been `` continuous fighting '' on Thursday in the Tremseh area , which had `` involved mechanised units , indirect fire , as well as helicopters '' . 
Activists later published a video online purportedly showing the blood-stained bodies of at least 15 young men laid out on blankets on a concrete floor , their faces or shirts drenched in blood . 
Some had wounds in their heads and chests . 
Most of the men were wearing jeans and t-shirts , though one had a camouflage jacket . 
3 Feb : At least 55 killed in Homs in month-long bombardment by military 3 Apr : Military attack on Taftanaz in Idlib . 
Mass graves said to hold 57 people 25 May : Some 108 killed in Taldou , in Houla region , many of them women and children 6 Jun : At least 79 people , many of them women and children , killed in village in Hama province Another video showed an alleged survivor of the killings . 
The narrator accused the government of `` ethnic cleansing '' . 
Abu Mohammed said he had visited Tremseh after the killings and seen bodies in fields , on streets and in homes . 
He said about 50 bodies had been pulled out of the River Orontes , and that most of the victims were farmers . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees , an opposition activist network , reported that more than 220 people had been killed in Tremseh . 
It said : `` The same methodology , tools and means as previous massacres was used : forces of the regime 's army shelled the town , shabiha then stormed the town and killed and slaughtered individuals and then burned the wounded and the bodies of the martyrs . '' 
Jaafar , an activist with the opposition Sham News Network -LRB- SNN -RRB- , told the AFP news agency most of those killed had been FSA fighters . 
`` At this stage , though we do not yet have the final count , the number of civilians killed by shelling is not more than seven , '' he said . 
The state news agency , Sana , said `` tens of terrorists '' had overrun Tremseh , killing or wounding dozens of civilians and ransacking or destroying scores of houses . 
It cited a witness , Abu Arif al-Khalid , who said the assailants had `` opened fire on -LRB- Tremseh 's -RRB- inhabitants and houses at random , killing more than 50 people , and blowing up houses '' . 
`` A woman and her child were killed by the terrorists before the eyes of all the people there , added Abu Arif al-Khalid , '' Sana reported . 
Security forces only arrived at the village after receiving calls from residents , officials said . 
Once there , the troops clashed with the attackers , `` inflicting huge losses upon them , capturing scores of them , confiscating their weapons , among which were Israeli-made machine-guns '' , the Sana report added . 
Some of those captured were paraded on state TV , which also showed large quantities of arms and ammunition it said were seized . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
