May 23 : An oil-covered pelican flaps its wings on an island in Barataria Bay off the coast of Louisiana . 
AP2010 BARATARIA BAY , La. -- As the Gulf of Mexico oil spill seeps deeper into the Louisiana marshes , the fragile grasses get difficult to clean , and the rescue efforts of wildlife like the brown pelican become harder . 
The biggest looming uncertainty of all -- when will BP be able stop the leak ? 
With each day , the anger and questions grow with the untold millions of gallons of oil that has spewed into the Gulf since an offshore rig exploded more than a month ago . 
BP PLC is getting barges and other equipment ready to prepare for a risky procedure midweek that the company hopes will finally halt the gusher . 
But the `` top kill '' maneuver , which shoots heavy mud and then cement into the blown well , has never been tried at 5,000 feet underwater and BP officials caution they are working on a range of backup plans . 
Even if it works , the damage has been done . 
On Sunday , some brown pelicans coated in oil could n't fly away on Barataria Bay of the Louisiana coast . 
All they could do was hobble . 
Their usually brown and white feathers were jet black , and eggs were glazed with rust-colored gunk . 
When wildlife officials tried to rescue one of the pelicans , the birds became spooked . 
Officials were n't sure whether they would try again , and U.S. Fish and Wildlife spokeswoman Stacy Shelton said it is sometimes better to leave the animals alone than to disturb their colony . 
Pelicans are especially vulnerable to oil . 
Not only could they eat tainted fish and feed it to their young , but they could die of hypothermia or drown if they 're soaked in oil . 
Just six months ago , the birds had been removed from the federal endangered species list . 
Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar and Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano were to lead a Senate delegation to the region Monday to fly over affected areas . 
Obama administration officials continued defending their response while criticizing BP , which leased the rig and is responsible for the cleanup . 
Salazar said he was `` not completely '' confident that BP knows what it 's doing . 
`` If we find they 're not doing what they 're supposed to be doing , we 'll push them out of the way appropriately , '' Salazar said . 
But federal officials have acknowledged that BP has expertise that they lack in stopping the deep-water leak . 
With oil pushing at least 12 miles into Louisiana 's marshes and two major pelican rookeries now coated in crude , Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said the state has begun work on a chain of berms , reinforced with containment booms , that would skirt the state 's coastline . 
`` As we talk , a total of more than 65 miles of our shoreline now has been oiled , '' Jindal said . 
Jindal , who visited one of the affected pelican nesting grounds Sunday , said the berms would close the door on oil still pouring from a mile-deep gusher about 50 miles out in the Gulf . 
The berms would be made with sandbags ; the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers also is considering a broader plan that would use dredging to build sand berms across more of the barrier islands . 
At least 6 million gallons of crude have spewed into the Gulf , though some scientists have said they believe the spill already surpasses the 11 million-gallon 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill off Alaska as the worst in U.S. history . 
A mile-long tube operating for about a week has siphoned off more than half a million gallons in the past week , but it began sucking up oil at a slower rate over the weekend . 
Even at its best , the effort did not capture all the oil leaking . 
The spill 's impact now stretches across 150 miles , from Dauphin Island , Ala. to Grand Isle , La. . 
At Barataria Bay , globs of oil soaked through containment booms set up in the area . 
Plaquemines Parish President Billy Nungesser said BP needed to send more booms . 
He said it would be up to federal wildlife authorities to decide whether to try to clean the oil that has already washed ashore . 
`` The question is , will it do more damage because this island is covered with the mess ? '' 
Officials have considered some drastic solutions for cleaning the oil -- like burning or flooding the marshes -- but they may have to sit back and let nature take care of it . 
Plants and pelican eggs could wind up trampled by well-meaning humans . 
If the marshes are too dry , setting them ablaze could burn plants to the roots and obliterate the wetlands . 
Flooding might help by floating out the oil , but it also could wash away the natural barriers to flooding from hurricanes and other disasters -- much like hurricanes Katrina and Rita washed away marshlands in 2005 . 
State and federal officials spent millions rebuilding the much-needed buffer against tropical storms . 
On Sunday , oil reached an 1,150-acre oyster ground leased by Belle Chasse , La. , fisherman Dave Cvitanovich . 
He said cleanup crews were stringing lines of absorbent boom along the surrounding marshes , but that still left large clumps of rust-colored oil floating over his oyster beds . 
Mature oysters might eventually filter out the crude and become fit for sale , but this year 's crop of spate , or young oysters , will perish . 
`` Those will die in the oil , '' Cvitanovich said . 
`` It 's inevitable . '' 
