May 22 : Oil from the Deepwater Horizon wellhead washes up on the beach of Elmer 's Island , a wildlife refuge , owned and maintained by the state of Louisiana -LRB- Reuters -RRB- . 
BARATARIA BAY , La. -- The executive in charge of fighting a Gulf of Mexico oil spill acknowledged Monday everyone is frustrated at BP 's failure to plug the ocean gusher more than a month into a disaster that is spreading damage in Louisiana 's wetlands , including miring pelican colonies . 
Doug Suttles , chief operating officer at BP PLC , went on all three U.S. network morning talks shows with the same message : BP knows frustration is growing that it has n't been able to halt the spill of millions of gallons of oil from a well that blew out after a rig explosion April 20 off the Lousiana coast . 
`` We are doing everything we can , everything I know , '' Suttles said on the NBC `` Today '' show . 
The Obama administration questioned BP 's competence Sunday , when Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar told reporters he was `` not completely '' confident that BP knows what it 's doing . 
`` If we find they 're not doing what they 're supposed to be doing , we 'll push them out of the way appropriately , '' Salazar said . 
Asked about Salazar 's criticism , Suttles said BP is working with experts from other oil companies and the government to find a solution . 
`` What I do know is , everyone is frustrated . 
I think the people of the region are frustrated . 
I know we are , I know the government is , '' Suttles said on NBC . 
`` The fact that it 's taken this long is painful to everybody . '' 
Suttles said on ABC 's '' Good Morning America '' that BP 's next shot at plugging the well this week stands a very good chance of success . 
But he said the global oil company has more plans in case the latest efforts fails , like several before it . 
BP plans to use heavy mud and cement to stop the breach , a maneuver called a top kill . 
Suttles said on the CBS `` Early Show '' the effort should start Wednesday morning and they 'll know the same day if it works . 
The White House said Sunday the Justice Department has been gathering information about the oil spill . 
Press secretary Robert Gibbs did n't say whether the department has opened a criminal investigation . 
He would only tell CBS ' `` Face the Nation '' that department representatives have been to the Gulf as part of the response to the oil leak . 
Salazar and Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano were to lead a Senate delegation to the region Monday to fly over affected areas . 
BP said Monday its costs for responding to the spill had grown to about $ 760 million , including containment efforts , drilling a relief well to stop the leak permanently , grants to Gulf states for their response costs and paying damage claims . 
BP said it 's too early to calculate other potential costs and liabilities . 
Even if BP 's top kill procedure works this week , the damage has been done . 
On Sunday , some brown pelicans coated in oil could n't fly away on Barataria Bay of the Louisiana coast . 
All they could do was hobble . 
Their usually brown and white feathers were jet black , and eggs were glazed with rust-colored gunk . 
When wildlife officials tried to rescue one of the pelicans , the birds became spooked . 
Officials were n't sure whether they would try again , and U.S. Fish and Wildlife spokeswoman Stacy Shelton said it is sometimes better to leave the animals alone than to disturb their colony . 
Pelicans are especially vulnerable to oil because they dive into the water to feed . 
They could eat tainted fish and feed it to their young , or they could die of hypothermia or drown if their feathers become soaked in oil . 
Just six months ago , the birds had been removed from the federal endangered species list . 
With oil pushing at least 12 miles into Louisiana 's marshes and two major pelican rookeries now coated in crude , Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal said the state has begun work on a chain of berms , reinforced with containment booms , that would skirt the state 's coastline . 
`` As we talk , a total of more than 65 miles of our shoreline now has been oiled , '' Jindal said . 
Jindal , who visited one of the affected pelican nesting grounds Sunday , said the berms would close the door on oil still pouring from a mile-deep gusher about 50 miles out in the Gulf . 
The berms would be made with sandbags ; the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers also is considering a broader plan that would use dredging to build sand berms across more of the barrier islands . 
At least 6 million gallons of crude have spewed into the Gulf , though some scientists have said they believe the spill already surpasses the 11 million-gallon 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill off Alaska as the worst in U.S. history . 
A mile-long tube operating for about a week has siphoned off more than half a million gallons in the past week , but it began sucking up oil at a slower rate over the weekend . 
Even at its best , the effort did not capture all the oil leaking . 
The spill 's impact now stretches across 150 miles , from Dauphin Island , Ala. to Grand Isle , La. . 
On Sunday , oil reached an 1,150-acre oyster ground leased by Belle Chasse , La. , fisherman Dave Cvitanovich . 
He said cleanup crews were stringing lines of absorbent boom along the surrounding marshes , but that still left large clumps of rust-colored oil floating over his oyster beds . 
Mature oysters might eventually filter out the crude and become fit for sale , but this year 's crop of spate , or young oysters , will perish . 
`` Those will die in the oil , '' Cvitanovich said . 
`` It 's inevitable . '' 
