Wednesday 24 August 2005 00.44 BST When the US and Britain begin to pull out troops from Iraq next year , as they hope , George Bush will do everything he can to ensure his three-year Iraq adventure is not portrayed as a total failure . 
That is why events in Baghdad this week , with Iraqi politicians negotiating a draft constitution , are so important to him . 
The bare minimum he will want to be able to claim next year is that he has set Iraq on the road to democracy . 
The US-imposed schedule is supposed to be that Iraqi politicians agree among themselves a new constitution . 
The deadline was last week , extended to Monday and then tomorrow . 
The constitution is supposed to be put to a referendum on October 15 and a fresh batch of elections held in December . 
Job done and troop withdrawals can begin . 
The Iraqi politicians who produced a draft constitution in Baghdad this week are threatening to disrupt Washington 's plans . 
The negotiations , meant to find compromises that will unite the country , have instead highlighted the potential in Iraq for civil war and break-up . 
There is logic in the federal structure proposed in the draft constitution but the Sunnis , dominant under Saddam Hussein and now marginalised , fear that the Shias and Kurds are being given too much autonomy and this could lead to break-up . 
The Shias and the Kurds needed to be magnanimous towards the Sunnis this week , to find space for them in the political process . 
This they failed to do and that is ominous for the future . 
The Iraqi politicians claim the US is pushing them to make decisions too quickly and that the constitution is being drawn up to a US rather than an Iraqi timetable . 
They are right , but there is no guarantee that the Iraqi politicians would prove to be any less fractious if given more weeks or months . 
There was a mistaken assumption in Washington before the war that Saddam was so unpopular that the Iraqi population would embrace western-style democracy and values as a counterpoint to tyranny . 
Bush was warned that democracy in Iraq was more likely to produce an Islamist state than the secular one that he envisaged and the draft constitution bears this out . 
The draft version embraces Islam as the religion of the state and `` a fundamental source for legislation '' . 
The Islamisation of Iraq could prove awkward for the US as it prepares to leave because neither the basic rights of women or human rights in general are clearly protected . 
The constitution has fudged whether Islamic law - sharia - or human rights takes precedence . 
US and British diplomats argue , unsatisfactorily , that if you give people democracy , you have to live with the consequences . 
Bush will be hard-pushed to persuade anyone in Washington that Iran has not been a major beneficiary of the invasion . 
The Islamisation of Iraq , through the proposed enshrining of a role for clerics in the courts and law-making , takes the Shia-controlled south closer to the theocratic Iranian model . 
If all goes well and there is a compromise by tomorrow and the Sunnis do not come out to vote against the constitution in large numbers in October , wrecking it , Bush can at least claim a success of sorts . 
He has started the democratic process in Iraq and that is to be welcomed . 
But he would be leaving behind a democracy that is extremely vulnerable . 
A month before the invasion of March 2003 , Bush said a free Iraq could become `` a beacon of democracy across the Middle East '' . 
It is highly unlikely that Bush or anyone else in Washington , not even in the rightwing thinktanks , will be claiming Iraq as a `` beacon of democracy '' . 
They will not be making the boast at all if , as is likely , the US pulls out against a backdrop of insurgency , lawlessness , power cuts , erratic oil production , water shortages , the threat of break-up and the increased influence of Iran . 
