AMMAN | Fri Aug 19 , 2011 7:33 pm EDT AMMAN -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian forces killed dozens of protesters on Friday despite assurances by President Bashar al-Assad that a crackdown was over , and thousands of people rallied across the Arab nation with renewed vigor demanding political freedoms . 
Activists said at least 34 people , including four children , were shot dead by Assad 's forces in the southern province of Deraa , where the uprising against Assad erupted in March , the city of Homs , 165 km -LRB- 100 miles -RRB- north of Damascus , suburbs of the capital and in the ancient desert city of Palmyra . 
See you in The Hague , '' chanted protesters in Homs , referring to the Dutch-based international war crimes tribunal . 
They also shook shoes in the air in a gesture of contempt . 
`` We want revenge against Maher and Bashar , '' shouted others , referring to the Syrian leader and his powerful brother -- a military commander accused by diplomats and residents of attacking cities and cracking down on pro-democracy protests . 
Encouraged by growing global pressure on Assad , the Syrian opposition in exile said it would set up a National Council in Turkey on Sunday to support the uprising and help fill any power vacuum should the protests succeed in ousting Assad . 
Similar initiatives in the past have failed to produce a robust umbrella group to unite the opposition , fragmented by 41 years of Assad 's harsh rule . 
Assad , from the minority Alawite sect in the mostly Sunni Muslim nation , told U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon this week that military and police operations had stopped . 
But activists say his forces are still shooting at protesters . 
The violent repression prompted coordinated calls from the United States and European Union on Thursday for Assad to step down and Washington imposed sweeping new sanctions on Syria , which borders Israel , Lebanon and Iraq and is an ally of Iran . 
On Friday , European Union states agreed to expand the number of Syrian officials and institutions targeted by EU sanctions and laid out plans for a possible oil embargo . 
Syria exports over a third of its 385,000 barrels per day output to Europe . 
Activists said five people were killed and 15 wounded in the ancient desert city of Palmyra , when Assad 's forces opened fire during a demonstration . 
`` The people want the execution of the president , '' shouted a crowd in the northern Idlib province . 
Some carried banners with slogans proclaiming `` Signs of Victory '' . 
Local activist Abdallah Aba Zaid said 18 people were killed in Deraa province , including eight in the town of Ghabaghab , five in Hirak , four in Inkhil and one in Nawa . 
Dozens of people were wounded , he said . 
State television blamed the deaths in Ghabaghab on gunmen who attacked a police post , killing a policeman and a civilian and wounding two . 
It said two members of the security forces and one gunman were killed in a clash in Harasta , near Damascus . 
Syria has expelled most independent media since the unrest began , making it difficult to verify events on the ground . 
The United Nations says 2,000 civilians have been killed . 
Authorities blame `` armed terrorist groups '' and Islamists for the bloodshed and say 500 soldiers and police have been killed . 
Internet footage of Friday 's protests suggested that , although widespread , they were smaller than at their peak in July , before Assad sent tanks and troops into several cities . 
But activists say protests have spread to more cities and become more frequent despite assaults that have intensified since the beginning of the Muslim fasting month of Ramadan . 
A doctor in Zabadani , 30 km -LRB- 20 miles -RRB- northeast of Damascus , said army vehicles were in the town and snipers were on rooftops to prevent crowds marching . 
Protesters from the Sunni majority resent the power and wealth amassed by some Alawites , who adhere to an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam , and the near monopoly of the sect on the security apparatus . 
They want Assad to quit , the dismantling of the police state and a transition to democracy . 
President Barack Obama froze Syrian state assets in the United States , banned U.S. citizens from operating or investing in Syria and prohibited U.S. imports of Syrian oil products . 
Adding to international pressure , U.N. investigators said Assad 's forces had committed violations that may amount to crimes against humanity . 
The United Nations plans to send a team to Syria on Saturday to assess the humanitarian situation . 
The United States , Britain and European allies say they will draft a U.N. Security Council sanctions resolution on Syria . 
Despite the dramatic sharpening of Western rhetoric , there is no threat of Western military action like that against Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi , meaning Assad 's conflict with his opponents seems likely to grind on in the streets . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
the same as Korea and Viet Nam with prior administrations ... . 
solve our problems at home before you attempt to solve the problems of another country ... . . 
This idiot Obama is the last leader that should be making accusations of slaughtering innocents . 
How many innocent lives have been lost due to his continued armed occupation of other countries . 
Get out or shut up Obama . 
It took them a bit of time to act . 
That is what makes international politics a big joke . 
It has been five months this Assad guy is slaughtering the Syrian people but because it suits Israel to have Assad in power no one has said until now ... . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
