Syria crisis : ` Limited progress ' on aid - Valerie Amos UN aid chief Valerie Amos says Baba Amr has been `` completely devastated '' - This video was purportedly shot in Homs following her visit to the city UN aid chief Valerie Amos has said `` limited progress '' has been made to get aid access to the worst-hit parts of Syria , but that much more is needed . 
Baroness Amos said she had asked for full access to the worst-hit areas , but the government had asked for more time . 
She gave more details about the `` terrible '' state of Baba Amr district in Homs , where `` every building '' was hit in the weeks of army bombardment . 
Envoy Kofi Annan is scheduled to meet President Bashar al-Assad on Saturday . 
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said Mr Annan would also meet Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem in Damascus , then hold talks with opposition leaders after he had left the country on Sunday . 
Mr Annan , who is representing the UN and Arab League , has called for dialogue and said the solution to the problem lies in a `` political settlement '' . 
He also said further militarisation `` would make things worse '' . 
But Burhan Ghalioun , the leader of the main opposition group the Syrian National Council -LRB- SNC -RRB- said the comments were `` disappointing '' when Syrians were being `` massacred every day '' . 
Meanwhile , several senior Syrian military officers have defected and fled into Turkey . 
The Turkish government has confirmed media reports that two generals , a colonel and one other officer were among 230 Syrians who crossed the border on Thursday . 
Baroness Amos , who visited the city of Homs - including the bombed-out district of Baba Amr this week - said the government had indicated that an initial humanitarian assessment could be made within the next week , and that a UN team in Damascus was ready to get to work . 
`` I put to them a quite comprehensive agreement which I had hoped to get signed , '' she told the BBC . 
Activists fear the Free Syrian Army in Idlib could be the next major target `` They have agreed to a limited preliminary assessment to try to find out where people are and what they need , but I would like something much more comprehensive . 
`` They have undertaken to look at that and get back to me and I do n't know how long that will take . '' 
The UN aid chief described a `` terrible situation '' in Baba Amr , which was vacated by rebels last weeks after a massive government bombardment lasting several weeks . 
She said there was not a single building in the areas she had visited which had not felt the impact of the bombardment . 
There were large holes in the streets and evidence of tanks rolling through , she added . 
Baroness Amos has also toured camps on the Turkish-Syrian border where about 11,000 Syrians have taken refuge . 
Tens of thousands of people were again reported to be on the streets across Syria on Friday , protesting against the Assad regime . 
Activists from the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said there were big demonstrations in Deraa , Latakia , Homs , Hama , Deir Ezzor and Aleppo . 
The Local Co-ordination Committees , another rights group , said 77 people were killed across Syria on Friday , including 26 in Homs , 28 in Idlib , six in Deraa , four in Hama , nine in and around Damascus , two in Latakia and one each in Bokamal and Aleppo . 
The death toll in Idlib , near the Turkish border , includes a reported massacre in the village of Ain Larouz , in which up to 20 civilians were killed when troops opened fire . 
Meanwhile , activists and the Observatory said troops backed by tanks were massing in Idlib to target the Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- , the country 's main rebel military force . 
Some activists fear Idlib could suffer the same fate as Baba Amr . 
The UN says more than 7,500 people have died as a result of the violence in Syria over the past 12 months . 
In other diplomatic moves on Friday , Russia said it could not back a new UN draft resolution on Syria as it was `` unbalanced '' . 
Deputy Foreign Minister Gennady Gatilov told Interfax : `` Its main problem is the absence of a simultaneous call on all sides to take practical steps in the context of ceasing fire . '' 
The draft resolution demands the Syrian government `` immediately '' ends violence while calling on opposition groups to `` refrain from all violence '' . 
Russia and China have jointly vetoed two previous UN Security Council drafts . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
