A housing bubble bursting , banks faltering toward failure , a nation plunging into recession . 
The year was 1991 , and the Swedish government responded with a dramatic plan : Unpaid loans and other troubled assets would be dumped into new state-owned banks , scrubbing the banking industry of problems in the hope of sparking a lending revival . 
U.S. government officials now are considering a similar plan to address the simmering financial crisis , part of a broader discussion about ways to revamp a federal rescue effort that has helped curb panic but failed to slow bank losses or increase lending . 
The idea of creating a `` bad bank '' to quarantine troubled assets is one of several approaches being considered , but it has gained momentum among President-elect Barack Obama 's economic advisers and banking regulators . 
With all of the approaches , there could be hitches : Several senior officials suggested that the government is likely to need more than the roughly $ 320 billion remaining in the financial rescue program . 
The renewed focus on toxic assets completes a trip around the block for the government 's rescue efforts . 
In October , Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke and Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. persuaded Congress to allocate $ 700 billion toward a financial rescue by describing a plan in which the government would buy troubled assets from banks . 
Instead , they chose to focus on direct capital investments . 
The investments helped some banks endure through autumn , but bank losses have continued to grow , threatening to overwhelm the government 's support and preventing the banks from finding private investors . 
The government was forced to fashion a pair of ad-hoc bailouts for Citigroup in November and Bank of America on Friday . 
`` A continuing barrier to private investment in financial institutions is the large quantity of troubled , hard-to-value assets that remain on institutions ' balance sheets , '' Bernanke said last week . 
`` The presence of these assets significantly increases uncertainty about the underlying value of these institutions and may inhibit both new private investment and new lending . '' 
The government could engage in direct purchases of troubled assets , but doing so would require an enormous amount of money to buy a meaningful volume . 
Another option under consideration is guaranteeing to limit losses on portfolios of troubled loans , as the government has done for Bank of America and Citigroup . 
But officials are loath to hammer out deals with one bank after another . 
Creating a bad bank is viewed as the most comprehensive approach . 
It is also a simple , understandable solution to a complicated problem , an important consideration in confronting what is ultimately a crisis of confidence . 
But a bad bank has never been tried on this scale , nor with assets as complicated as those held by U.S. banks . 
Bad banks are generally formed to deal with failed banks . 
And in almost every prior case , the cost to the government has been significant . 
The idea has generated interest among key Democrats . 
`` It 's something I am very interested in , but I 'd have to see the cost , '' said Sen. Charles Schumer -LRB- D-N.Y. -RRB- , chairman of the joint economic committee . 
One precedent for the discussions is the Resolution Trust Corp. , created by the government in 1989 to dispose of assets from the savings and loan industry . 
The RTC eventually liquidated about $ 400 billion in assets , at an estimated cost to the government of about $ 125 billion . 
The RTC is widely viewed as successful because it helped curb the crisis . 
