VENICE , Louisiana -- Federal officials shut down fishing from the Mississippi River to the Florida Panhandle on Sunday because of the uncontrolled gusher spewing ma ... Photos of fish with sores may raise concern about long-term environmental effects of the massive BP oil spill - but federal health officials say the Gulf seafood tha ... Photos of fish with sores may raise concern about long-term environmental effects of the massive BP oil spill -- but federal health officials say the Gulf seafood tha ... Commercial fishermen brace for impact as oil slick creeps closer A baby sea turtle escaped from the jaws of a shark , only to get stuck in oil spilled from BP 's well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
A young dolphin apparently was attacked by ... VENICE , La. -LRB- AP -RRB- -- BP 's chairman defended his company 's safety record and said Sunday that `` a failed piece of equipment '' was to blame for a massive oil spill along t. . . 
Events May 4 , Day 15 of a Gulf of Mexico oil spill that began with an explosion and fire on April 20 on the drilling rig Deepwater Horizon , owned by Transocean Ltd. ... VENICE , La. -LRB- AP -RRB- -- The surface area of a catastrophic Gulf of Mexico oil spill quickly tripled in size amid growing fears among experts that the slick could become v. . . 
FORT JACKSON , La. -LRB- AP -RRB- -- A Who Dat Nation weary from the worst-ever U.S. oil spill set aside its misery for a few hours Tuesday to schmooze with the Super Bowl-champ ... Six months after the rig explosion that led to the largest offshore oil spill in U.S. history , damage to the Gulf of Mexico can be measured more in increments than e. . . 
Six months after the rig explosion that led to the largest offshore oil spill in U.S. history , damage to the Gulf of Mexico can be measured more in increments than e. . . 
MOUTH OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER -- British Petroleum downplayed the possibility of a catastrophic accident at an offshore rig that exploded , causing the worst U.S. sp ... The Gulf oil spill probably wo n't steal shrimp from your plate , but it may take a bigger chunk out of your wallet to get them there . 
Though much of the Gulf of Mexico ... 
