More Headlines '' `` Less Headlines An oil spill is the release of a liquid petroleum hydrocarbon into the environment , especially marine areas , due to human activity , and is a form of pollution . 
Energy giant BP vowed Monday to pay `` all necessary and appropriate clean-up costs '' from the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The promise came after the Whit ... A government lawyer says the owner of the oil rig that exploded and led to the massive 2010 Gulf oil spill is thwarting a federal board 's efforts to make safety reco ... The owner of the oil rig that exploded and led to the massive 2010 Gulf oil spill is thwarting a federal board 's efforts to make safety recommendations that could pr ... Federal judge outlines new structure for January 2013 trial over Gulf oil spill claims A federal judge has outlined a new structure for a trial of Gulf oil spill claims that would n't be resolved by a proposed class-action settlement between BP PLC and ... British oil giant BP has agreed to pay the U.S. government $ 4.5 billion in installments over a period of five years for the 2010 oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , the ... BP PLC reached a settlement late Friday night with a committee representing the largest group of plaintiffs suing over the 2010 Gulf oil spill , a federal judge said ... This is a story of survival , and the survivor is a dolphin named Chance . 
It was the day before Thanksgiving in 2011 when a rescue team found Chance stranded on the be ... BP 's settlement of lawsuits filed by more than 100,000 victims of the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history goes a long way toward resolving pending claims . 
HAVANA -LRB- AP -RRB- -- U.S and Cuban officials are holding `` working level '' talks on how to respond to the massive Deepwater Horizon oil spill that is believed to be dumping s. . . 
The U.S. Justice Department has reached a $ 1.4 billion settlement with Transocean Ltd. , the owner of the drilling rig that sank after an explosion killed 11 workers ... The Environmental Protection Agency says the air in some places along the Louisiana coast poses a health risk to vulnerable people . 
The EPA says recent air sampling s. . . 
