Tuesday 6 December 2005 15.37 GMT At least 43 people were killed and 73 injured today when two suicide bombers blew themselves up in a police academy classroom in east Baghdad . 
An internet statement purporting to be from militant group al-Qaida in Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack . 
`` Two brothers targeted the police academy that continues to train dogs which feed off the blood and honor of Sunni Muslims ... the strength of the explosion destroyed a large part of the building , '' said the statement , which could not be immediately authenticated . 
The group , thought to be led by Jordanian militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi , has been linked to last month 's Amman hotel bombings and believed to be behind the kidnap and murder of Briton Ken Bigley . 
Wearing explosive vests , the two bombers appeared to have coordinated their attacks to maximize casualties . 
All those killed or wounded were police trainees or officers , with the exception of one US contractor . 
`` One of the suicide bombers detonated near a group of students outside a classroom , '' the US military 's Task Force Baghdad said . 
`` Thinking the explosion was an indirect-fire attack , -LRB- Iraqi police -RRB- and students fled to a bunker for shelter where the second bomber detonated his vest . '' 
`` We were sitting in the yard when we heard an explosion , '' said police major Wisam al-Heyali . 
`` Seconds later , we were hit by another explosion as we were running . 
I saw some of my colleagues falling down and I felt my hand hit , but I kept on running . '' 
Training and recruitment courses for police and security forces have been a regular target of militants since the end of the Iraq war . 
Many Sunnis see the police as being dominated by Shia Muslims , and reports of extrajudicial killings of Sunnis by police officers have further stoked tensions . 
In September , a Baghdad police academy was targeted by a suicide bomber who killed seven people and wounded 30 . 
More than 20 died in a suicide attack on a graduation ceremony in south Baghdad in January . 
A suicide attack on a police recruitment center in the neighbouring northern province of Irbil in May claimed at least 60 lives . 
Yesterday , the US defense secretary , Donald Rumsfeld , admitted the insurgency had been stronger than anticipated but said the media had focused on the war 's growing death toll rather than the `` progress '' he claimed had been made . 
`` To be responsible , one needs to stop defining success in Iraq as the absence of terrorist attacks , '' Mr Rumsfeld added . 
