By Dr. James Lindsay , Special to CNN Hopes that revolutionary fervor would quickly sweep Moammar Gadhafi from power look to be dashed . 
The Libyan strongman has secured his hold over Tripoli , the country s capital and largest city , and his forces have begun attacking rebel strongholds . 
A protracted Libyan civil war may be looming . 
That prospect presents President Obama with a dilemma : How does he encourage Gadhafi 's ouster and minimize harm to Libyan civilians without entangling the United States in yet another Middle East conflict ? 
He has seven options . 
The administration has already taken several steps to pressure Gadhafi to go . 
It has frozen $ 30 billion worth of Libyan assets in the United States , joined with the rest of the international community in banning members of the regime from traveling internationally and voted to suspend Libya s membership in the UN Human Rights Council . 
None of these measures is likely to make a difference , at least any time soon . 
The travel ban and Human Rights Council suspension are purely symbolic . 
Sanctions could take months to pinch the regime , if at all . 
So what are the White House s next steps ? 
Direct U.S. military intervention is off the table . 
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates and senior U.S. military officials oppose sending U.S. troops into Libya . 
The American public feels likewise . 
Here is a figure to keep in mind : a majority of Americans -- 58 percent according to the latest CNN poll -- oppose the war in Afghanistan . 
Americans don t want to get out of Afghanistan just so we can go into Libya . 
So what might the administration do instead ? 
Here are the seven possibilities : 1 -RRB- Impose a no-fly zone . 
This is what the U.S. did over parts of Iraq for more than a decade after the 1991 Gulf War . 
We could also go beyond that and bomb airport runways so they are unusable . 
Neither of these steps would help the rebels much . 
The Libyan Air Force has been a non-factor in the fighting so far . 
A no-fly zone and cratered runways also would not help the rebels deal with the real threat they face , namely , artillery and multiple launch rocket systems -LRB- MLRS -RRB- . 
These advanced weapons are capable of leveling entire neighborhoods . 
2 -RRB- Impose a no-drive zone . 
The White House could tackle the artillery and MLRS threat by bombing these and other heavy weapons . 
That , however , clearly makes the United States a participant in Libya s civil war . 
A no-drive zone would also be ineffective if Gadhafi 's forces have already dispersed their heavy weapons into cities and towns . 
Attacking them in place runs a high risk of killing and injuring civilians . 
3 -RRB- Push someone else to intervene in Libya . 
But who would volunteer ? 
European countries don t want to re-assume the colonial mantle . 
Most of Libya s neighbors either lack the ability or desire to take on a peacemaking mission . 
Countries outside the region would prefer to worry about their own problems . 
4 -RRB- Directly arm the rebels . 
This policy is gaining support on Capitol Hill . 
But it may merely increase the carnage rather than give the rebels the upper hand . 
Sophisticated weapons require training to use , but no one is talking about sending in trainers . 
Equally troubling , the weapons we want Libyans to use against Gadhafi could wind up in the wrong hands and be used against us down the road . 
What succeeds Gadhafi 's regime may not be a stable , broad-based government but something that looks more like Somalia . 
5 -RRB- Ask other countries to arm the rebels . 
Unfortunately , that doesn t solve the problem of weapons ending up in the wrong hands . 
Would the Saudis , for instance , be careful to make sure that weapons don t fall in to the hands of Islamic extremists who are as mad at the West as they are at Gadhafi ? 
6 -RRB- Provide tactical military intelligence to the rebels . 
Real-time information about the regime s troops movements would help the rebels direct their own forces . 
But it would not be a game changer . 
7 -RRB- Provide the rebels with moral and humanitarian support but nothing else . 
Debates in Washington always presume that the White House has to do something . 
But it can choose to do nothing . 
That sounds cold-hearted , especially when cable news , YouTube , and Twitter will bring the fighting into our living rooms . 
But the United States has stood on the sidelines many times before when people struggled to overthrow a tyrant . 
Moral outrage can give way to calculations of self-interest or political expediency . 
None of these options is appealing . 
That is why inside the White House officials are no doubt hoping that events will save them from having to choose among them . 
The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of James Lindsay . 
We dont get involved . 
Since out money went to china , tell them to do it . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:05 am | Reply I agree totally China is killing the North American Economy IMO , so why dont thye contribute !!! March 9 , 2011 at 10:25 am | Reply because China is smart !!! you do n't increase your net worth by assisting everyone else , not unless you can exploit your good deeds . 
By staying out of `` it '' keeping to themselves and letting other countries do all the work all while selling products to Libya is making China money . 
let the other countries spend their resources on helping people who will turn on you in a heartbeat , we will sell them our products and even sell products to the countries that are assisting Libya and make even more money . 
Even if countries demand that we help\/do our part in assistance we will crush them by slowing down trade to that country . 
if you do n't like this then hurt us by not buying any products Made China and make them in your own country !!!!!!! March 9 , 2011 at 11:37 am | Nodat : Name me something not made in china that we require for our daily lives ? 
Mind you this idea would also involve a worldwide boycott of Wal-Mart ? 
Not very realistic with all the ignorant and poor around here , huh ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:08 pm | thank you usa for all of your money . 
i love vacationing at all of the usa resorts that the people own . 
please , mr. b. hussein osama , please do something stupid in libya , so that the people can sweep in and recover the oil and take over another countries economy . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:42 pm | Before WW2 Great Britain was the worlds richest country , and spent all of its wealth -LRB- and lost its empire -RRB- during the war . 
The United States an upcoming great power did not get involved in the war for two years , preferring to sell arms to the UK , in order to make money . 
In fact it took a direct assault an US sovereign territory to provoke the nation to fight , rather than turn a profit . 
Asking China to get involved is ridiculous , if the USA is allowed to profit from a war -LRB- a slightly more important one in terms of human rights and world peace -RRB- , why not China ? 
After WW2 The United States was the only major participant to have made a profit , largely by sitting on the side and letting British , Soviet , and free European soldiers do the fighting . 
These days the USA posses the worlds largest armed forces and strongest national economy , like the British Empire before WW2 , why cant the USA make a stand and fight against Libya , like Britain against The third Reich , after all , Libya is n't as powerful a country as Nazi Germany was is it ? 
Or is the US government still afraid to fight the bad guys ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:04 pm | and they will continue as long as we keep allowing Companies to outsource and put jobs elsewhere . 
PUT A 25 % tarrif on all goods coming into the country and we will see the factories come alive here but there will be short term pain ... March 10 , 2011 at 9:09 am | Well , it seems US oil makers and arms dealer stand to gain the most out of any conflict in the world , especially any turmoil in the middle east . 
It gives US a great opportunity to expand its influence into the region , or should I say to to conitnue the Americanization process , to do what an empire should be doing . 
Compared with the US , China is a real lame duck ; only thing it can do is to sell some trivial merchandise and make some pocket money ! 
China was never an empire and it never will be one for it is in the blood of the Han people to make peace not war ; to trade and not to invade . 
March 10 , 2011 at 10:14 am | Generally a meaningless article wit no depth , no real insight . 
Thats what you get when you play bloggers $ 100 . 
Hey Arianna HuffPost pays $ 50 . 
!! March 9 , 2011 at 10:28 am | Reply So I guess that means you have the right answers . 
Let 's hear them . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:21 pm | I agree . 
Horrible article ... The best option is to do nothing and let other countries take care of themselves . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:50 pm | March 9 , 2011 at 10:46 am | Reply REASON , I think this poster is referring to the trade imbalance with China and its effect on the U.S. economy . 
Try and read deeper into the post . 
I do n't know where you are from , but America can still kick your a -- at any given time . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:53 am | Bernie and FannieMae\/Freddie Mac were not the main culprits of the economic down turn it was GREED ! 
greed from the Wall Street hustlers , greed from the mortgage brokers that gouged anybody that was warm , greed from the banks that bought the fraudulant loans from the greedy mortgage brokers and greed from the American public that bought these homes knowing ful well they could not afford them and then defaulted on them ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:42 pm | Reason101 . 
Try combining all of those factors ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:09 pm | Yeah , and the whole reason Africa 's in this mess in the first place is because Europe is a bunch of douche bags . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:14 pm | Ya hit it on the head . 
This darn mess we have been in started with Bushy and Dicky when they deregulated the Banks and Wall Street , failed to fund the war in Iraq , and failed to get on top of the worst recession since the great depression in time . 
Anyone feeling the drip drip drip of tax cuts trickling down to the middle class ? 
That was a Reagonesque move and did not work then and will never work . 
Those tax cuts for the wealthy just result in bigger mansions and longer yachts . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:58 pm | YES ! 
Title should have been ' 8 Options ' with # 1 being Do Nothing . 
# 7 still costs U.S. Citizens money mortgaging OUR future for their freedom ... There 's too much tolerance for the `` rest of the region simply lacking the ability of desire to act '' so the conclusion is the U.S. has to save the World ... It 's getting Really OLD staging wars that have only added TRILLIONS to the Nationat Debt -- For What ?? March 9 , 2011 at 11:18 am | Reply I have to agree . 
For all of the talk about deficit reduction , we are still in Iraq - for what again ? 
We created that conflict on credit we did n't have and the same deficit busters are busting at the seams because Obama is not reacting like the last cowboy who got us unto a useless war that taxpayers continue to pay for . 
We do n't need another one without deep thought and consideration about what the heck we 're doing . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:46 am | `` Doing nothing '' is not a zero cost option . 
One simple word , like it or not -- OIL . 
Protracted instability in or bordering any oil producing nation will have a negative effect on the US economy . 
It does n't matter that we do n't get much oil from Libya , since oil is a standard , globally traded commodity -- any reduction in suplly reliability affects the global market . 
We have oil prices in the $ 100.00 per barrel range now , in a global recession -- what do you think oil prices would be if the US economy was strong -- driving demand in China and elsewhere , in addition to increased domestic consumption . 
Rising oil prices , if sustained , will put the brakes on any economic recovery in the US . 
Libya is not an isolated situation , either -- the Egyptian military and security forces are no doubt watching the situation closely , to see how far they really have to go with reform -- if Qaddafi is successful , that will have a demoralizing effect on Egypt 's opposition , and the Egyptian military and security apparatus will likely just pick another front man and continue much of the Mubarak era status quo . 
If Qaddafi falls , then opposition movements throughout the arab world will be energized and more insistent on reform or regime change . 
The beneficial end result for the US is not going to come from US bought thugs like Mubarak -LRB- our friend so long as we fed his regime billions in aid -RRB- , but from the emergence of stable governments and domestic economic growth in the arab world . 
We would not even be discussing options with respect to Libya if the results did not have major geopolicital and global economic significance for the US . 
Bloodshed and butchery have occurred in the Congo and Darfur for years , and we 've never considered intervention . 
Political oppression is rampant throughout the world , and the US does n't consider intervention . 
This `` policeman of the world '' concept is self-deluding propaganda . 
We have never endeavored to be the world 's `` policeman '' -- US foreign policy and foreign military or intelligence interventions have always been guided by an intent to protect or enhance US economic interests . 
Libya is no different in that regard , and we have a clear economic interest . 
Just ask any yuppie commodities trader working at NYMEX . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:42 pm | Actually , we do n't get ANY oil from Libya . 
The prices have n't gone up in America because the world market has been drastically effected at this point . 
The prices have gone up because greedy assholes fear in advance that they will . 
On top of that , what is this crap about Obama contemplating using our reserves to offset prices in America ? 
The American oil market income and consumption has not changed . 
He should penalize the companies who are raising the prices for no reason and DEMAND the price go back down but , Obama ai n't really doing shit about nothing . 
OUR GOVERNMENT IS FUCKING USELESS . 
TEAR IT ALL DOWN ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:13 pm | You have the most informed analysis of the situation . 
The article itself has nothing to offer . 
We can not afford another war and even if we were to get involve , it will give the Al Quada and other of their ilk will exploit that . 
One way to help this could be by recognizing the rebel government as representing the new Libya . 
This will allow the recognized government to request weaponary and humanitarian assistance . 
We have already burned out bridges with Ghaddafi and recognizing the new government would not effect the future . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:50 pm | # 7 . 
We are presently doing what we should be doing . 
We are helping people to go back to their homes . 
We should do NOTHING militarily !!!! Let the UN get involved , as they should . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:28 am | Reply I 'll agree on this one . 
Let the U.N take this one , as they should have anyway , and when they screw up -LRB- and they will -RRB- , Americans can finally shrug and say hey was n't us . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:46 pm | WHY CA N'T WE SEND SPECIAL FORCES TO WIPE GADDAFI AND HIS SONS OFF THE FACE OF THE EARTH ? 
WE COULD THEN COME HOME . 
I REALIZE IT 'S NOT THAT EASY BUT IS N'T THAT WHY THESE FORCES ARE TRAINED ? 
THAT UGLY DUDE HAS TO GO ... ... ... ... ... . . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:07 pm | March 9 , 2011 at 3:20 pm | I agree . 
A single .50 cal . 
round each from 3\/4 mile away would eliminate Ghadafi and sons . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:23 pm | They are sitting on the sidelines waiting it out , hoping the U.S. will do something stupid as usual . 
South Korea , China , and many other countries wo n't spend a dime , but will be there to sent goods to be sold after the crisis is over . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:45 am | Reply Very well Said ... Keep our noses out of other nations business , BUT ... DOnt forget . . 
Its an OIL GRAB like all the other wars , And they dont care who they kill to get it ... . . 
What a SHAME March 9 , 2011 at 12:06 pm | Reply So where is all of this oil that we have `` grabbed '' and exactly how much oil comes out of Afghanistan ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:48 pm | you 're joking right ? 
you 're asking china -LRB- a nation that 's known for brutally oppressing all anti-government interests -RRB- to intervene in a nation that 's oppressing their citizens on behalf of the citizens ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:11 pm | Reply Why does n't eastern Libya seceed , form a government which we can recognize along with many other countries . 
Then we can go in and help them defend their borders . 
This new country will have most of the Libyan oil . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:13 pm | Reply Brokering a cease-fire ? 
Like we did in Korea and Vietnam ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:34 pm | Why do we have to do anything ? 
This once again is not our problem . 
Why do we have stick our nose into other countries business ? 
We must have more money than common sense . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:47 pm | Reply I agree that it 's not our problem and we should stay out of it . 
However , US is top dog in the world , and if there are major shifts in power that could change . 
The unrest in the Arab and African countries could have a significant impact on the world pecking order . 
My view , it would be a change for the worse and have wide-reaching repurcussions . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:27 pm | March 9 , 2011 at 1:30 pm | It 's time that we keep our noses , hands , and mouths out of other countries problems , issues and civil wars . 
If we as a nation are so worried about oil prices then we as a nation need to figure something else out and stop depending on so much oil . 
We ca n't afford it now , and we ca n't afford it in the future . 
Butt out , and leave other countries civil unrest to themselves . 
Let other countries learn how to feed , clothe , educate , and defend their own , while we regroup and start bringing our nation back up to the levels we once had , economically , educationally , ethically , spiritually and morally . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:16 pm | Sun . 
3\/20\/11 But of course , No One will ever read this but I gotta add my 2 cents worth . 
To be Brutally Honest , I do n't Give a Shit if any of these Nations in Northern Africa or the Middle East become a Democracy . 
IF You chose to begin a Revolution & all You have is a AK47 then You are going to Die . 
It 's that Simple . 
AK 47 vs a Military Tank DUH ? 
I sincerely DO Give a Damn about Al Quida & Muslim Extremists Killing Americans & Our Troops . 
I am STILL WAITING for the BLOODY HEAD OF BIN LADEN to be brought Home On a Stick ! 
We belong in Afghanistan , Pakistan or where ever Al Quida is located & that includes Saudi Arabia . 
Those are the S O B 's that Killed 1000 's of Innocent Americans on `` 9\/11 '' & Yes They should Die . 
If we attempt to protect all of these Arab Revolutions across Northern Africa & the Middle East then the focus & the $ $ will be directly away from Our True Mission : Killing Al Quida , That 's Where We Belong . 
All of this is DaJaVu , Invade Iraq when We should have been focused on Afghanistan ?? Keep getting involved in SomeOne Else 's Revolution then there will be another Military Draft in America ! 
That 's a Shocker to think about . 
OPTION # 8 : Stay out of it . 
There are no Americans in danger there . 
It 's time the U.S. starts letting other countries stand on their own feet . 
READ MY LIPS AMERICA : THERE IS NOTHING TO BE GAINED BY BECOMING INVOLVED IN LIBIYA 'S CIVIL WAR . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:07 pm | Reply that was option 7 . 
At least read the article before commenting March 9 , 2011 at 1:34 pm | No nick # 7 was provide moral and humanitarian support . 
Do nothing would be doing nothing . 
Duh ... March 9 , 2011 at 2:56 pm | What everyone who calls for China and\/or Russia to step up and intervene fails to recognize the reason why they dont and always oppose foreign intervention . 
That reason is that they do n't want a precendent set for when their own populations rise up against their oppression and they need to start taking their own heavy handed tatics to slap them back down . 
China can talk a good game about condemning Gadaffi killing his own civilians but since they have done it before themselves and will likely do so again , they sure wo n't support anyone else getting involved less they find them selves on the recieving end of that in the future . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:16 pm | Reply We 're doing it too , except that the people we 're killing live in Afghanistan and Pakistan . 
So do n't be so arrogant and self righteous !!! March 9 , 2011 at 3:16 pm | Did USA learn any thing from Afghanistan ; they supply weapons to Al-kaida , during Russian conflict , even portable satellite to Osama Bin Laden . 
Now they are using those things against USA . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:17 pm | Reply Do you think china 's regime is better than Lybia s Gadhafi ? 
They have same goal ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:51 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 2:04 pm | Reply The Chinese Army , Navy and Air force is a joke , they have n't had any combat experience since Korea , and they are poorly equipped compared to most western countries , and what do they have to do with Libya ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:31 pm | Reply The US should take over the country , it could be the new Vegas ! 
Take over all the oil to pay off our debt to others . 
Enough Mr. nice guy shit . 
Nice guys finish last . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:42 pm | Reply What about changing the title to ... `` 0 options for the US in Libya '' ?? Rebels have got to do what they gotta to get their fredom . . 
USA has no gain or loss here so why bother ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:21 pm | Reply I agree we should stay out . 
This is none of our business . 
And who would we be helping ? 
The same people who cheered the release of the Lockerbie bomber ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:25 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 4:12 pm | Reply Overall a good article . 
However , I have trouble believing `` The Libyan Air Force has been a non-factor in the fighting so far . '' . 
From what I have been reading and hearing this is the number one advantage of the Libyan government . 
The ability to use air assets to bomb , scare , and watch the rebels has surely got to be a major factor . 
I do not think that the United States should , alone , create a no fly zone . 
If NATO goes through with plans of a no fly zone then I think the United States could use its military to help with that . 
The United States can not be seen as the ` instigators ' of this revolution or it will be used against us . 
Even though we are all eager to help those who yearn for Democracy we must act cautiously and do what is best for them and ourselves . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:15 pm | Reply How about the US keeping its nose out the domestic politics of other countries . 
Let us face it , a preacher christens his children first . 
The US should tidy up its own house before labeling other people 's houses dirty . 
Not to mention how head over heels the US is in debt . 
Yep , getting to the oil resources of other countries and planting the US flag on it is tempting , it would also be theft . 
The US should back off and stay out of Libya 's et . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:11 pm | Reply The Euro-cowards wo n't get involved . 
Even when the problem is in their own backyard -LRB- Bosnia -RRB- they wait hat in hand for the U.S. to do something . 
They are worthless leeches . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:29 pm | Reply I see it differently . 
This is a moral imperative : when you see a bully beating up a person who just wanted to breathe free air , a decent person would try to stop the bully . 
If , as expected , this vicious tyrant crushes his people , he will torture every one of them to death . 
In the name of common humanity , we are called upon to help . 
There should be a no-fly zone , now . 
It is our shame if we stand by , and watch this slaughter . 
`` Mind your own business '' and `` keep out of it '' just emboldens more would-be Hitlers . 
For shame !! March 9 , 2011 at 5:49 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 6:27 pm | Reply America has had more than enough of these absurd wars . 
We could be dragged into a Libyan civil war that could last for years , and cost us even more billions ! 
Besides , who is to say that another extremist group will not come into power there ? 
Gadaffi is fighting them with force , because they took up arms and want to overthrow the Libyan government . 
Can you imagine what would happen of a group of armed rebels started marching towards Washington DC intent on ousting Obama ? 
The US military would obliterate them ! 
March 10 , 2011 at 2:18 am | Reply Arm the rebels ? 
Great idea if we do n't look back at history and see what happened when we armed the Afghan rebels against the Soviets . 
Now the Soviets are our friends -LRB- ish -RRB- and we 're fighting the rebels to whom we gave weapons and training . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:07 am | Reply Seriously , the US never learns . 
It is one act of stupidity after the other . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:15 pm | Reply When did it become our responsibility to baby sit and interfere with everyone 's business ? 
Where was Libya during the our civil war ? 
One day we must realize to mind our own business . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:10 am | Reply Ha Ha ... where were the Libyans during our civil war ? 
Ha ha ... Face it . 
We live in a society where the internet and communications has forced us to become a more global society . 
We will become involved in this whether we want to or not . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:25 am | Reply Haha Where were the Libyans during our Civil War ? 
I believe they were serving as human foot stools for their Ottoman `` masters . '' 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:56 pm | Yah , and where was France during our Revolution ? 
Oh , wait ... March 9 , 2011 at 10:31 am | Reply I wipe my SEVERELY DIRTY BUTT with your ideology and YOUR French Flag ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:14 pm | Libya was part of the Ottoman Empire back during our Civil War and had no real power . 
The Ottomans had sense enough back then to stay out of our business and were already burning from the Barbary Wars -LRB- pirate -RRB- with us . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:49 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 12:10 pm | Reply I dont know about you all but that fella looks like he wants to kill someone ... . . 
I think our only option is to stay the hell out of it ... . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:10 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 11:19 am | Reply Options 4 -RRB- and 6 -RRB- sound eerily similar to how we got involved in Vietnam . 
`` Oh do n't worry we are just going in strictly as advisors , not active fighters . '' 
YEAH RIGHT !!!! March 9 , 2011 at 10:10 am | Reply but Vietnam was n't exactly a civil war and that was n't why the US got involved . 
It was against an aggressive superpower who was bending the outcome of the internal conflict for their own gains . 
Libya , on the other hand , is simply a Civil war . 
March 22 , 2011 at 4:57 pm | Reply Why do we wait when there are so many innocent civilians at stake ? 
I thought we were different . 
At the very least , we could stop his ability to harm his own citizens . 
I thought we encouraged democracy and discouraged tyrants ! 
I guess only if the polls tell us that 's the thing to do . 
Worry more about the innocents than what the press will say . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:11 am | Reply Hey Patty -- why do n't you go over there and straighten things out for them ? 
You must be a crack head to think US involvement will help or be well taken . 
Option # 8 -- stay out of their business . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:15 am | Reply Amen brother , we ca n't even fix our own problems let alone the rest of the world 's problems . 
This is why we are becoming less of a super power , this is why our currency is tanking , because we do not know when to STOP . 
Let 's go save Libya civilians ! 
Meanwhile who is saving American citizens in west Baltimore ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:16 am | You and matthew have it right . 
Never mind people like Patty Brown with their obvious limitations ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:15 pm | Patty , if you 're willing to send your child to help , go for it . 
I would prefer that my marine son stay out of this mess . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:15 pm | Reply We are not the Worlds policeman . 
The rest of the world 1 . 
Our current search for WMD 's and other threats to our way of life is now going into the what ? 
The US played a huge part in a World war from 12-41 to 8-45 -- 3.75 years -- and won that war and came home . 
We are working on more than twice that amount of time to get free of the current quagmire . 
even our `` allies ' do whatever they want when it suits them . 
Any good will and sympathy the US had , and there was plenty after 9-11 , was squandered going into Iraq . 
The middle east hates us no matter what we do . 
So take the no valuable US lives lost route and send all the old white men who are rattling sabers over there to make things right . 
Those who talk loudest never pick up a gun . . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:21 pm | Reply Jim , we still have army units station in Germany and Japan March 9 , 2011 at 2:28 pm | March 9 , 2011 at 3:04 pm | Unfortunately the US has always been a friend to tyrants when it suites the ambitions of US policy , except of course in case of personal vendetta . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:40 pm | Reply Option # 8 -- Stay out of their business . 
This area has been in constant conflict for over a thousand years . 
Let them thin out the herd without spending US money or shedding US blood . 
If body bags start coming home , US leaders are going to have more to worry about than which page to sleep with or what wine to have with lunch . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:11 am | Reply You 're right on here , we 're not killing or responsible for the deaths of civilians in Libya and we should avoid the `` temptation '' to feel the need to be the `` global , social , good cop '' . 
Option # 8 is the best , let them sort things out for themselves . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:12 am | Reply I am not sure if you noticed , but US money is being spent -- at the gas pump . 
If this situation does not settle down , with or without our intervention , we will soon be paying $ 5 + per gallon gas . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:15 am | Reply Libya produces less than 2 % of the worlds oil and none that is imported to the US . 
The price of gas and oil is driven by traders and corporations that are doing what they do in a market ... making as much money as they can . 
If the regulations of Wall Street were not being underfunded , these kinds of problems may have been mitigated . 
I love those that shout , `` Keep the governm , ent out of our lives , but keep gas cheap . '' 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:39 pm | Yup , the Libya situation is raising oil prices . 
No , that is not a good reason to get involved . 
Even if there was a good reason , we are not very good at solving other people 's problems . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:10 pm | We should do 1,5 , 6 and 7 but just dont give them any weapons that such as surface to air missiles . 
Give them basic arms that they could have received thru other channels but we need to stop sitting on our butt . 
It 's not like we dont have a score to settle also . 
Has everyone forgotten the Barracks that they blew up . 
Time to give them payback for the Gipper March 9 , 2011 at 10:11 am | Reply The joints chiefs already said we ca n't just send arms to a PO box in eastern Libya . 
The opposition party needs to be fully formed first . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:33 pm | Reply We did nothing in Tunisia and in Egypt and it worked out well for all . 
We did something in Iraq and Afghanistan and it is a mess . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:11 am | Reply Other way around , buddy . 
China 's money is coming to the US . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:12 am | Reply Humanitarian aid is the only part the US should play here . 
Obama will win big points if he stays out of this . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:16 am | Reply This is now a civil war , and the US needs to stay out of it . 
The people of Libya need to fight and decide their future -- not have it imposed on them by outside entities . 
If the Libyan military begins to directly and intentionally target civilian populations , then the international community -LRB- NATO , US , etc -RRB- could strike hard -LRB- ship\/sub launched cruise missiles only -RRB- at military facilities -- to send a message to military leaders to cut it out or maybe its time to switch sides . 
Otherwise , we need to stay out of this civil war . 
Just like Europe stayed out of the US Civil War in the 1860s . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:16 am | Reply I believe the French did aid the south , weapons for cotton , Mr. Lincoln formed a blockade to stop the French , all of it lead to the battle of the `` Monitor '' and the `` Merrimack '' . 
The Monitor sank the Merrimack which was built to bust the blockade and was basically the first version of a Battleship . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:46 am | Reply The battle for both ships left with out a winner . 
cannon balls bounced off both ships and had no real damage to them . 
both ships withdrew from the battle and that was that ... March 9 , 2011 at 11:14 am | Not France , but England . 
The problem was that it was hard for ships coming from England with arms to run the Union blockade of Southern ports and of course , it was equaly as hard to ship cotton out to England . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:30 pm | I agree with you . 
The world should send a strong message to Gadhafi and his supporters by the real action . 
If they choice to die for not democracy and not freedom why are we still keeping them alive . 
Why are we still seeing many Libyan who love democracy and freedom to die every day ??? Is it fair ??? Anyway , a lot Libyan will die , the world can control which side die more and which side die less . 
This action is also a strong message to send to all leaders in the world too : you and your supporters will be kill if your country is not democracy and freedom . 
This world is only to remain for whom love democracy and freedom . 
If the world does soon then the life of Libyan will come back as normal soon . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:20 pm | Reply Unfortunately too many in the US do not appreciate FREEDOM and DEMOCRACY any more and also forget that with being a Superpower comes greater responsibility . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:09 pm | The US has only one option in the civil war in Libya and that is to stay completely and utterly out of it . 
What will be , will be without our `` helping '' either side . 
No US `` boots on the ground '' period . 
Tell them we will pray for them ... March 9 , 2011 at 10:18 am | Reply Send troops there to guard oil wells and pipelines , ignore everything else -LRB- speaking about priorities ... -RRB- . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:20 am | Reply Every time the US gets involved with anything in the middle east , we end up the worse . 
For once , let a foreign country deal with their own problems in their own way , and pay for it themselves . 
Nothing positive ever comes from US government involvement in anything . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:21 am | Reply Why not just take out Ghadafi ? 
We have laser guided bombs , drop one on his head . 
And we could have done the same to Saddam . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:22 am | Reply Its against US law to directly target leaders . 
If they are collateral damage , that 's okay . 
But the US military can not target -LRB- aka -- `` assassinate '' -RRB- foreign heads of state\/governments . 
You would not believe how many military lawyers in the Pentagon review and sign off on our battle plans . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:28 am | Reply it 's against the law of the U.S. military industrial complex to target foreign leaders for assassination . 
how are we going to continue to run up the deficit funding all of those uniforms , boots , serving steaks in air conditioned warehouse facilty in the middles of the desert , specialized lifetime medial care for the wounded , the gi bill , drones , aircraft carriers , submarines , jet aircraft . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:50 pm | Ghadafi has eleven children , all of which plan to replace their daddy when he gives up power . 
Unless you can manage to `` take them all out '' , you will have accomplished nothing . 
Leave them alone and let their own people do the dirty work . 
Their military will eventually turn sides and support the peoples revolution ... March 9 , 2011 at 10:29 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 10:47 am | Actually that 's not true . 
We tried to kill him back in the Reagan administration . 
We missed and ended up killing some of his children instead . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:51 am | Reply Nah its true . 
US\/most of the civilized world policy is to not target political leaders for assassination . 
This thing called WW1 started out because of someone killing someone else ' leader blah blah blah . 
A few 10million dead later the war was over . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:01 pm | Simpleton . 
First you gotta find him . 
Silly quickie solutions like the one you propose never work . 
Besides , someone just as bad or worse will simply take his place or civil war will continue\/worsen . 
I say we mind our own business for a change . 
We do n't need to involve ourselves in any more conflicts . 
We 'd just find ourselves stuck with a bigger mess , and we have more than enough of those already . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:01 am | Reply We do not have the resources -LRB- in either money or personnel -RRB- to be the world 's policeman . 
Yes , it is tragic to watch the carnage but I think it 's time we heeded Einstein 's definition of insanity : doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result each time . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:23 am | Reply As difficult as it may be , we should not intervene . 
There is a great opportunity in the region for the People to reshape their destinies - and forge new structures . 
It will take a long time . 
We can not afford to be seen as Invaders and Colonizers . 
It will bite us later . 
We need to reshape our own country which has plenty of problems . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:23 am | Reply The us should stay out of this civil war and let them work it out . 
Have n't we learned any thing from past wars . 
What Is the us going to do if this happens in iran or china ? 
Stay out of it us its not are worry . 
Its just the oil issue again . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:24 am | Reply It 's hilarious to hear senators that support getting involved . 
They use phrases like Ghadafi , if left around will be up to nothing but mischief . 
Are you kidding me ? 
Americans are done with the decisions that are not based on foward thinking about possible `` blowback '' . 
Ca n't even believe there are officials talking about getting involved . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:27 am | Reply Well , hell ... why should we even have a military then . 
But not to worry . 
Obama would never take military action against a foreign dictator on behalf of the people . 
That is SO George W. Bush . 
They might just take back his Nobel Peace Prize . 
We could n't have that now , could we . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:08 pm | Reply We should stay out of this one . . 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- it 's none of our business -LRB- 2 -RRB- the opposition does n't want us there judging by the arrest of the British SAS team earlier this week -LRB- 3 -RRB- WE SHOULD NOT BE THE WORLD POLICEMAN -LRB- 4 -RRB- China has all the money thanks to our greedy US mutinational companies , let them do it . 
We should be fixing our own problems NOW not later , I have seen the US gov ' t push problems off on my generation -LRB- X -RRB- and i do n't want to see my kids generation get stuck with an even larger debt because we refused to face the problems out baby boomer bretheren left us . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:28 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 10:29 am | Reply Now McCain wants to get in on the slaughter . ! 
Gee would have guessed ! 
Obama has adopted a strategy that Eisenhower first proposed as to how to proceed against communism . 
Not to pursue but containment only . 
Communist will self employ . 
In spite of Nixon s failure to observe his advice , communism fell without a shot fired directly between the opposing forces in 1991 . 
Russia , 1997 China . 
It is for the people to decide their fate and not for another . 
By not stepping into various sovereignties and cultures , at great expense to us , to tilt the situations in favor to our agendas . 
Obama allows the people by their own strengths and ideologies to bring to term their agendas . 
If he had interfered in any situation , a message to the people in transition is that they may manipulate the U.S. to intervene for one purpose or another . 
On and on we go until our resources are depleted and our demise exposed . 
One small example ; Computer virus to Iran rather than military . 
Obama\/Israel superior strategy , to our Right Wing sludge hammer strategies . 
By the way Busch proved that sludge hammer does not work as we are still trying to disentangle ourselves from that failure . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:30 am | Reply For the record , it was Lyndon Johnson who escalated the Vietnam conflict from a minor engagement to a full blown war . 
Nixon only inherited it . 
And just when did China reounce communism . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:52 pm | Reply Large US corporations want stability and they will push to get it by help from the US military . 
The average citizen is worried about the problems at home and not those in countries thousands of miles away . 
They do n't want us there anyway . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:30 am | Reply This is a ` Damn if we do '' & `` Damn if we do n't '' moment in history . 
Damn if we do -- the Arab world will say we 're trying to extend our power and tell them how to run their world . 
Damn if we do n't -- Innocent people will die as the rest of the world stands by and watches because no one else will take any action . 
If history is an indicator the United States will have to act alone . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:31 am | Reply Option 8 -- leave them alone and deal with our own -LRB- worsening -RRB- problems . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:31 am | Reply Keep out . 
Get out of Afganastan , Iraq , So . 
Korea and everyplace else . 
Get home and protect our own borders . 
They will figure it out . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:31 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 10:32 am | Reply I am absolutely outraged by the dithering of the US and European allies over the legalities of a no fly zone , all the while seemingly oblivious to the fact that Zawiya has been turned into another Stalingrad . 
I am ashamed and sickened by our military and politicians who speak grandly about how great our country and our democracy is on the one hand and then when people are begging for our help to stop the slaughter they look at their shiny shoes and blather some weak excuses about how difficult it is to make such a decision . 
A friend in need , is a friend in deed . 
Get involved and get involved now . 
Give the freedom fighters in Libya what they ask for . 
Should they end up being crushed , Obama will loose the next election . 
I voted for him the last time and have never voted Republican . 
But , should it end up that people in Libya are needlessly murdered and their battle for the freedoms , which we all enjoy , are crushed , I will never vote for Obama again . 
I am more than disappointed in the man whom I thought would be a great President but instead , is turning out to be more to be like Woodrow Wilson than Teddy Roosevelt . 
For those unfamiliar , Teddy was right about world war I and Wilson was just another weak kneed politician who asked for leadership and then , never displayed any . 
France helped the American revolution and we gladly accepted it . 
Why then do we deny the very same help to Libya ? 
Was it so long ago that we have forgotten how it felt to not be forgotten ? 
Have we forgotten how important that help was to the formation of the USA ? 
Well I have n't and many many others have not either . 
We will remember come election day , you can be sure of that . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:32 am | Reply The rebels have specifically asked that we NOT get involved . 
`` No foreign interference ! '' 
unless it 's the UN , in which they have a voice . 
US military intervention 1 -RRB- proves Gaddafi & Al Qaeda propaganda right -- they 're always pointing to foreign powers seeking oil & colonial influence 2 -RRB- de-legitimizes the opposition who 've asked us to stay out and 3 -RRB- stretches our forces even thinner after a decade of unsuccessful war in the region . 
... BUT , it would make defense contractors & oil companies a lot of money , so what 's a few hundred more dead Marines ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:00 pm | Reply Terrible post . 
Your analogies -LRB- i.e. comparing French help in our revolution to the Libyan situation -RRB- are simply wrong , and your lack of foresight would be extremely dangerous if you held any position of power . 
I hope that you do not manage a business . 
Thankfully we have a leader in power who has the ability and consideration to think three steps ahead . 
Please do n't prove me wrong , Obama . 
You are the Commander in Chief . 
Do not succumb to the war-mongering voices that are undoubtedly attempting to persuade you toward military invention . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:54 pm | Reply Go USA . 
I love to fight for freedom so I hope US will help Libians to fight for freedom . 
What are you waiting for ? 
You did to Iraqi people so now its your turn to do the same for Lybian people . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:33 am | Reply Completely disagree . 
The US has no idea what the consequences will be if we go in there . 
You know how many innocent people died in Iraq and Afganistan and we are there . 
Innocent people will die if we are there or not . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:35 am | Reply How about then bestg option ? 
Stay the hell out of there and let them decide their own destiny . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:36 am | Reply Thank god for Secretary of Defense Robert Gates ... Egypt should be the primary actor ... muslim intervention would be best . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:37 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 10:37 am | Reply Lee let you people go attack them so they can have more money and oil too . 
After you guys have the economy already . 
You have more than enough funds . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:19 pm | Reply I am pretty sure that Lee is from the US ... . . 
Just guessing March 9 , 2011 at 7:56 pm | hey mr lee , tell your chinese brothers with more money and army then no other country to attack them and get all the oil they wish to have . . 
And dont 4get to fight your kung-fu . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:43 pm | Reply Why do we always have to meddle in others business . 
Take the time and money you would spend and invest it in our own problems as our nation is greatly flawed at the moment in case you did n't notice . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:39 am | Reply Indeed , all the option look ugly for the USA . 
In addition there are no reliable allies in the Middle East except for Israel , not even a frienly country , except for israel . 
Increased support of Israel is not even an option but the most important task for the USA . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:40 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 10:40 am | Reply Everything that you just stated has made several people more ignorant for having read it ... You should headbutt a butter knife repeatedly until you colapse . 
The world would be a better place . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:10 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 4:09 pm | Here 's a novel idea ... balance the budget , THEN spend money getting involved in stuff like this . 
Last I checked , we 're running over a trillion dollar deficit . 
How about fixing that before spending even more money ? 
I mean , before I loan a friend $ 500 , I 'm going to make sure my own bills are paid first . 
Novel concept , is n't it ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:41 am | Reply We should get the Govt . 
signed up in Credit Counseling . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:45 am | Reply and while they 're at it , can they return my foreclosed home , and re-open my son 's closed down school due to lack of budget . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:51 am | Reply Libya is tribal and the US could tie itself into unresovable tribal revenge killings ... March 9 , 2011 at 10:45 am | Reply Jeeze !!! Am I the only one what happened the last time we armed rebels in that part of the world ? 
Does anybody remember the Afgan war against the Russians ? 
We `` armed the rebels '' in Afganistan and what happened ? 
We lost the Twin Towers . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:46 am | Reply I cant see a positive outcome of any of the options presented here , except # 8 where the US stays out . 
We cant be put on trial for doing nothing , except may be in the media . 
I suppose however that even if we dont get involved , others in the world will simply assume the US did anyway . 
But that bad publicity is something I 'd rather deal with than another war in the region , regardless of the nature of the involvement . 
And if Gadhafi stays in power when the dust settles , what would he have to govern ? 
A country torn apart and only people submissive to his wacky whims ? 
With no contacts with the outside world -LRB- except those that are willing to trade with a proven demonic tyrant ? -RRB- 
What will his just-as-wacky sons inherit from all that ? 
How about we just drop in internet capable mobile devices that allow anyone to post video to facebook or tweeter to keep the information going , so at least we can have the atrocities documented for future reference . 
Information is simply the most powerful weapon in these situations . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:47 am | Reply Sure , if nothing else the videos would be more entertaining that reality TV . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:38 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 10:48 am | Reply I 'll take Libya resenting us as opposed as the entirety of the middle east being even MORE hateful of us . 
Letting someone else do the dirty work for once will serve the US the best . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:30 am | Reply People will hate us one way or the other . 
If we act and involve ourselves , we are hated for `` grabbing for oil '' or being imperialistic or imposing our will on others . 
If we stand by and do nothing , we are hated for failing to help the suffering , not supporting those striving for freedom or not helping to bring down a dangerous tyrant . 
What is important is not being loved or hated , but doing the right thing . 
It is reprehensible to stand by and watch as people are slaughtered , whether it is Libya now or Rawanda or others in the past . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:01 pm | Maybe we should just mind our own business and see how that works !! Is the world divided into Good ones and Bad ones ? 
If it is so Are you absolutely certain that the rebels are the good ones ? 
Were n't the today AlQaedans the good ones twenty years ago ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:51 am | Reply What is china doing ? 
The united states should do the same . 
We spend our money , shed our blood at the end we are considered the envaders not the liberators . 
If you remember history the war of Iran and Iraq , Sadam Husein was our ally . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:56 am | Reply Not really sure that I want us to model ourselves on China 's behavior . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:04 pm | Reply That 's not entirely true . 
At least they investing in the right things such as education and infrastructure . 
But I do agree that their social and political structures are different stories all together . 
March 9 , 2011 at 8:02 pm | Should we invade all of the unstable but rich countries ? 
Will the Libyans be grateful ? 
Is n't this Libya another Afghanistan in the 80 's ? 
Will we help to turn Libya in another Somalia ? 
Will the warmongers like McCain pay for the mess ? 
Or will American young people the ones who die ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:57 am | Reply option # 1 should be assassinate Gadhafi with our highly trained special forces ... ... ... RIGHT ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:58 am | Reply I think we need to allow the people of Lybia to earn their freedom\/democrocy themselves . 
`` Any gift that is given but not earned , holds not value . '' 
Not sure who said it , but I think it holds true . 
Kind of along the same lines as `` Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day . 
Teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime . '' 
Their independence , if they earn it themselves , will mean more than if we go in and `` liberate '' them . 
March 9 , 2011 at 10:59 am | Reply The federal government is borrowing from our children 's future and we want to spend that intervening Libya ? 
Why do n't we focus in solving our own problems ? 
Do we want to rob Libya 's oil to solve our economic problems ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:01 am | Reply Gadhafi raised his fist in power and the US and the West blinked . 
We had a change to get rid of a person responsible for killing Americans and we let it slip . 
To have power and not use it is just as bad as being powerless . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:03 am | Reply We stay out of it . 
We helped the Afgans against the soviets in the 80s and 20 years later , they helped a madman fly a few planes into our buildings . 
The middle east is lost . 
They seek extremism and the majority of their culture involves being subservient to tyrants . 
It 's trading one nightmare for another . 
Instead , use the money to fund programs that develop energy that does n't require is to be in bed with them , then they have no power over us . 
Let them fight it out if that is their desire . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:03 am | Reply The treasure of the United States of America is in great debt because of Iraq and Afghanistan and we want to open a third front ? 
Was n't that the Hitler 's big mistake ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:04 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 11:42 am | Reply Is easy to say let 's get in Libya when you are not the one to die . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:05 am | Reply The US ca n't seem to keep its nose out of world affairs as we should . 
It 's all about oil . 
Either go in and take it over and make it another US territory or stay out of their business and let them fight it out . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:06 am | Reply It 's the precedent we would set that is most troubling to me . 
Any way we would help Libya , we would have to in turn help any that would form a rebellion or be looked down upon , further tarnishing our already weak foreign relations in the middle east . 
How many more would attempt it knowing the USA will step in and help . 
And how many more Anti-American rebels would join in the fight to bring down the USA as a result . 
In my opinion , this could really spiral out of control in a hurry . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:07 am | Reply Is the world divided into Good ones and Bad ones ? 
If it is so Are you absolutely certain that the rebels are the good ones ? 
Were n't the today AlQaedans the good ones some years ago ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:08 am | Reply Theere are no good and bad guys , it 's just us and them , or so to say , the civilized and the uncivilized , but that 's debatable March 9 , 2011 at 11:14 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 11:09 am | Reply March 11 , 2011 at 11:10 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 11:09 am | Reply What we need to do is to put the ball in the court of other Muslim countries . 
Publicly call for these countries to help their `` brothers '' in Libya . 
Say , the reason why we can not help directly is because we think we should stay out of a situation where our presence may not be welcomed based on our mistakes in Iraq . 
We think that a coalition of Muslim countries would be most apppropriate . 
We will be willing to help if we are publicly asked by this Muslim coalition of countries for our assistance . 
All of this should be plastered all over the world in different languages . 
Enough of us trying to help people and getting nothing but insults in return . 
Let them do it on their own this time . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:10 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 11:17 am | Reply i see one very easy option of letting the arab states deal with it , they are no longer giving us oil at a cheaper price for protecting them so let them fend for themselves March 9 , 2011 at 11:14 am | Reply Lets suppose an absolute worst-case scenario : We fund the rebels , who turn into Islamic Extremeists . 
We now have a nation in Libya that is well armed and supportive of anti-western terror attacks . 
Oh wait a minute -- that is what we already have . 
A lot of people have argued we ca n't win in Libya ... but the way I read things , we ca n't lose either . 
The absolute worst case scenario is that we get Ghaddafi 2.0 -- but far more likely is that we get someone at least marginally better . 
To those who say `` let the Arabs\/Africans\/UN take care of it -- you just named three groups where some of the strongest voices are themselves tyrants . 
You really think they want this fire to keep spreading ? 
China , Saudi Arabia , Algeria , Zimbabwe -- all these nations would be perfect happy for Ghaddafi to crush the rebels and end the spread of freedom . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:16 am | Reply `` they are no longer giving us oil at a cheaper price for protecting them so let them fend for themselves '' And where is our moral obligation ? 
We are a free nation , a powerful nation , and a wealthy nation -- and yet so many here are refusing to do ANYTHING , other than half-heartedly cheer on the revolutionaries -LRB- in many cases , just to increase the arab death count -RRB- ... do n't we have an obligation as a free nation to support pro-democracy forces ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:18 am | Reply but you also have people dying from hunger from your homefront ... and in case you missed it , we have a trillion $ deficit and ca n't even balance our own budget . 
I see cities from my state crumbling down . 
People losing jobs , crimes rising , schools closing , children dying from hunger , more homeless people on the streeets , foreclosures , pension funds disappearing , social security heading to bankruptcy , government shutdown . 
Now what were you saying about moral obligations again ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:34 am | Reply First , there is no guarantee they would end up being `` pro-democracy '' . 
Second , why do you feel we have a moral obligation to invade another country in the Middle-East , as we did in Iraq ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:42 am | Reply We should stay out of it entirely and mind our own business . 
We need a sound energy policy that reduces\/eliminates our long term dependency on Middle Eastern oil . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:19 am | Reply This is n't the US 's war . 
Iraq was an issue all in its own -- I wo n't get into that . 
Unless our troops are intentionally attacked by Libyan forces there is no reason for us to interact . 
Sanctions need to be put back in place on Libya and we need to tell those kids to pull up their pants and tighten their belts . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:19 am | Reply 7 ugly options for the U.S. in Libya Editor 's Note : Dr. James Lindsay is a Senior Vice President of the Council on Foreign Relations -LRB- where he blogs -RRB- , First off , if this guy got a real job then maybe he might learn some of the common man 's common sense . 
There is another option that happens to be the only option and he misses it entirely . 
Read the Constitution of the United States . 
Nowhere in that document is the federal government given any authority to intervene militarily or otherwise in the affairs of a foreign country . 
This is what George Washington was trying to tell us when he warned us of becoming involved in foreign entanglements . 
You get involved and just create more problems in the long run . 
Leave the rest of the world alone . 
Our foreign policy should be based on 4 ideas : 1 . 
Leave other countries alone -- let them find their own destiny -- we did . 
Never carry a trade imbalance -- pay for all you buy from other countries in cash , not debt . 
Never borrow from another country . 
Blast anybody off the face of the earth who messes with you . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:19 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 11:23 am | Reply I did not read all the comments written here . 
I just want to inform the readers that civil society has a moral obligation to protect the innocent civilians . 
United Nations supposed to do this , but failed miserably in many occations . 
Remember Rwanda !! `` World '' said `` Never again '' after Rwanda Genocide . 
Happened again in Sri Lanka . 
More than hundred thousand Tamil speaking people -LRB- that is the only reason -RRB- were killed in that Genocide not long ago , May 2009 . 
`` World '' did nothing to stop Sri Lanka from using all kinds of bombs -LRB- including cluster bombs and allegedly chemical bombs -RRB- to kill its own citizens . 
Sri Lankan President is a good friend of Gaddfii . 
I wonder what will happened to civilians in Libya ???? March 9 , 2011 at 11:23 am | Reply Libya and Middle East struggle is not about racial hatred as it was in Rwanda . 
It is about religious struggle between Shias and Sunnis . 
Once Shias will be the dominant , then the world holy war will begin . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:36 am | Reply There is not civilians in Libya anymore , all of them are armed . 
Soon will be another Somalia . 
It 's not our fight . 
We have our own problems to worry about . 
It 's not our fault that the Libyans chose to allow Gadhaffi to stay in power for over 40 years . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:26 am | Reply Is the world divided into Good ones and Bad ones ? 
If it is so Are you absolutely certain that the rebels are the good ones ? 
Were n't the today AlQaedans the good ones some years ago ? 
Are you willing to go and kill and die ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:26 am | Reply We went to topple Saddam and now Iraq is falling in Nuclear Anti American Iran 's embracing arms March 9 , 2011 at 11:28 am | Reply You people do n't get it . 
It 's about OIL !! . 
Did you go to the gas station today ? 
Think about fuel cost . 
Every single thing is related to it ... They built this system around it . 
We are got by the bolls !! Every single countriy is . 
Look at Wall Street and the markets today and you 'll understand why they have to do something ... March 9 , 2011 at 11:29 am | Reply Democracy is not for Muslims , They HAVE to obey the Koran or face death penalty . 
that is the shariah . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:29 am | Reply We have armed Egypt to the teeth with Modern M1 tanks and F16s . 
How about arab nations stepping in to help arab nations ? 
Nah that would make too much sense . 
They would rather complain about us not doing anything\/doing anything , whichever the case may be . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:31 am | Reply One question , why is Madoff the only one in jail ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:32 am | Reply Yes it is about oil which turns us -LRB- US -RRB- in the greatest world pirates robbing every oil country in the world . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:32 am | Reply We just ca n't afford to be the world cops anymore . 
If you belong to the country club and your house is in foreclosure , it 's time to start playing Putt Putt . 
George Bush 's ego wars should be stopped ASAP and we should take care of Americans . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:35 am | Reply Alright folks , I 'll make it simple for you . 
The United States of America can not get involved . 
It seems most people are just focused on Libya . 
Do n't forget that pretty much all of the middle east and northern Africa is in varying levels of chaos . 
We can not simply sit there and try to ` fix ' Libya and think we wo n't get drug into something else in the region . 
We already have a foothold in both Iraq and Afghanistan that we desperately need to get out of . 
The United States solely needs to focus on what we are currently doing in the middle east and wrap it up pronto . 
We have way too many problems of our own to deal with . 
Why are n't some of the more influential countries in the region doing more to stabilize the region ? 
Where are the countries in Europe and Asia in all this ? 
It is about time they started pulling their own weight . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:38 am | Reply Option 3 -- let the usual freeloaders take the lead , i.e. Japan , S Korea , China and Germany . 
They should n't be allowed to continue merrily building and exporting stuff , while the big economic has-been continues going broke trying to be the world 's policeman March 9 , 2011 at 11:43 am | Reply Option 8 -RRB- USA invades with Drones and cruise missles . 
Paid for with 30 billlion in frozen assets , Qudaffi could be defeated without ever putting one american boot on Libian soil . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:46 am | Reply Forget that ... we charge Saudi Arabia and keep the 30b March 9 , 2011 at 11:48 am | Reply Options 6 and\/or 7 are the only choices that are even remotely appropriate . 
NO -LRB- additional -RRB- US INVOLVEMENT in Northern Africa . 
Let these people fight and win their own freedom from oppression ; they 'll cherish it that much more if they paid the price for it themselves . 
If we intervene , they 'll simply turn on us -LRB- as history shows -RRB- as soon as they fully realize the difficulty of actually creating and maintaining a functioning democracy . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:46 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 11:49 am | Reply If it was n't for the sweet light crude , the US \* government \* would n't give a `` rats '' about whats going down in Libya . 
`` Helping the Libyan people '' . . 
what an absolute bunch of garbage and lies . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:50 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 11:51 am | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 11:54 am | Reply I would ` vote ' to have China , Japan and Germany provide the funds for a humanitarian operation whereby the U.S. , England and France would provide the ` goods ' and the logistics . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:55 am | Reply so what do we get out of it ?????? ok so we help stabilize Libya , a new government in place , then what ? 
We might get a few million back in infrastructure contracts or defense contracts , Oil may start flowing again but not at a pre protest price BP will make sure of that and in a couple of years they will again hate the US start killing US workers and demand that all US company 's get out . 
Let then have their `` civil '' war we need to stay out of it and let it run its course so what if it floods into other countries what do they have to offer , Oil ? 
We have plenty here in the US that the oil cartels are unwilling to tap because they have no excuse for the profit margin they make under the guise of world demand ... March 9 , 2011 at 11:58 am | Reply I say options 1,2 and 6 . 
Even though the rest of the world is not willing to do anything I do n't think we should stand by and watch this maniac slaughter babies with tanks . 
The fact that he is willing to shoot people with anti-aircraft guns should say all that needs to be said . 
I think the rebels are showing their courage by fighting against such over whelming odds . 
We should even the odds for them by taking out the tanks and artillery . 
We should go no further than that though . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:58 am | Reply Obama has proven to the world that he will not lead . 
He will not lift a finger to help democracy or stop genocide . 
Obama seems to be Jimmy Carter 's turd . 
The world sees an incompetent , valueless organizer making a mess of everything he touches . 
Obama is an embarrassment to the United States . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:00 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 1:06 pm | Reply Option : Stay OUT !!! , but if we do get involed , I hope we -LRB- the U.S. -RRB- get slaughtered . 
It would teach us a lesson to keep our nose in our own business . 
Hope it 's a blood bath . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:04 pm | Reply The United States should not be playing the role of world cop . 
It has no right to decide on who the `` bad guys '' are . 
This is why there is so much hatred directed at them around the world . 
There should be a world body that decides on who is breaking international law and that body should enforce the law using all means possible . 
The United Nations is not the kind of world body I am suggesting . 
It is too corrupt . 
favoring and being controlled by a few countries with tremendous powers . 
We need to establish an independent world body where countries can vote without being threatened with loans being canceled because their vote does n't reflect a more powerful countries wishes . 
We need a world body that does not give special voting rights such as veto rights to certain countries . 
We need to change everything and create a new world body that is fair and just and one that can enforce existing international laws . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:11 pm | Reply You mean to tell me that you are suggesting a `` New World Order '' ????? I think its a fabulous idea . 
Lets make the ultra rich richer !!!!!!!!!!!!!! What would make you think that the corruption and greed in the world would not spill over into the `` group '' you are speaking of ... Greed and Power will always exist . 
That is why it is in everyone 's best intrest for us to step up , step in , and get involved . 
YES we will make enemies , but will we profit from it ? 
that is the real question ... You have to weigh the cost versus the outcome and potential benifits . 
If we wanted Gadafi -LRB- sp -RRB- taken out , or the rebels to win , trust me we have enough power that what we wanted done would be done and noone would have a clue who or why it happened ... On the note , I think it would be safe to say that if you watch the stock markets and see who starts reporting the most profits on weapons , security , and oil ... you will then know who has already decided who will win this civil war ... March 9 , 2011 at 1:32 pm | Reply 1 -RRB- Rebels have specifically said `` No foreign intervention ! '' 
Please stay out of this ! 
There 's our answer ... Good luck fellas ! 
2 -RRB- Any foreign involvement diminishes the power of the `` popular '' rebellion , and de-legitimizes the rebels . 
3 -RRB- Gaddafi & groups like Al Qaeda always point to foreign `` imperialism '' & lust for oil . 
We do n't want to prove them right . 
4 -RRB- The spike in oil prices is not due to Libya , which is the world 's # 18 exporter . 
It 's artificially driven by Wall St. Thanks jerks . 
The only `` safe '' military response would be an anonymous , laser-guided bomb on Gaddafi 's head , and not a word from us . 
But that breaks all sorts of long-established taboos & policies about assassinating foreign rulers . 
Has n't worked out very well for us in the past , either ... March 9 , 2011 at 12:15 pm | Reply JohnUSA is a genius and should be given the Nobel Peace Prize March 9 , 2011 at 12:15 pm | Reply China , Rasia , Iran have the possibility of winning by default through inaction that is why they do n't lift a finger at this time ... less they are planning to supporting Qaddafi to increase their possibility ... they wo n't invest to loose ... and they might not have to invest much to win either ... so how can this outcome be offset ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:16 pm | Reply If we do nothing it COSTS everyone in the US with higher gas prices for who knows how long . 
I say send in the Military , i.e a couple hundred or so Tomahawk cruise missiles & smart bombs and crush the tyrant and then let the rebels have a go at it , maybe look around and see if anyone else in the area needs and attitude adjustment courtesy of the US Military -- if not , then just leave . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:16 pm | Reply You ever thought why the gas prices are going up ??? So people like you will think this way ! 
So easy to control . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:21 pm | Reply No. 3 '' Countries outside the region would prefer to worry about their own problems . '' 
This should include US -LRB- us -RRB- , unless Libya starts paying my taxes and becomes the 51 state then I 'll shut up . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:17 pm | Reply The world is overpopulated and our existence is unsustainable . 
Civil War reduces the human footprint . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:20 pm | Reply Here we are getting involved -LRB- once again -RRB- with someone else 's problems . 
Why is it our problem ? 
Because our country is so dependent on Fuel . 
Instead of wasting our money helping resolve another country 's problem , why do n't we use that money to find more ways for us to not be so reliant on fuel & the unstable countries that supply it . 
Instead we will provide weapons to a group we really do n't know much about however they are the lesser of 2 evils . 
That may seem to be the correct answer at current moment but what happens when these rebels are no longer fighting this battle ? 
I think history has proven us time and time again , these things end up coming back to us and usually it 's in the form of these people using our own weapons against us . 
These situtations will continue to rise and rather than always reacting -LRB- defending our precious oil we need -RRB- why do n't we be proactive and find a way to not depend on these unstable countries . 
I am no President but I would think this make a little more sense than continuing to make the same mistake over and over just for a resource that we really could learn to live without . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:21 pm | Reply We as Americans need to get over our own arrogance and self-righteousness . 
We ca n't just jump up on our high horses and go galloping around the world so to speak and try solving eveybody else 's problems such as those in Libya . 
The `` rebels '' started this civil war and we have a moral obligation to stay out and let them fight it themselves . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:22 pm | Reply This is exactly what the U.S. would be doing to it 's people if we decided to toss all of the corruption out of D.C. by force . 
And I doubt that any other country would come to our aid . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:27 pm | Reply 1 . 
Al Queda creates civil unrest in all major oil producing countries . 
Gas prices surge to $ 5 - $ 10 a gallon 3 . 
America responds by opening up the oil reserves . 
Prices come down for a short time until reserves are depleted . 
Prices for Goods and Services goes through the roof as Gas prices once again surge . 
Economy worsens and America descends into chaos . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:27 pm | Reply none of the option will do so keep thinking about what is the next best options for the western allies to follow , do n't expect China , Russia , Iran 's help it wont come this way ... opposition is what can be expected from this nations tell me why i should think other wise . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:29 pm | Reply How about Option 8 -- WWRD -LRB- What Would Ronnie Do ? -RRB- 
The first line of the Marine Corps Hymn is ` From the halls of Montezuma , to the shores of Tripoli , We will fight our country 's battles in the Air , on Land , and Sea ... ' I say we send a MEF -- Marine Expeditionary Force into Tripoli , put a bullet or three through Quadaffi Duck 's head and hand the country over to the most reasonable Rebel Force with one caveat ... We get the land to build a proper monument to the 220 Marines , 18 Navy Personnel , and 3 Army Soldiers that were killed on Oct 23 , 1983 when the Marine Barracks in Beirut were bombed . 
Here 's the reality folks , we are the United States of American , the single World Power in existence today . 
We got this way because we stand for Freedom and we should NEVER back down when we have the ability to right a wrong . 
If we had the mentality in the past , all of Europe would be speaking German , All of the Southern Asia would speak Japanese , and we would be speaking Russian or Chinese . 
The fact is , the United States has flexed its muscle in the past and the outcome was best for everyone involved . 
Ask England , ask France , ask Japan , ask Iraq , the list goes on and on . 
Some say we should n't go in , because we do n't know what the outcome will be , or because the next Libyan Leader will be just as bad . 
Well , maybe he wo n't . 
Is it possible the Libyan people finally come out of the hole Quadaffi placed them in and say , hey yeah we 're Muslims , but the USA ai n't too bad . 
Could n't this translate to other countries in the region ? 
We need more stabilizing forces in the Middle East and this is as good as any a place to start . 
I ask all of you reading this to answer me one question : If you witnessed a mugging or a rape and you had the means , and ability to stop it , would you walk away ? 
No , because you are an American and you were raised do the right thing Of course , Obama can choose to sit back and take no action . 
However , the risk of inaction can be just as detrimental as the risk of action . 
Mr. Obama , stop worrying about how you might be perceived in the Arab World and take out Qaudaffi !!! It solves your problem with Gas Prices being artificially inflated , it sends a message to despots around the world , and it finally gives you an accomplishment that translates into success for you during the upcoming campaign season . 
Ronnie would be so proud of you . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:34 pm | Reply Let me ask you this then ... if you were a soldier -LRB- which I assume you are based on your username -RRB- , would you leave today and go to war while your kids are dying from hunger , out in the cold cause you just lost your home to these greedy corporations , and your parents or brother or sister ca n't get medical help cause they lost their jobs and medical insurance ? 
I do understand your point , but what most of the people here are saying is let us clean our own yards beofre we even help others . 
You really think these people would come and help us when the tables have turned ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:35 pm | Reply WHY CAN THE U.S -LRB- THE BEST PLACE IN THE WORLD -RRB- SEND SHIPS AND TAKE ALL THE OIL WHEN NO ONE IS LOOKING AND BLAME IT ON GADHAFI . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:36 pm | Reply One point the author seems to forget -- how can America be so sure that a rebel victory over Gaddafi would be in their interests ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:38 pm | Reply Sounds like a job for the EU . 
Let us know when you 're done . 
The US is busy in Afghanistan right now . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:39 pm | Reply No drive sounds like a pretty good option , actually . 
But it certainly would be inappropriate unless it has the backing of the UN Security Council , and they do n't look ready to budge . 
Still , let 's think about this option a little more rather than just knee-jerking against it . 
Would a no-drive zone create a buffer whereby the rebels could regroup in the east ? 
Could it be done , at least in the desert and highways , without killing many civilians ? 
Can the world afford it -LRB- again , assuming UN and broad-based backing -RRB- ? 
IMO , the answer could be made `` Yes '' to all three . 
But again , this assumes that we have the backing of the Security Council , which we certainly do not at this time . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:39 pm | Reply It is going to be very dangerous , on so many different levels , for the USA to get significantly involved with this crisis . 
As much as it would be good to see Gadafi gone , would he be replaced by anyone better if the West steps in ? 
It is very hard to sit by the sidelines and let nature take its course . 
But , on this occasion , that is the smart option for the USA . 
This is not the USA 's fight . 
The advantage of letting Libya sort out its own issues is that ultimately they will attain a stability of their own making , as opposed to a phantom stability imposed by foreign power -LRB- s -RRB- that will eventually disintegrate and thus return Libya to where it is right now . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:39 pm | Reply Best option is just to bomb those Al Qaeda sponsored rebel terrorists . 
Mo Q may have been into terrorism in the past , but now he is fighting against it , so here is our opportunity to REALLY show how much we want to stop the spread of Al Qaeda 's influence in the world and bomb the rebel terrorists , like I said before . 
Anytime a group of people unlawfully takes up arms against a `` democratic '' government then they are terrorists , no ? 
That is what we are taught in America , and that is what any rebels here would be branded by our gov ` t\/corporate controlled media , so why should it be any different with the rebels in Libya . 
They are terrorists too . 
Libya , officially is a `` Direct Democracy '' so the rebels have to be `` terrorists '' , and we are still in a `` War Against Terror '' so if we ignore the terrorist rebels and do nothing to support the Lawful Democratic Government of Libya against such terrorism then we might as well just surrender to Al Qaeda . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:42 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 1:08 pm | Reply `` 6 -RRB- Provide tactical military intelligence to the rebels . 
Real-time information about the regime s troops movements would help the rebels direct their own forces . 
But it would not be a game changer . '' 
... Ummm , did you miss the war in Afgahinstan ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:43 pm | Reply The best option is to stay out . 
The country is a bankrupt , and those rebels are radical muslims . 
They will never be friends with the US no matter how much money our wise government will shed . 
Moreover , when the dust settles , they will blame US How about drone attacks to make Qadaffi and his sons and other leading henchmen hide like cockroaches . 
Blow up thier luxurious houses and other wealthy assets . 
Reagan lobbed a missile years ago and it really shooked up madman Qaddafi . 
We still have payback time to fulfill for Qadaffi 's Lockerbie Horror . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:46 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 12:47 pm | Reply Do nothing . 
We have twice seen in recent memory -LRB- Iraq and Afghanistan -RRB- how much we are thanked and loved for ousting a dictator\/oppressive regime -LRB- but we are still wanted for protection -RRB- . 
Yes , it 's cold-hearted , but we will not win any brownie points either way . 
Save our resources for more important problems . 
Also , I would n't past it past China or even Russia to be arming Gaddhafi so that they can get the oil in case the opposition loses . 
Hey , Serbia is helping Gaddhafi right now -- look it up . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:47 pm | Reply The obvious option is to get the Rebels on the monetary system . 
Float them a loan to win , let them buy weapons and training . 
When they do win , float them another loan to rebuild . 
1 -RRB- Since we will want to get repaid , we will ensure they win . 
2 -RRB- This gives us leverage over the new regime . 
Govern yourself properly , and we will help you make a better life for your country with continued loans until you are self-sustaining . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:49 pm | Reply if your neighbor was killing people ... would u not want him stopped . . 
or atleast call the police ... just because they are a few more miles away . 
They are still ur neighbor ... someone should stop it March 9 , 2011 at 12:50 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 1:18 pm | Reply Life is a `` Bitch '' and then you die . 
That 's a phrase that the west needs to start following when it comes to the affairs in other parts of the world . 
Many times the U.S. sticks their nose where it is n't wanted , imposing their ways and views only to find that after its done the countries turn on you . 
If the arabs care then THEY should step in . 
Ask yourself WHY THEY DO N'T ??? Simple . . 
to sucker the U.S. in as usual . 
Wake up and smell the winds of war ... and look after YOUR OWN ... March 10 , 2011 at 9:06 am | Reply How about getting the 2 Libyan piolets , that flew to Malta , and have them bomb Tripoli 's military comand structures ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:51 pm | Reply Stay out , let the Libyans solve their own problems . 
If the UN authorizes humanitarian relief , we should contribute so long as the Arab League and African Union -LRB- both of whom list Libya as a member -RRB- participate . 
The US can not be seen as `` leading '' anything in Libya other than neutral humanitarian missions . 
On the other hand . 
if we have some extra small arms -LRB- guns , RPGs , Stingers , etc -RRB- lying around we can discretely drop off in Benghazi without them being traced back to us , we ought to do it . 
Those hand-held weapons are unlikely to ever come back to hurt us even if the rebels sold them on the black market instead of fighting Gadhafi . 
Sharing real-time intelligence is another low-cost , low-risk option that we can easily deny ever doing later . 
See , we want to topple Gashafi , but we do n't want to be seen as helping to topple him , so we have to be discrete . 
No US personnel on the ground whatsoever . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:53 pm | Reply Not sure if this is mentioned but Option 4 Directly arm the rebels , is not an option . 
There is an arms embargo against Libya . 
If the US or an other country sends arms to Libya they would be breaking International Law . 
As we know the US would NEVER do anything to break International Law . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:59 pm | Reply So in other words , there is going to be a no-fly zone soon . 
According to my calculations ... -LRB- ... dot-matrix printer printing ... -RRB- a joint US-UK no-fly zone will be in place in approx . 
2 weeks from the date of this post . 
France will have a very limited supporting role , and other NATO forces will be put on alert . 
The timing of the no-fly zone will coincide with an announcement from the UN that a no-fly zone has been authorized . 
Gadfi will immediately declare war on the west . 
NATO support of rebels will escalate . 
Gadhafi 's forces on the ground will be directly targeted . 
Gadhafi will react so violently , targeting his own people en masse , that NATO will be forced to directly target him and remove him as soon as possible . 
Gadhafi 's rule will end on 4\/3\/2011 , at approximately 4:30 AM EDT . 
March 9 , 2011 at 12:59 pm | Reply We should 've just listened to George Washington and remained a neutral country . 
He had the right idea . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:02 pm | Reply A few questions , the answers to which I would expect to be key when formulating a strategy in Libya : 1 -RRB- Where is Gadhafi 's support coming from ? 
All those soldiers he recently fielded in helicopters and pick-up trucks -- why do they follow him ? 
2 -RRB- How does Gadhafi pay his soldiers ? 
3 -RRB- How does his military communicate with one another in the field ? 
-LRB- Via cell phones ? 
Via land lines ? -RRB- 
4 -RRB- Where is Gadhafi right now ? 
5 -RRB- What does Gadhafi value ? 
What could we take away from him that would hurt him ? 
6 -RRB- Can drones -- which are low-flying and usually subsonic , from what I understand -- target helicopters ? 
7 -RRB- And finally -- what are the options that are n't on that list ? 
The crazy ones , the ones that any sane person would usually dismiss outright ? 
- Unconventional problems require unconventional solutions . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:02 pm | Reply You appear to be no more an expert at strategizing than I am at foretelling the future . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:05 pm | Reply Did I ever say I was n't ? 
These are basic questions I 'm asking here . 
Do you know any of the answers ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:08 pm | Reply We should continue to really push the European Union to assist the Libyans . 
Libya is in their region of the world . 
They have much more history with Libya . 
They -LRB- European Union -RRB- import more than 50 % of Libya 's oil . 
It SHOULD be their interest to intervene . 
But they probably will not ... no one in the European Union cares enough . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:05 pm | Reply I knew it !!! , Mr. Obama wanted to be president to do nothing good for the USA , but help destroy the nation . 
He is a handycapped incompetent president . 
He will drive the USA into the 3rd world war , and is preparing the humanity to meet the antichrist !!!! ... Once he said he had the `` best job in the world '' !!!! ... will he still say the same ????? ... March 9 , 2011 at 1:06 pm | Reply Hey knuckleheadt I have a question for your peanut brain . 
... ... Was Georgie boy bush all those vile things when he took us into the 2 wars we are in now ? 
Go read your comic books ... ... ... ... . 
Oh and get your rush mask ready ... haloween is coming up fast !! March 9 , 2011 at 1:15 pm | Reply All these options are unacceptable ... ... ... ... Let the European Union handle it . 
OR , god forbid , get the African Union off their fat @sses , it is after their continent . 
Let France take this one on alone ~ they have the largest Libyan population anywhere in the workd outside Lubia . 
Coll K only has about 50 damsn jets anyway . 
USA needs to leave the thing alone . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:10 pm | Reply We should stay out , stopping a genocide is not the USA 's business . 
Also , my neighbor beats his wife and rapes his daughters , but it 's none of my business ... March 9 , 2011 at 1:10 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 1:23 pm | Reply @Bob . 
You are trash and should skydive without a parachute ... you neighbors daughters would appreciate it ... loser March 9 , 2011 at 1:38 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 1:11 pm | Reply i do not mean to be callous but the u.s. option is to stay out of libyas business altogether we are not the whole worlds savior March 9 , 2011 at 1:12 pm | Reply ~ Perhaps it is time for the United Nations to step up to the plate , and offer more than just words & sanctions alone ... but pull together a large `` multinational peacekeeping force '' -LRB- including support from other Arab nations , European , Asian , & the US -RRB- with enough volunteers & supplies to stop Qadhaffy & protect Libyan civillians\/protestors . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:13 pm | Reply how about staying out of it for once ? 
havent we learned anything in the last then years . 
usa is not the global superpower any power . 
and we certainly cant be policing every country in this world . 
we simply dont have the resources any more . 
the vietnam war started out with usa giving tactical support to the french and look where it got us . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:13 pm | Reply We should not get involved . 
While living in the Middle East , all I heard when there were conflicts or hints of conflicts was `` Let the US bomb them for us , the US will take care of it for us etc. '' Well the US has gotten involved in Iraq and Afghanistan to our detriment . 
Let these countries sort it out for themselves , let other Mideast countries supply the humanitarian aid -LRB- Saudi is rich with oil money after all -RRB- and give themselves a true stake in their own destiny . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:15 pm | Reply There is an 8th option . 
Do nothing and watch . 
Take no action is an action . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:17 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 1:18 pm | Reply Get a derelict Boeing 747 . 
Paint it in Pan-Am colors . 
Give it the same wing-number as the plane that Ghadaffi blew up over Lockerbie Scotland . 
Locate Ghadaffi and crash the plane into him . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:19 pm | Reply I favor intervention but only with the UN support . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:19 pm | Reply You Americans ! 
A majority of you supported GWB on Iraq beleiving all his lies about WMDs . 
That was when you had your jobs . 
Now with your jobs gone you are no longer willing to ` get involved ' even as the mad man slaughter his own people . 
You can support a full fledged war when the economy is good willing to beleive all the lies your leaders tell you , but when your pockets hurts you are not even willing to get partially involved ... and let a genocide happen . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:25 pm | Reply You Losers . 
No one cares what you think . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:29 pm | Reply Libyan killing libyan is n't genocide . 
Why should we be bailing out people who 'd reather berate us and vilify us and see us as an enemy until they want something . 
No american blood for ANY country that ca n't take care of itself . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:29 pm | Reply I like your ideas ... TO WIPE MY DIRTY AMERICAN BUTT WITH !! USA USA USA USA USA USA USA USA USA USA USA ALL THE WAY , NUMBER ONE AND HERE TO STAY ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:21 pm | Reply Let the Europeans take care of Libya . 
It 's in their back yard and THEY get the oil from there . 
Oh that 's right they are gutless and we 're stupid enough to bail them out . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:27 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 1:27 pm | Reply Just give Hillary her broom and let her enforce a no-fly zone . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:37 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 1:28 pm | Reply I seem to see the least amount of criticism with supplying rebel forces with military intelligence , you say its not a gamechanger , but it is a ` tangible ' action to show we are on their side . 
I 'd say lets provide them with military intelligence , moral and humanitarian support , and nothing else . 
It may not be a game-changer , but it advances the game in their favor , as information is part of the battle . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:32 pm | Reply What about hiring mercenaries ? 
there is plenty of them out there . 
Use the future earnings from the oil revenue , and pay these mercenaries to help the rebels fight Qaddafi . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:35 pm | Reply These guys are 90 % muslims meaning they have high tendency of terrorist acts . 
i think we should live the dead to bury the dead cos if it was a western country in chaos like this , i bet the will be popping some Moet by now and dancing . 
Let them sort out their mess and we should lose any of ours to people that will end up being ungrateful . 
Lastly we should not forget that colonel Gaddafi has had links with terrorist organizations in the past . 
Let us not make any actions we would later regret . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:37 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 1:39 pm | Reply Intelligence certainly can be a game-changer . 
The most powerful weapon in war is communications , of which intelligence is a major part . 
If you can see and communicate enough , you can defeat virtually any enemy with nothing but sticks and stones -- literally . 
A campaign of providing communications equipment and intelligence to rebels could be used to win over public opinion , let them know when and where to run , disperse , regroup , and fight , and might even help unify the various rebel groups -- if made pervasive enough . 
Jam enemy communications , let friendlies know when and where to move , mass , and strike . 
Keep them all in close communication with each other , too . 
Let them know where the aerial intelligence , the jamming , and the radios are coming from -- the U.S. Do n't bomb anyone or any thing . 
Then , they will remember and appreciate . 
We do need Libyan oil . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:40 pm | Reply will those who feel a need to say the U.S is the top dog please stop . 
all you hear in this country about how best to solve OUR problems start with cutting our deficit by spending less . 
getting involved in ANY of the rest of the world 's problems is contrary to that goal . 
why are n't those that define themselves as member of the tea party protesting in the streets , holding their famous town hall meetings , or publicly demanding of their representatives to forget about getting involved in Libya ? 
after all , it will cost the U.S taxpayer a boatload of cash -LRB- really credit -RRB- to do anything in that country . 
Or are they going to demand we cut spending in everything else to fund military involvement in a place that no one wants us to be in in the first place ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:40 pm | Reply I say let 's stay out of it period ! 
For all you idiots that want to get militarily involved , then just send your children and grand children in the first wave of the attack . 
You people have no common sense and you ca n't think straight . 
It 's no wonder people around the world think that Americans are deaf , dumb , and blind . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:46 pm | Reply Gadhafi -LRB- today 's spelling from above -RRB- has not caused any real trouble for a long time . 
Like Saddam Hussein , he controls his country with an iron fist , stifling both democratic dissent and Islamic sect activities . 
Iraq was no threat , and neither is Libya as it now stands . 
We have seen the chaos that overtook Iraq once Saddam fell . 
It 's now a breeding ground for terrorists , and we will come to regret trading the devil we knew for the devils we did n't know . 
Why make the same mistake ? 
Gadhafi is n't our friend , by any means , but does anyone seriously think that Libya is going to evolve into a stable , peaceful democracy once he 's gone ? 
The fall of Gadhafi will lead to a power vacuum , which will be filled by the usual squabbling warlords and thugs . 
Eventually , one of them will rise to a shaky position of `` leadership , '' but the corruption and misery will persist for a decade . 
The best we could hope for would be a compliant puppet like Karzai , but that would require American forces on the ground to prop him up . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:47 pm | Reply We do NOT need to get ourselves into another military action anywhere else in the world , least of all Libya . 
There are other countries that need to step up . 
Why the hell are we the world 's policemen ? 
China , Russia , Germany , let them deal with this . 
If we go in , that 's just another group of islamic fundementalist fanatics that will hate us . 
We need to put money into our own house , our own economy rather than spending it , as well as risking lives of our service personnel in another un-winable conflict . 
I am going to remain neutral as to my objections to what Obama is doing so far , however need to see that blacks and whites in the US need to fix things together ... sleep together when they want to and stop fuching with Libya ... forget Libya and take care of our own population . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:47 pm | Reply If we did give them weapons to shoot down planes\/helicopters , could n't we fix the software so that it 's disabled after 3 months ? 
Kind of like how my X-box dies 3 months after the warranty expires ? 
Microsoft is great at that ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:48 pm | Reply Although the suffering in Libya is great , this is happening right now in Iran , Cote d'Ivoire , Sudan and other countries . 
What makes Libya different ? 
It is not a critical relationship , as is Egypt , and the world let the Egyptians handle the issue . 
The USA is not the world 's police officer and can not run around helping every uprising to achieve their political aims . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:50 pm | Reply The US has 16 different intelligence agencies , the largest number of special operations forces , and the most powerful and well-connected State Department in the world . 
What do you think we 've been doing with all that power ? 
We are involved in virtually every world conflict and politically significant happenings that most people have never heard of . 
You ca n't just send highly visible armies to help everyone , not unless you want to be at war with the world and miserably fail our foreign policy missions . 
It so happens that what is going on in the Middle East is huge , in the world 's face every day , and is definitely not an area we are not already deeply involved with . 
Believe me , there are most likely already people on the ground , and who have been on the ground for a long time . 
Do anything highly visible , like attack Libyan government forces , and their missions could be compromised in addition to igniting yet another war in the mideast . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:20 pm | Reply The Author is an idiot . 
Long gone are the days where we have to get involved . 
We are no longer the Police of the World . 
We must make stands for our country and our people . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:52 pm | Reply it 's against the law of the U.S. military industrial complex to target foreign leaders for assassination . 
how are we going to continue to run up the deficit funding all of those uniforms , boots , serving steaks in air conditioned warehouse facilties in the middle of the desert , specialized lifetime medial care for the wounded , the gi bill , drones , aircraft carriers , submarines , jet fighters . 
March 9 , 2011 at 1:53 pm | Reply Funding Soldiers ran up the deficit ? 
Why do we have contractors who make 100K plus a year to do things Soldiers used to do for far less pay -LRB- i.e. Slap food on a plate in the dining facility -RRB- ? 
Why\/how did these contracts come to be ? 
The millions of unaccounted for $ went\/was intended to where ? 
What companies got those contracts ? 
If these companies can afford to employ their workers at 100K plus a year how much was awarded to the company contracted ? 
Go back and do your homework buddy . 
Soldiers did n't start this war . 
Elected greedy politicians did . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:24 pm | Reply Your ignorance is mind blowing . 
What planet do you live on , I would like to know so i can move there . 
Do you honestly think peace is even attainable , its human nature to destroy . 
Its rather funny to see that you are all for killing people to have peace . 
take a deep look inside and find that you sir are an idiot . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:08 pm | Reply Whatever be the American action or inaction , the President -LRB- s -RRB- of this great democracy will continue to preach democratic values to the world from the rostrum . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:01 pm | Reply Let the President and Secretary of State preach all they want , but remember : The laws of the United States end at our borders . 
We have no authority to insist that our concept of human rights , noble as it might be , should be followed in the Middle East , Russia , Africa , China or anywhere else . 
When Hillary Clinton gets on her broom and lectures about the rights of women in the third world , she is speaking against centuries of tradition in many places . 
To some , this is the way to bring these countries into the 21st century , but to others it is unwanted interference in their internal affairs . 
If we do n't want Muslim extremists telling women in America that they must cover their faces , then we need to understand that they do n't want us telling their women the opposite . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:14 pm | Reply Put up a bunch of news blogs where Libyans can log on and exchange angry rants back and forth with each other . 
No no-fly zone needed . 
Although , they might want to consider a no-stupid zone for the blogs , should the conversations get too ... well ... stupid . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:06 pm | Reply It 's an impossible situation for the US . 
The US should not do this directly . 
The only possibility would be a united NATO response . 
Let 's see the new wealthy super powers of India and China do something . 
The US is already bogged down in war not to mention fiscal problems at home ... March 9 , 2011 at 2:07 pm | Reply Im in favor of options 1 , 4 and 6 myself and 7 if you remove the words `` but nothing else '' For 4 it all depends on the weapons you hand the rebels , sure it would be terrible if you gave them F35 's and thought for sure those wouldnt be used against you sometime down the road ! 
Besides the rebels dont really need anything capable of carpet bombings because tehy are trying to not kill civilians , Ghadafis side on the other hand ... If you were to simply hand the rebels the ability to take out tanks , give them real time intel on the movement of Loyalist tanks , artillery pieces and snipers and maybe tactical advice to the Rebels ! 
If there are any mercenaries maybe send in some spec ops teams so silently kill them off -LRB- I do admit that if Ghadafi has mercs then shouldnt the rebels also get some help ? -RRB- 
, and keep the aid of doctors and food going to the rebels , that would be enough to give the dignity to the libyan people that China demands they retain yet at the same time improve our relations with Libya down the road -LRB- right now they are getting more and more frustrated with the west !! -RRB- That in my opinion would keep things in pretty good shape , its not like anyone in the east is afraid of being killed if they go out into the streets looking for food or medical aid , unlike Tripoli at the moment !!! But yea mass bombings would reduce the civilian population that we are trying to help out ! 
After the dust settles and everything is said and done we can do what we are all doing in Afghanistan , train up a more responsible Libyan Army and Police Force ! 
Just so theres no confusion here , I am a Canadian and am speaking in more general terms when I say `` we '' ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:08 pm | Reply Here 's an idea , let 's go into Lybia letting everyone think we are there to help , and steal all their oil so these damn gas prices go down ! 
And when we got the oil , drop a big bomb on their ass and call it a day ! 
Killed two birds with one stone ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:14 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 2:15 pm | Reply As Libya burns , along with several other Arab and North African countries , one thing is certain ; by the end of this year , many dictators across the Middle East and Africa would have fallen . 
But the essential question remains : Will America and the rest of the West learn to deal with the Arabs as grown-ups rather than micromanaging their affairs through the prism of America 's antiquated foreign policy in the Middle East . 
As Mubarak s administration crumbled , all I heard from the West was how the Muslim brotherhood must not be trusted with power over Egypt . 
If I may quote Lincoln ___ Democracy is government of the people for the people by the people . 
Therefore America and the West need to learn to respect the choice of the people , even if it is a political party founded on the principles of religion . 
I 've never heard anyone criticizing the Christian Democratic Party which currently rules Germany . 
But the key point here is that with power comes greater responsibility for any organization . 
I recalled that the PLO was labeled the world 's number one terrorist group along with Arafat . 
Suddenly after more than two decades of isolation Arafat was given a seat at the table and everything changed , the PLO gradually became a respected organization . 
Unfortunately , however , when Hamas won a free-and-fair election in Palestine and unilaterally suspended all attacks on Israel , America and Europe chose to isolate and undermine them instead of engaging them constructively . 
The approach has so far failed woefully . 
But still nothing has been learned from this mistake instead , the shift now is on the Muslim brotherhood . 
I wonder what it would take for the brains and all the think-tanks in Washington , London and other capitals to realize that we can not impose our will on the democratic choices of other nations , but we can certainly use our brains and money to make them more responsible . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:17 pm | Reply A basic problem with America and other democracies involves a combination of reactionism , lag , and obstanence . 
When something happens in the world that many people do n't like , there is usually a strong reaction . 
Often this reaction 's strength is not in line with the relative calm and control inherent in most democratic world leaders -LRB- a leader has to present as calm and in control of at least his own behavior -RRB- . 
So then , an opposition develops surrounding the perceived inadequate response to the reactionaries , whose reactionary behavior tends to spread like a rash . 
Soon , voices call for the replacing of the leader in the coming elections . 
But , a US president has 4 years in office before elections . 
So , people wait ... and they wait ... and while they 're waiting , they tend to continue to harp on their earlier reactions to events that most seem to have forgotten by now . 
Come election day , all most presidential opponents really know is that they 're darn angry about ... something . 
To keep from looking like fools , these people will trump up anything they can in order to get their consituents to react , and continue reacting , until the president leaves office . 
By then , anyone 's notions on what our foreign policy was , should be , or if anything was really wrong with it to begin with , are largely forgotten except for the scholars and experts on late night news TV interview programs . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:33 pm | Reply I believe that the issue at hand and policy we push is more freedom based than democracy based . 
After all , the United States is n't a pure democracy itself and was formed as a constitutional republic . 
Multiple time in our history , individuals have won the popular vote , but not garnered the presidency . 
This is due to an electoral college system that was put into place by our forefathers wish to limit what they called ` rabble rule ' . 
Religion is very divisive . 
In practicing Sharia Law , punishment is imposed as if were still the Catholic Inquisition . 
I would prefer to think that humanity has moved beyond such things and international pressure should be brought to bear when human rights are violated , whether the majority voted for them or not . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:33 pm | Reply For a blog , that was a good historical summary of American government . 
When you said , `` I would prefer to think that humanity has moved beyond such things and international pressure should be brought to bear when human rights are violated ... '' , you seem to be suggesting the international community become much more involved with the Libyan rebels . 
It 's as if you are suggesting military intervention . 
This seems to contradict what you said earlier about the need to let the Libyans fight their own battles , and how doing so without intervention would allow them to appreciate their freedom more . 
Could you respond to this , please ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:45 pm | We must not intervene ! 
Freedom is n't cherished unless it is fought for by those who desire it . 
If it is handed to them ; it appears as forced upon them . 
If they as a people overcome adversity and freedom is stained by the blood of their brothers and sisters , only then can it be cherished and esteemed . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:24 pm | Reply I like what you said , JP . 
Although , I have to disagree that people in general can not appreciate freedom unless they 've fought for it themselves . 
You can realize what others have sacrificed for you and your family , and be very appreciative of it indeed . 
I did not fight in the wars that gave my country its freedom ; but I sure do appreciate the sacrifices made by those who did . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:39 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 2:28 pm | Reply e = mc2 alternative energy using garbage , oil companies goes bankrupt March 9 , 2011 at 2:39 pm | Reply Sit on the sidelines , do nothing , resume buying oil from the winner . 
Then obtain the lion 's share of the design and reconstruction work for the infrastsructure destroyed during the war . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:45 pm | Reply The US will be hated and criticized no matter what we do , so let 's keep our $ $ $ and troops out of there . 
We should have bombed the sh \* t out of them after Lockerbie . 
I think as a country we 've been a bit lacking in the timing of things . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:45 pm | Reply Why do n't I just BOMB you with diarrhea which is how this AMERICAN BUTT got INCREDIBLY DIRTY !! March 9 , 2011 at 4:30 pm | Reply I agree with matthew McJilton . 
Let them figure it out and if they start targeting civilians , let the UN and Nato do THEIR job ! 
Besides it will ALWAYS be like this in the Middle East ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:45 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 2:49 pm | Reply China and Russia are playing it smart , perhaps we ought to do the same . 
Look our history of getting involved in rebel groups has had a dark and checkered history for decades ; every time they end up turning on us , every time U.S weapons end up used on Americans . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:51 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 2:54 pm | Reply Like they have a name tag that says `` Hello , I am a Rebel ' . 
Everyone wants a piece of Libya now . 
Stay out of it , or risk creating another Osama bin Laden . 
Remember when the US gov ' t thought helping the `` Freedom Fighters '' was the right thing to do ? 
Provide humanitarian aid , that 's it . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:55 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 2:55 pm | Reply You forgot an important option : Provide the rebels with tactical leadership . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:55 pm | Reply Stop sending weapons and stop giving advice to the Gaddafi family NOW . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:00 pm | Reply REBELS IN LIBYA = 99.9 % OF THE POPULATION Everyone in Libya , except the Gaddafi family 's few cronies , DESPISE the criminal Gaddafi family . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:01 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 3:03 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 3:10 pm | Reply Moral obligation ? 
How come no one did anything for Rwanda when millions of people died ? 
They do n't have gold , diamond , or oil ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:11 pm | Reply War is not the answer . 
We do n't have to be in that region at all . 
We ca n't afford it . 
I think the whole U.S. response is about making sure `` our '' oil is safe , but it 's fronted that we have a humanitarian responsibility to get in there and save the Libyan people . 
While it seems to make sense , there are many many nations around Libya that can do whatever they choose . 
Will out nation ever stop bringing democracy to every single nation in the world ? 
It always comes at the end of a gun , so lets not pull the trigger . 
Lets be the bigger country and set the new pace . 
What are we , international police , EMTs , and firemen ? 
When your nation thinks it 's a `` Peace keeper '' , the first thing you should do is send food and aid . 
After that , keep the DOD out of it . 
Haliburton is licking its chops . 
1969 's peace movement never made more sense . 
When is it going to show up again ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:12 pm | Reply ASK OUR SPECIAL FORCES WHO WANTS TO DO THE JOB OF TAKING OUT THAT GADHAFI AND SONS . 
THEN COME HOME AS SOON AS POSSIBLE . 
I 'M SURE WE CAN GET RID OF THAT UGLY MONSTER . 
I 'M AWARE THIS PLAN IS MORE THAN DIFFICULT BUT THOSE ANIMALS NEED TO GO . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:15 pm | Reply WE ??!?!?! YOU ARE N'T TOTING ANY WEAPONS OR DODGING BULLETS . 
DO SOMETHING USEFUL TO MANKIND AND WASH YOUR AZZ ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:32 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 3:17 pm | Reply Dr. Lindsey could add option 8 and that is : Benign neglect . 
Offered by the late great Sen Patrick Moynihan ... when asked about what to do about the middle east mess . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:18 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 3:20 pm | Reply AND YOUR DIRTY COLON IS EVERYONE 'S PROBLEM !!! CLEAN THAT STUFF UP !! March 9 , 2011 at 4:31 pm | Reply . . 
and now is also the time to ramp up alternative and energy self sufficiency policies . 
Hope $ 5.00 gas makes solar and other renewable sources bloom . 
Of course , we need to accelerate 4th gen nuclear too . 
I dream of the day when US space based solar power systems power to Dubai and all of these parts . 
You know , they should be leading the world in new generation power production and distribution , but instead they keep squabbling with each other and spending their petrodollars on building gleaming cities in the desert and hoarding weapon systems . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:24 pm | Reply In my opinion the UN should set up the `` no fly zone '' just for the simple fact it gives the rebels who are on our side a fair chance . 
If you read other articles our main concern is libya 's helicopter force . 
That 's true though helicopters are slow they pack a powerful punch to ground vehicles . 
So restating what I said earlier I think the UN should set up the `` no fly zone '' but that 's it nothing else . 
The people who want to leave have left so let the other people fight it out . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:25 pm | Reply In my opinion the UN should set up the `` no fly zone '' just for the simple fact it gives the rebels who are on our side a fair chance . 
If you read other articles our main concern is libya 's helicopter force . 
That 's true though helicopters are slow they pack a powerful punch to ground vehicles . 
So restating what I said earlier I think the UN should set up the `` no fly zone '' but that 's it nothing else . 
The people who want to leave have left so let the other people fight it out . 
The US is already tied up in one war . 
It does n't need anymore soldiers dying for dimocracy . 
Let people run a country the way they want to . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:29 pm | Reply Why does it always fall on the United States to drop tens , or even hundreds of billions of dollars to act militarily ? 
Most of the Libyan oil goes to Italy , France , China , Germany and Spain . 
All of these countries have the military and financial ability to deal with Libya . 
If the United States attacks , and protects the oil supply for these 5 countries , I guarantee all 5 countries will protest our involvement . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:31 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 3:37 pm | Reply At the begining of the Libyan uprising -LRB- which is a civil war now -RRB- a few of Gaddafi 's government officials , condemned Gaddafi and one in particular wanted him to be tried for violation of human rights , So , how about having someone , from the inside to carry out a coup , ie internal coup . 
President Obama seemed to whisper in someone 's ear yesterday regarding that when he warned the men around Gaddafi , that they can stop now better than later . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:44 pm | Reply Have not the Administration , Congress , and Senate all been warning us we are not only broke we are heavily in debt to the point where our children will inherit it . 
Why is there any discussion about spending more on war ? 
Lets face it , the USA is not the power house it used to be . 
One can not be a super power without funds to back it up . 
If you can get the oil companies and the rich hawks to pay for this then fine , but not with American tax payers $ $ nor with our lives . 
We are taxed out , in more ways than one . 
Sorry they are having their problems but we have a whole lot of our own . 
The fact that the other nations are doing nothing to intervene is a clear indication that we should do the same . 
Why do we always have to be the doops ? 
Send a signal to the world that we are n't going to take it anymore . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:50 pm | Reply Explain ... why do we want to rescue people who reward those who blow us up ? 
On the off chance that maybe they will chuck their religion and come over to our side ? 
Where are the guarantees they will separate religion and state and quit producing little terrorists ? 
We are infidels , why would they want us in their country at all ? 
Death to America is their slogan . 
It 's hard to ignore these facts when contemplating laying down our lives and wallets for these people . 
Wake up America , they do n't like us . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:00 pm | Reply Most of Lindsay 's options focus on direct action by the USA . 
# 3 and # 5 refer to encouraging other to act , but they are given little value . 
Option 1 should always be to work with local powers in instable areas . 
If America acts directly , it will give the Islamic radicals and other America-haters support for their positions in a very visible way . 
The Americanization of the wars against Saddam Hussein and the Talaban has given fuel to those groups that present themselves as valiant defenders against a new evil empire . 
Remember , that the greatest progress against the Talilban in 2001 was during the Northern Alliance 's -LRB- supported by embedded US special forces -RRB- offensive . 
Those were Afghan troops Western newsmen filmed being cheered by the people of Kabul . 
SFC Mike makes a good point that the powers that be in Egypt have little motive to help the insurgents . 
However , they have learned their lesson that they must listen to the mood of the Cairo street , who , I imagine , are firmly with the uprising . 
What would be the results if , rather than debating what AMERICAN military power can do , our leader defer to Egypt as the natural leader of the Arab world , and urge them to take charge of the situation ? 
America would appear as a supporter of the Arab and Egyption people rather than a distant puppet master , while the Egyptian military would be put in a difficult political situation if they seem to pass responsibility to the West . 
Privately , of course , the American government should make clear that something should come out of US-Egyptian cooperation after the billions of dollars the US has spent over the last 30 years underwriting their military . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:01 pm | Reply Enough young American men and women have died and been maimed over the last 10 years ! 
As much as it may bother us to watch Libyan 's die in the middle of a civil war , it 's their Civil War , not ours ! 
As cold hearted as it sounds , `` lets mind our own business ! '' 
We have enough problems here to deal with ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:06 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 4:14 pm | Reply Jon , you need to mind your ` business ' , meaning your extremely dirty ANUS ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:19 pm | Reply I agree with Raul . 
Who died and made the United States the universal equalizer . 
There is a reason why were are such a target . 
Because we constantly poke our nose into other countries business . 
It is their Civil war , let them handle it . 
Our Military is stretched thin enough . 
We need to get on that with that synthesized Gasoline project anyway . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:21 pm | Reply I agree you need to clean your dingleberry encrusted ANUS . 
You are not a spaceship , so stop transporting Klingons ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:24 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 4:21 pm | Reply they could , but they should n't , it would just show how foney , fake and self-righteous U.S is . 
We preach moral , but act like barbarians . 
March 9 , 2011 at 7:54 pm | Reply That guy 's face in the photo is priceless . 
What do u think he is lookiing at ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:33 pm | Reply Okay , here is a question : What would Reagan do ? 
-LRB- Hint : He did it once in the past . -RRB- 
I think this could be option # 8 . 
Oh , and one more thing , if I were the opposition , I would send a delegate to Beijing with this statement . 
`` You want our oil ? 
Choose our side or else you will get squat when we are done removing the trash ... '' March 9 , 2011 at 4:34 pm | Reply Time to think about nuking the whole scene man ... a winning . . 
formula , guaranteed to scare every camel from Morocco to Gaza ... PrimeTime chaos would ensue , but it would get Charlie off the air , so he can enjoy his bitches and crank ... Little problems deserve big solutions , that 's what she said . . 
Nuke 'em , take their oil , and thank 'em later March 9 , 2011 at 4:34 pm | Reply A lot of posts call the article useless , but it does a good job of pointing out how unlikely it is that an intervention will do any good . 
Anything bad that happens to anyone will be blamed on the USA . 
This is a good answer to the Fox news , and republican crowd who look like the administration to do something stupid and get more of our troops killed so that they can win an election March 9 , 2011 at 4:35 pm | Reply U.S. to Libya - `` Mmmmm Texas tea '' U.S. to Libya - `` The oil frontier '' U.S. to Libya - `` And here we go again ... '' U.S. to Libya - `` No one tells us where we ca n't put a McDonald 's '' U.S. considers `` Baywatch '' theme as new national anthem . 
U.S. to Libya - `` After this we can pack on up and move to Beverly ... Hills that is . . '' 
U.S. Government to America - `` Damn what do we do now ? 
That weapon of mass destruction B.S. was our best one '' Now that Bushes subscription to `` Highlights '' ran out , where will he get his statements ? 
No one can take Hillary serious . 
We look weak as a country . 
`` For what is strength without a double share of wisdom ? '' 
All of us have too much to say with little to NO wisdom and foresight of future effects caused from current choices . 
`` Choose carefully , the choice is brief yet endless . . '' 
I love my country but despise my government , as do mostly All Americans . 
U.S. government choices\/laws\/actions in part , are a complete joke and I can not believe the people still allow this ... for now . 
Americans are hated so much globally that future international travel seems more like a death wish than dream wish and unless you travel with Chuck Norris , stay home . 
The world is not this complicated I do n't care what anyone says . 
Let 's not make it that way . 
If were going to play `` Capitan Planet\/America '' then stop being so irritating . 
Assemble divisions to search and free slaves around the world . 
PROTECT YOUR VETERANS U.S. and stop being so ungrateful and pathetic - 25 percent of all homeless people in America ARE veterans . 
Psshh , disposable heros is more like it . 
There is soo much to be addressed ELSEWHERE ! 
... What a waste ... these are my thoughts and maybe yours . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:35 pm | Reply Option 8 : Bribe them . 
Offer Gadhafi 's top military very generous `` retirement packages '' . 
Offer the lower officers straight up cash incentives . 
Reagan did n't win the cold war with bombs , he -LRB- and all Americans -RRB- won that war with money . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:35 pm | Reply why should america have to give money to anyone , just let these idiots kill each other . 
Sit back watch your TV and have a bag of popcorn while we sit at home . 
Its time other nations grew up instead of america always playing the big brother . 
dont give them a dime . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:58 pm | Reply A no fly-zone would help more then this article states . 
The rebels are forced to hold back now out of fear of what the Qadaffi can do with his airforce . 
I say a no-fly zone , possibly with the partcipation of neighboring states , an arms embargo and the sharing tactical information is the most practical packages we can be expected to put together . 
The rest is for the rebels to earn . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:35 pm | Reply There is another option . 
It 's called `` Let them figure it out for themselves . '' 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:36 pm | Reply Option 8 , Cancel visas to and from , shut them off to handle their own problems and if they want another form of government let them get it for themselves . 
Offer our observations and recommendations to the UN and abide by the edits of that body . 
It time for Europe to quit hiding behind the curtain every time there is an international issue and let the U.S. tread in and get slapped in the face for whatever action we take . 
If the oil being cut off from the region is that big an impact to us , then we need to admit it to the public and invest any money that may have gone there to reducing the impact to the U.S. going forward . 
We have got to get off the petro-chemical teat , and quit worrying about the Mid East , the area has been one ethnic , religious war for 5-6000 years . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:38 pm | Reply Have to agree , the amount of oil should not be a issue here . 
We should not play liberator to every Country that starts fighting for freedom . 
I am starting to understand why the Muslim world hates America . 
We always think we need to get involved . 
Let them fight it out as America did in the Civil war . 
Sometimes a little blood shed is what has to happen to make people appreciate their fight . 
Having the US fight their battle is not our position . 
We have a military to protect America . 
I do not see that America is threatened in any way here . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:45 pm | Reply Even a No Fly zone put 's NATO in the position of choosing sides . 
If a plane attacks a NATO plan then what ? 
We could easily be drawn into the war . 
We do not want another Iraq . 
America can ill afford another war . 
We have been in two wars for a decade . 
Let someone else do the dirty work . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:40 pm | Reply we should keep our nose out of other peoples business . 
even when we smell oil . 
mayb then we could solve some of the bs going on in the states March 9 , 2011 at 4:42 pm | Reply The White House should mind its own business and do the job we pay them to do HERE on US soil . 
Obama could start by ordering Joe Biden to get his buttt back from Europe where he has zero business . 
He took off three days after Obama told him to help settle the Federal budget stalemate . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:31 pm | Reply I agree with not doing anything , dont freeze the assets take them . 
Its time that we face our internal problems and leave the other countries to deal with theirs . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:55 pm | Reply If Obama puts his fingers in there we have to vote him out of the office . 
I hope he has some comon sense not like that idiot McCain . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:08 pm | Reply The USA ca n't resist the temptation to play `` hero '' to the world . 
If they only knew how poorly the rest of the world viewed our incompetent government . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:30 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 5:16 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 5:27 pm | Reply MIND YOUR OWN BUSINESS AND DO YOUR JOB HERE IN THE USA . 
LET EUROPE DEAL WITH THE LIBYA PROBLEM . 
THEY GET MOST OF THE GASOLINE FROM LIBYA . 
ITS NOT A USA PROBLEM . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:27 pm | Reply Why does the U.S. not intervene in Darfur ? 
Or why did they not intervene in Cambodia for that matter ? 
Our government claims to care so much about the safety of civilians , so where were they when genocide was commited by Pol Pot , or in Rwanda ? 
The U.S. will only attack `` regimes '' that do n't abide by American consumerism . 
Or they will only attack `` regimes '' that can not readily defend themselves . 
It all comes down to natural resources ... Those countries that can provide the American population get our help , those countries who can not get left to fend for themselves . 
It is typical U.S. politics that will drive the death-nail into this once great nation . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:34 pm | Reply You my friend are beating a Dirty American Butt . 
Leave it be , or wipe it ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:50 pm | Reply You my friend are dead dirty BUTT . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:51 pm | Reply Let Egypt just take them over , the borders were drawn by Europeans anyway . 
They all consider themselves Arabs and Egypt would have food and oil to build a great Arab nation . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:44 pm | Reply The US supported the overthrow of the overthrow of the Batista dictatorship in Cuba by helping a democratic revolutionary named Fidel Castro ? 
Only fools rush in without determining the agenda and identifying who we would be helping . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:46 pm | Reply Not to mention arming the `` popular uprising '' of the Taliban in their efforts to kick out the Soviets . 
How 'd that work out for us ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:52 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 5:47 pm | Reply Just stay out of it , USA . 
We are paying for our mistakes in Afghanistan and Iraq . 
For goodness ' sakes , let 's learn from that . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:50 pm | Reply Why are morons even considering going into libya ? 
nothing to do with america March 9 , 2011 at 5:51 pm | Reply March 9 , 2011 at 5:53 pm | Reply Americans need to clearly understand that this news release is an act of disinformation with attempts by the Agency to pursue actions for intervening in a war to control Libyan oil reserves ... Buy electric cars asap ... March 9 , 2011 at 5:57 pm | Reply Who cares about Libya ? 
If the diabolically cruel dictator was O.K. for the last 40 years , what is the big deal now ? 
Stop wasting money on ridiculous rule-the-world schemes . 
A country that has been going bankrupt for the last several decades is in no position to be telling any other country what to do . 
At least if Iran develops nuclear power , they will contribute less to global warming than the stupid , idiotic United States of Crapeteria . 
March 9 , 2011 at 5:58 pm | Reply Way to turn this into a xenophobic & ill-informed rant about China . . 
OT : I have to disagree with the learned Doctor when he states a no-fly zone would not help the rebels , being as that the rebels themselves are begging for one . 
Personally I suspect our lack of involvement has more to do with long-term thinking over a populist revolution sweeping the Mideast and how that would affect our friends in Saudi Arabia . 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:17 pm | Reply The author left off the best option ... DO NOTHING . 
Keep our little piggy noses out of other countries affairs . 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:19 pm | Reply 7 are too many ugly options . 
Do n't even help the rebels . 
Let them deal with their own internal problems . 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:23 pm | Reply since our prisons are over crowded and our taxes keep going up in the USA maybe we send some convicts over there to help . 
kill multiple birds with one stone , problem solved ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:30 pm | Reply Spend the money that would be going to the rebels on developing effective alternative fuel sources . 
This would rid us of dependence on largely foreign oil and maybe even provide us with a product we can sell to the rest of the world in the future . 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:37 pm | Reply Let Them sort it out themselves -LRB- the Opposition -RRB- , as they WANT it . 
Do Not intervene , No. . 
III could be on your doorstep . 
Lybia 's oil is not worth it , it delivers only 1,7 % of the world 's total . 
Do not let fear or the NYSE rule the world . 
Most people are following those who are in charge here and most of them , over 85 % , are to stupid to wipe their own buttocks . 
Learn about Vietnam , Iraq , Afganistan . 
I rest my case ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:48 pm | Reply How much are the planes worth ? 
If someone was willing to buy the planes would the pilots be willing to defect ? 
It would create a no fly zone because Gadafi could n't trust the pilots to take them up . 
Any planes bought could be sold back to Libya after the war . 
the opposition could be given a line of credit . 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:56 pm | Reply republicans calling fo a no-fly zone make me laugh ! 
in afganistan the republicans supported the people fighting the former USSR . 
no we are their fighting the same people we supplied arms to . 
the republicans made nice with saddam . 
its ronald raegan , dick chaney and don rumsfield i see shaking hand with suddam in old news footage . 
were are our troops now and who did we go to war with ? 
george bush sr. said that he would support the people in iraq if they rose up against saddam than he sat on his hands and watched suddam gas tens of thousands of his own countrymen . 
george w. bush made nice with gadhafi and even opened up an embassey their . 
repiblicans seem to think they can make friends with snakes and that will keep them from getting bitten . 
now they seem still to be drunk with there need for war and want to start another one as soon as they can . 
the people they want to help when you see them on TV look like they are very good at killing clouds in the ski by shooting their weapons into them . 
we have muslims killing muslims and this american does n't care one bit about it . 
they can all make themselves martars if they want to ! 
raegan blew it years ago when he attacked gadhafi for a two days than stopped ! 
the republicans seem mostly to me have a real big problem in picking friends . 
i do n't want to be friends with any middle eastern country . 
they have to sale their oil or eat sand so thinking that there will be no oil to buy is just talk ! 
there are goverments in south and western africa killing their own people right now and the big moral conservitive republicans do n't care one bit because these people do n't have any oil to sale to american oil compinies to profit with by resale to americans at ever increasing prices . 
is it that hard for republicans to mind their own business or do they think this country is swimming so much extra money that we can afford to through billions of dollars into anouther war . 
March 9 , 2011 at 7:05 pm | Reply i think the administation thought they would have the same results with Libia as they saw with egypt , sometimes you should becareful of what you hope for ! 
March 9 , 2011 at 7:36 pm | Reply `` There are always contradictions . '' 
-LRB- Mao Zedong -RRB- We constructed the legislative format of the UN so that WE could dominate the international scene and contain the USSR . 
Had a backup plan with NATO . 
Never had to face them on the battlefields in Korea , Viet Nam , Afghanistan . 
-LRB- they did have to deal with our surrogates there -RRB- Chose to side with Israel in the Mid East . 
NONE of those choices has increased our security . 
In fact the opposite has occurred . 
We wasted the lives of our citizens in Korea and Viet Nam . 
Israel 's adversaries penetrated our perimeter , AT HOME , where our response , AFTER THE FACT , is to beef up `` homeland security . '' 
All the recent disruptions have surprised us . 
ALL those security plans have been a farce , ordered by incompetents or , certainly a grossly limited and short term view , through 10 presidents . 
Will going into the immensely unpredictable situation in Lybia , improve our international diplomatic score ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 8:02 pm | Reply A Muslim regime is purposely killing Muslim civilians -- Where is the Arab League ? 
Where is the UN ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:36 pm | Reply US Army Cavalry Scout Cadence - Always ready Hi Ho , Lock and Load We 're ready to rock , We 're ready to roll Kill the enemy , take control So early , early , early in the morning Out of the rack , and into the track Awakened by a mortar attack Kill the enemy , take control So early , early , early in the morning Kill the enemy , take control So early , early , early in the morning So early , early , early in the morning Tank tracks on the hill SABOT loaded , ready to kill TC says fire at will So early , early , early in the morning GAS ! 
Don your mask Hopefully it 's just a test But if it 's not you 've done your best So early , early , early in the morning . 
March 9 , 2011 at 11:51 pm | Reply Funny how China does absolutley nothing for the rest of the world and the US is expected too . 
80 % of all recalled products are from china . 
There is a 50 % chance if your house was built in 2006 and beyond it has chineese drywall in it that is killing you . 
Add that to the list of tainted fertilizer , baby formula , kids toys etc. . 
Keep shopping at Wal-Mart people March 10 , 2011 at 6:24 am | Reply I agree , who cares about Libya , if Italy and Germany want to keep their oil pipe line running tell them to get off their butts and do something about it . 
We have enough war debt to last us a life time and do n't need anymore . 
As far as China and the rest of the Rich World Bankers that hold our Debt I say , get paid is what you do ! 
The American People did n't vote on any of it . 
And Our Constitution says WE THE PEOPLE so sorry about your losses . 
You should have ask US first before you loaned it to a run away govenment . 
You want to do something for the Libyan People , make them a Constitution and a Bill of Rights that taste good in their mouths and drop Pamplets on them so they have something real to demand from their Dictator . 
Other than that , leave it alone and get our troops out of the Afgan waste land and start using the war budget to stop these mexican drug lords from coming over our borders and pushing Good Tax Paying Farmers off their land . 
March 10 , 2011 at 11:17 am | Reply honestly , i do n't know why America is thinking of even interfering in a civil war . 
This is none of Americas business . 
only bad things can come from America helping . 
First and for most , Libya has had this ruler for over 40 years . 
so i do n't really think they hate him the way the news wants us to think else they would have done something sooner . 
second the small group of rebels are only acting out because of change in leadership in Egypt . 
there is no such thing as a country where everyone is in favor of the leader . 
i mean majority of people dislike obama however if we went to march to get him out of the white house it would be viewed as a crime . 
but back to my point . 
if america infers in this civil war . 
i bet you would start to see groups in other countries coming up to rebel against the government in saudi arabia and other places . 
Those groups would have it in their mind that o america helped libya so i bet they would help us also . 
yea thats my little rant . 
March 10 , 2011 at 7:28 am | Reply I feel sorry for the innocent civilians of Libya , but I 'm tired of spending billions upon billions in the Middle East just to assume the role of `` bad guy '' . 
It just does n't seem like a good investment . 
March 10 , 2011 at 8:51 am | Reply If you guys want to know what 's going on in the Middle-East , follow our facebook group To see James Lindsay respond via text and video to the issues you raised , click here : I cant believe it you guys really have no life im going to slay all of you !!!!!!!! March 11 , 2011 at 9:40 am | Reply Lots of attractive options too . 
Billions of Libyan dollars in US banks that can be spent on arms , `` contractors '' , helicopters that can be modified to gun ships in a flash , surface to air missiles with activation required by Satellite that makes the missile dead for any other purpose in any other area . 
Drones , Communications equipment , specialist instructors . 
All of course could be provided via third countries the first and easiest of course would be Afghanistan and Georgia or a host of other former soviet countries begging American brownie points . 
March 11 , 2011 at 11:08 am | Reply It is ironic the economic and foreign policy consequences of our ill-advised invasion of Iraq in seem to be preventing us from acting in a conflict where our intervention is far more justified . 
As an American Jew of Israeli decent , I recognize the quagmire that any intervention in the Middle East can become -LRB- it is for that reason that I was vehemently against the invasion of Iraq in 2003 -RRB- . 
However , in dealing with a part of the world that sees us in the most cynical light , we should not underestimate the impact of non-action . 
The perception that we are willing to force democracy on our own terms in Iraq while we are willing to let an indigenous movement wither on the vine in Libya will not help our interests any more than it will help the citizens of that unfortunate country . 
I usually feel quite proud when our President reminds us of the consequences of being on the wrong side of history . 
However , I m deeply worried that historians a generation from now will be marveling at how we got it wrong twice : by choosing to intervene in Iraq and then choosing to do so little in Libya . 
A failure to answer the voices calling for our aid will not erase the mistakes of the past , it will only add to them . 
Let 's not forget , the impulse of isolationism has not `` done us proud '' in the past . 
We stood on the sidelines as Germany rose in power and started persecuting my ancestors in the 1930 's . 
We did this in part because of our economic troubles , but also , in part , because of collective guilt about the Treaty of Versailles after World War I. March 11 , 2011 at 3:24 pm | Reply Why ca n't we send in a small secret force to assassinate Gadhafi ? 
March 11 , 2011 at 5:35 pm | Reply if the nice col. had been home the last time we came knocking we wouldnt be having this conversation . 
world politics is a complicated game for the elite not your average person , but you can believe that something will happen no matter what we do . 
just hope the solution comes quick so we can plot our next move . 
people not politicians or dictators should effect change . 
the world population demands dignity we are not pawns in your capitalist interests . 
the oil embargo was a test to see what we could stand odd even my behind , gas then was 60 cents a gallon you see how well weve done its only 4 dollars now . 
not much has changed since early times its all about command and control . 
March 12 , 2011 at 12:45 pm | Reply screw it ... empty out our prisons , fly em out there ... arm them , throw em off the plane . 
tell them whoever gets the bigs guys head on a platter get to their freedom -LRB- a lie of course -RRB- . 
March 12 , 2011 at 5:29 pm | Reply are you serious ... let 's fix the state of wisconsin first , then we can help someone else ... i mean really , there is `` OIL '' here to you know . 
How about some of that `` humanitarian '' over here in the US ... March 14 , 2011 at 11:41 pm | Reply THIS SUBJECT JUST MAKES ME MAD ... WHAT HAS OBAMA DONE FOR THE US OTHER THEN PUT US MORE IN HOLE ... I AM TIRED OF HIM THINKING THAT HE CAN RAN THE U.S. ON HIS OWN , HE IS OUT OF CONTROL , HE WAS NOT EVEN BORN IN THE U.S. AND HE IS RUNNING IT RIGHT IN THE GROUND ... BUT MAYBE THATS WHAT HE WAS PLANNING THE WHOLE TIME ??? IF NO ONE ELSE WANTS TO JUMP IN FOR OTHER PEOPLE WHY THE HECK ARE WE ??????? IT IS HARD TO MAKE IT WITH A LARGE FAMILY AND IT GOT TEN TIME WORSE WITH HIM IN OFFICE , OBAMA GIVE IT UP TO OTHERS THAT HAVE MORE KNOW HOW !!!!!!! March 24 , 2011 at 11:02 pm | Reply As a conservative 16 year old , I think we should stay out of world affairs and worry about problems here , we 're turning into a socialist country , i 'm seeing it with my own eyes ! 
Our schools need reform more than our healthcare , and we 're worrying about whats happening in some african country with some old dictator thats killing civilians . 
It 's their problem not ours . 
Who died and made us the world 's caretaker ? 
We should only get involved if this biggot attacks american soil , then it 's Ok to take it to their land , their people , their blood . 
These so called peacekeeping operations are just pissing off more and more people , we already have enough enemies , lets just let the world be the world and lets worry about giving the students the proper education , stop government spending , and get out of our socialist ways for good . 
March 31 , 2011 at 1:47 am | Reply @ BRBsandiego - patty is a crackhead @ Jim - we dont get our oil from lybia goofball - Italy , France and China do . 
@malcolm - are you sure your not muslim cause they alll sound kinda stupid when they speak . 
@Wil Peters-why dont you jump on a plane a go help yourself . 
@John usa-malcolm is and idiot . 
Look we have no reason to be doing anything we dont get oil from these people anyway , alot of you people have no clue what your saying if the rebels lose than big deal they should of not started this crap in the first place . 
we need to worry about our southern boarder with MEXICO that problem these is gonna bite us in the butt if we dont get it staightend out . 
April 13 , 2011 at 5:24 am | Reply WHY THE HELL DO WE NEED TO BE IN THEIR RISKING OUR MEN AN WOMENS LIVES !? THEIRS NO POINT ! 
OBAMA NEEDS TO GO HOME CUZ HIS HOME ISNT IN THE U.S. , IM ONLY ALMOST 18 AN I KNO WHATS GOIN ON , ITS BULLS \*\*\* WE USE OUR RESOURCES FOR COUNTRYS THATD DNT GIVE A DAMN ! 
ITS THE CHRISTIAN THING TO DO TO HELP , BUT NOT STICK OUR NOSES IN OTHER COUNTRYS BUISNESS WHERE IT DNT BELONG , GET THE F \*\* K OUT OF OFFICE OBAMA BEFORE WE IMPEACH U ! 
UR FU \*\* ING ALL OUR S \*\*\* UP U DUMB MONKEY ! 
IMPEACH OBAMA !!! April 20 , 2011 at 8:13 am | Reply People fight for something cut be better life , food , better country , another president and some others fight for oil , minerals , control , power , or just to train there troops . 
who you are whith April 21 , 2011 at 1:38 pm | Reply Hello ! 
dkebdcf interesting dkebdcf site ! 
I 'm really like it ! 
Very , very dkebdcf good ! 
November 23 , 2012 at 2:00 am | Reply Hello ! 
cgefeek interesting cgefeek site ! 
I 'm really like it ! 
Very , very cgefeek good ! 
November 23 , 2012 at 2:00 am | Reply Hello ! 
baaafdk interesting baaafdk site ! 
I 'm really like it ! 
Very , very baaafdk good ! 
November 23 , 2012 at 2:01 am | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
