Thousands have died in political violence in the past 10 months Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal called on the international community to put more pressure on the regime . 
He was speaking at an Arab League meeting in Cairo , which is expected to extend the Syria mission for a month . 
Critics have said the 165-strong mission has done nothing to stop a 10-month crackdown on protesters . 
Activists say almost 1,000 people have been killed since the monitoring mission began . 
The main opposition coalition , the Syrian National Council , has formally asked the league to refer the crisis to the UN Security Council . 
The league 's foreign ministers are meeting in Cairo to discuss the conclusions of Syria mission chief , Gen Mohammed al-Dabi of Sudan . 
Gen Dabi is believed to favor extending the mission and boosting the number of observers . 
Prince Saud al-Faisal told the meeting that Riyadh was pulling out because the Syrian government had not followed an Arab peace plan it agreed to before the monitors were sent . 
`` We are calling on the international community to bear its responsibility , and that includes our brothers in Islamic states and our friends in Russia , China , Europe and the United States , '' he said . 
Meanwhile , the rebel Free Syrian Army said that army deserters had briefly taken control of much of the Damascus suburb of Douma on Saturday night after fierce fighting with the security services . 
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the fighting broke out after security services shot dead four civilians at a funeral service . 
More than 5,000 civilians killed since March , says the UN UN denied access to Syria Information gathered from NGOs , sources in Syria and Syrians who have fled Vast majority of casualties were unarmed , but the figure may include armed defectors Tally does not include serving members of the security forces The rebels later decided to withdraw for fear of reprisal raids from the government forces , the group said . 
There has been no independent confirmation of any fighting in the area . 
In a separate development , at least 14 people died after a van carrying prisoners was blown up on a road in north-west Syria on Saturday , reports say . 
The official Sana news agency said the police van was attacked by an `` armed group '' on the Idlib-Ariha highway . 
Opposition groups confirmed the attack but did not say who carried it out . 
Activists said armed rebels then stormed the state hospital and found another 60 bodies in the mortuary , some of them showing signs of torture . 
Thirty unidentified corpses were also reportedly discovered at the National Hospital in Idlib . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
22nd January 2012 - 18:12 The Syrian government has simply ignored and snubbed the presence of the Arab League . 
It 's a lot clear that the Arab League 's efforts to restore the order were n't effective . 
The monitors will only be effective if : 1 - They are given free rein to travel anywhere in Syria without Govt minders so that neither the regime , nor the opposition will know where the monitors are at any given time . 
2 - The number of monitors is increased 3 or 4 fold . 
3 - There is no given date when monitors have to leave 22nd January 2012 - 14:06 The Arab league is looking even more ineffectual than the UN . 
Someone with the firepower needs to step in to prevent this continuing series of war crimes by the Assad regime . 
Really , this time around , it needs to be the Russians , with the support of the Arab League . 
Trouble is , do Putin 's lot really care , or want to appear to care , about the human suffering and injustice happening in Syria now ? 
22nd January 2012 - 12:47 What is the point of observers ? 
If they are looking for things that would lead to action by the AL then the regime will ensure that they do n't see it . 
To find facts requires investigators with power which will never be allowed . 
Therefore this is procrastination from making tough decisions ... they do n't want to take . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
