US commission on BP oil spill demands tougher safety regulations The report recommends Congress to raise the liability cap on offshore oil spills , set at $ 75m and oil companies to fund a safety institute as part of their fees for drilling licences Campaigners criticised White House commission 's report into BP 's Deepwater Horizon spill for refusing to call a halt on offshore drilling . 
Photograph Reuters The White House commission investigating the BP disaster in the Gulf of Mexico began lobbying Congress today to set aside anti-government sentiment and commit more funds to overseeing the offshore oil industry . 
In presenting the commission 's final report on the BP disaster , commission co-chair William Reilly said he was launching an all-out campaign to get Congress , the Obama administration and the oil industry to impose tougher safety and environmental regulations . 
`` We are going to make a lot of noise , '' he said . 
The commission , issuing 15 main recommendations , wants Congress to approve funds to create a separate safety agency for the offshore oil industry , whose chief would be shielded from political interference by being appointed for a fixed term . 
The commission 's co-chair acknowledged turning the recommendations into reality would be a challenge given the prevailing mood in Washington . 
Republicans took over the house of representatives last week vowing to roll back government regulations and environmental safeguards . 
Meanwhile , the powerful Chamber of Commerce business lobby today said overturning the Obama administration 's `` tsunami '' of environmental regulations would be a top priority for 2011 . 
However , Bob Graham , the commission 's other co-chair , argued that even conservative Republicans would make an exception because of the economic and environmental consequences of the BP blow-out . 
`` It will override an ideological preference for less government intrusion , less government cost , '' Graham said . 
`` Members of Congress understand that this is not just a typical example of government regulating a private enterprise . 
This is government regulating land that the people of the United States own , '' he added . 
Reilly said the commission 's early conversations with oil executives about industry funding of a safety institute had been positive . 
However , the American Petroleum Institute lobby group complained that companies had already made safety improvements since last April 's blow-out . 
`` This does a great disservice to the thousands of men and women who work in the industry and have the highest personal and professional commitment to safety , '' Erik Milito of API said in a statement . 
Among other top recommendations , the commission said it wants : cents Congress to raise the liability cap on offshore oil spills , now set at $ 75m -LRB- # 48m -RRB- , and to allocate 80 % of the funds from BP fines under the Clean Water act to Gulf restoration . 
cents America to bring its safety regulations for deepwater drilling in line with tougher standards in Norway and Britain , which require companies to demonstrate they can deal with especially risky wells . 
cents Oil companies to pay for an industry-wide safety institute , as part of their fees for drilling licences . 
cents Congress to give more time , up to 60 days , to government regulators to approve oil drilling licences an idea resisted by senators from oil states such as Louisiana and Alaska . 
Commission members were due to brief congressional staffers later today , and will testify before Congress this month to press their case . 
The 380-page report on the causes of the disaster described a systematic breakdown of safety and environmental safeguards in offshore drilling , involving industry as well as government . 
Democrats in Congress said the commission 's report showed the need to move ahead on legislation . 
`` Because systemic safety and oversight issues regarding the offshore oil industry persist , if we do not enact reforms there will likely be repeats of this disaster , '' said Ed Markey , who headed the house global warming committee now disbanded by the Republican majority . 
In London , BP shares closed up 2.8 % . 
Peter Hitchens , from stockbroker Panmure Gordon , said investors were reassured that the full report contained `` no more nasties '' after the release of part of the report last week . 
It also followed a sell-off on Monday after BP admitted it had to shut down 95 % of its Alaskan oil production because of a pipeline leak . 
However , despite that sweeping indictment , the commission said the Obama administration had been `` excessive '' in ordering a six-month halt to offshore exploration . 
The commission 's refusal to call for a halt to offshore drilling among its 15 main recommendations was criticised by environmental organizations today . 
`` The commission 's full findings reveal that offshore drilling simply can not be done safely , '' the Oceana conservation organization . 
`` To suggest that the oil industry is ready to make the complete transformation called for in this report is not credible . '' 
Greenpeace , in its response , said the commission was misguided to put its faith in a UK-style regulatory system . 
`` Only last week a committee of MPs raised the alarm over oil companies ' preparedness to deal with a major spill , '' the organization said . 
A version appeared on p24 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 01.24 GMT on Wednesday 12 January 2011 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off MatthewWells : Friend turns on TV and sees Ocado van driver reversing away from flames 2\/2 
