The Trans-Alaska pipeline , part-owned by BP , carries about 12 % of America 's domestic oil production . 
Photograph : Doug Wilson\/Corbis The final report from the presidential commission investigating the causes of BP 's Gulf of Mexico disaster is expected to recommend today that the US oil industry adopt the North Sea approach to safety . 
The US government is expected to radically overhaul its discredited regulatory regime covering offshore operations , which had merely required companies to fill out uniform box-ticking safety audits . 
It is also expected that the commission will recommend the setting up of an independent safety institute responsible for auditing companies ' plans . 
It comes as engineers battled extreme cold to fix a leak in the 800-mile Trans - Alaska oil pipeline part-owned by BP and restore supply lines from America 's largest oil reserve . 
The pipeline carries about 12 % of America 's domestic production , and the shutdown for a third straight day yesterday has raised concern about oil prices after companies cut production by 95 % . 
`` I remain concerned about the potential impact both on oil prices and Alaska 's economy of even a short-term shutdown of the pipeline , '' said Lisa Murkowski , the senior Republican on the Senate energy committee . 
BP is the largest shareholder in Alyeska , the company which runs the pipeline carrying oil from the BP-operated Prudhoe Bay field to the port of Valdez . 
BP owns about 47 % of Alyeska , ConocoPhillips 28 % , ExxonMobil 20 % and smaller shareholders control the remainder . 
BP is referring all questions about the shutdown to Alyeska . 
Only an estimated 10 barrels leaked onto the basement of a booster pump room , and none seaped onto the tundra with no reports of any environmental damage being done . 
But the news could not have been more badly timed , coming on the eve of the commission 's report into the Gulf of Mexico disaster and putting BP 's safety record under the spotlight once again . 
The commission is expected to recommend the setting up of an independent safety institute responsible for auditing companies ' plans , analysts said . 
Under the UK 's ` safety case ' model which the commission has endorsed in previous hearings , companies are required to separately assess the risk for each operation and show how they would mitigate this . 
Experts believe this system , which is audited by independent consultants , results in fewer accidents because companies have to proactively demonstrate safe operations in each instance . 
The analysts also doubt that production in the Gulf of Mexico will ever recover to pre-spill levels . 
Tighter drilling regulations will mean that `` permitting will forever be more deliberate and constrained '' they said . 
In 2006 , BP was responsible for the largest ever oil spill on Alaska 's North Slope when a pipeline at its Prudhoe Bay field leaked an estimated 5,000 barrels . 
BP 's Alaska operations have also been the subject of numerous ` whistleblowing ' safety concerns being raised by the ombudsman the company set up in 2006 . 
Of the 252 known concerns received since 2006 , 148 relate to BP 's Alaska operations , including 50 specific safety-related concerns at the North Slope operations . 
Alaska remains a key region for BP in the US , and contributes about 200,000 barrels of oil per day in production , 5 % of the company 's total . 
Gas reserves found there are also one of the largest undeveloped resources for BP globally . 
In a venture with ConocoPhillips , it is competing against a rival consortium to build a $ 35bn pipeline to transport the gas southwards . 
Safety concerns raised by incidents such as the Trans-Alaska shut-in will not help its bid . 
BP shares , down by almost 2.5 % in morning trading in London yesterday , closed down 1.25 % . 
News of the Trans-Alaska closure sent the price of oil quoted in New York up by 1 % to just under $ 90 a barrel . 
