Haiti is part of a large Caribbean island called Hispaniola . 
The Dominican Republic is located to the east of Haiti and covers over half of the island . 
Haiti lies right on the boundary -LRB- boundary : The region where two or more tectonic plates meet . 
It is a zone of intense seismic activity . -RRB- 
of the Caribbean and North American plates . 
There was slippage along a conservative plate boundary -LRB- conservative plate boundary : Areas between two crustal plates that are moving past each other in opposite directions or at different speeds . -RRB- 
that runs through Haiti . 
On 12 January 2010 , a magnitude 7 earthquake hit Haiti at 16:53 local time . 
The earthquake s epicentre was 25 km west of Port-au-Prince , the capital . 
Most people , businesses and services were located in the capital . 
Social impacts of the earthquake -LRB- effects on people -RRB- Economic impacts of the earthquake -LRB- effects on money and jobs -RRB- Many of the effects were immediate or primary , eg injuries from falling buildings . 
Some secondary effects didn t happen until many months later , eg cholera outbreaks . 
The effects of this earthquake were particularly bad because of the following reasons : There were very few earthquake-resistant buildings . 
Buildings and other structures were poorly built . 
The epicentre -LRB- epicentre : The point on the Earth 's surface directly above the focus of an earthquake . -RRB- 
was near to the capital . 
There were few resources to rescue or treat injured people . 
Haiti is a very poor country without the money and resources -LRB- resource : Anything that is useful to people . -RRB- 
It is one of the least developed countries in the world with most Haitians living on $ 2 or less per day , about # 1.30 . 
Because there were few earthquake-resistant buildings -LRB- earthquake resistant buildings : Building designs which help to minimize the effect of earthquakes . -RRB- 
, the devastation was massive . 
Many buildings simply collapsed or were damaged beyond repair . 
Neighbouring Dominican Republic provided emergency water and medical supplies as well as heavy machinery to help with search and rescue underneath the rubble , but most people were left to dig through the rubble by hand . 
Emergency rescue teams arrived from a number of countries , eg Iceland . 
Medical teams began treating the injured temporary field hospitals were set up by organizations like the International Committee of the Red Cross . 
GIS -LRB- GIS : Geographical Information System . 
Electronic maps with layers added to display information about the area . -RRB- 
was used to provide satellite images and maps of the area , to assist aid organizations . 
People from around the world watched the news from Haiti on TV and through social networks . 
Many pledged money over their mobile phones . 
United Nations troops and police were sent to help distribute aid -LRB- aid : The giving of resources or money from one country or donor to another . -RRB- 
Money was pledged by organizations and governments to assist in rebuilding , but only slow progress had been made after one year . 
After one year , there were still 1,300 camps . 
Cash for work programs are paying Haitians to clear rubble . 
Small farmers are being supported so crops can be grown . 
