Syria crisis : China sends senior envoy Syrian army tanks at the entrance to the Baba Amr neighborhood in Homs China says it is sending a senior envoy to Syria in a bid to find a peaceful resolution to the country 's crisis . 
Deputy Foreign Minister Zhai Jun will go to the capital , Damascus , on Friday . 
China was widely criticised for vetoing a UN Security Council resolution urging Syria 's leader to step down . 
The UN General Assembly is to vote later on an Arab-sponsored resolution condemning Syria 's government . 
Human rights groups say some 7,000 civilians have been killed there since March . 
The resolution also backs an Arab League plan calling for President Bashar al-Assad to hand power to his vice-president . 
The measure can not be vetoed in the assembly , but the resolution would be non-binding . 
Ahead of the vote , the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon called on Syrian authorities to stop killing civilians , and said crimes against humanity might be taking place in the country . 
Officially , Beijing has a policy of non-interference in other countries ' affairs . 
But as China 's become more influential , it 's a policy that it is finding harder to maintain . 
In the case of Syria , Beijing remains wary about Western intentions . 
An editorial in the People 's Daily newspaper - the mouthpiece of the Communist Party - warned that the violence in Syria could worsen if foreign powers intervened . 
It also stated that America 's aim was to establish a friendly government in Syria - in order to counter the influence of Iran . 
`` We see neighborhoods shelled indiscriminately , hospitals used as torture centres , children as young as 10 years old killed and abused . 
We see almost a certain crimes against humanity , '' he told reporters during a visit to Austria , where he was attending an international conference on drug trafficking in Afghanistan . 
Mr Ban said it was `` regrettable '' that the previous resolution put before the UN Security Council had been vetoed by China and Russia , but that the lack of agreement `` does not give the government licence to continue this assault on its own people '' . 
French and Russian foreign ministers Alain Juppe and Sergei Lavrov were also at the Vienna conference and held talks on their sidelines , with Mr Juppe hoping to convince his Russian counterpart to back the latest measures against Syria . 
Russia , like China , has opposed what it sees as forced regime change in Syria , and has raised concerns about the possibility of military involvement . 
Mr Juppe said it was `` perfectly clear in this resolution that there is no military option '' but that he had told Russia accepting the status quo was not an option . 
He also dismissed Syrian plans to hold a referendum on a new draft constitution as `` a farce '' . 
`` How can you propose a referendum on the 26 February while at the same time continuing to attack your own innocent people in some Syrian towns ? '' 
Mr Lavrov said he had received no new proposals from France in their meeting , but that Mr Juppe had told him France was thinking about a new resolution focused on humanitarian aid . 
In Beijing , Mr Zhai said that China did not approve of armed intervention or forcing so-called `` regime change '' in Syria . 
In an interview posted on the Chinese foreign ministry website , he condemned violence against civilians and called for the government to respect the people 's `` legitimate '' desire for reform . 
He also said sanctions or the threat of sanctions were `` not conducive to the appropriate resolution of this issue '' . 
A Chinese foreign ministry spokesman would not say if Mr Zhai would also meet Syrian opposition representatives during the two-day visit . 
`` I believe the message of this visit is that China hopes for a peaceful and proper resolution of the Syrian situation , and that the Chinese side will play a constructive role in the mediation , '' spokesman Liu Weimin said . 
Last week , Mr Zhai met a Syrian opposition delegation in Beijing . 
In Syria itself , government forces are reported to have launched a new attack on the town of Deraa in the south of the country , where the rebellion first started in March last year . 
There are also reports of violence on the eastern border with Iraq , and in Kfar Nabuda in the central Hama province , where a number of rebel soldiers are reported to have been killed , along with several civilians . 
Activists say at least 40 people were killed across the country on Thursday . 
There are also reports of more shelling by government forces in Homs , which has along with Hama been hit by major government offensives . 
In an interview with the BBC , Prince Hassan of Jordan said there was a danger of Syria `` subdividing '' along its various ethnic and religious lines , with each group `` afraid for their own future '' . 
He called for `` heavyweight diplomacy '' to draw attention to the opposition within Syria , and said `` a conversation has to be held '' between the Syrian authorities and all opposition groups . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
