BP gave investors a glimpse of its future Tuesday , one that will feature a new American chief executive , slimmed-down operations , and $ 32.2 billion or more in payments to clean up and compensate people affected by the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
In announcing its second-quarter earnings , the London-based oil giant tried to walk a line between reassuring bankers and investors about its vast assets and financial strength , and avoiding the appearance of being a rich , powerful company insensitive to the plight of the Gulf Coast . 
`` We have much to do to make it right , '' BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg said in a conference call with investment analysts Tuesday , referring to the spill . 
But he added that BP 's directors are also `` determined to restore value to our shareholders . '' 
In mapping out plans to pay for damage and cleanup , BP said it will sell $ 25 billion to $ 30 billion in assets over 18 months , shedding about 10 percent of its oil and natural gas output . 
That should enable it to shrink its outstanding debt and reinstate dividends next year for shareholders while still covering payments to the massive escrow fund for spill damage claims . 
`` It 's still going to be the second-largest oil and gas producer among international oil companies , '' said Fadel Gheit , oil analyst with Oppenheimer & Co. `` Smaller than Exxon Mobil but bigger than Royal Dutch Shell . '' 
In a sign of how difficult it will be for BP to turn the page on the crisis , however , Rep. Edward J. Markey -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
lashed out Tuesday at the company for concealing its estimates of the rate at which oil had flowed into the gulf . 
Markey released a letter from BP Chief Operating Officer Douglas Suttles to the Coast Guard in early July in which Suttles estimated that oil was pouring forth at a rate of 53,000 barrels -LRB- 2.23 million gallons -RRB- a day . 
The BP briefing for investment analysts was a somber one , as Svanberg announced that the board had picked Robert Dudley , a BP managing director and former Amoco executive , to replace chief executive Tony Hayward , a British geologist who had spent his entire career with BP . 
Dudley , 54 , who grew up in Mississippi and spent summers boating with his family in the Gulf of Mexico , will become the first foreigner to lead the century-old company . 
`` Today is a very sad day for me , '' Hayward said . 
`` I love the company and everything it stands for . '' 
He said , however , he realized that for BP `` to move forward , particularly in the United States , it should do so under new leadership . '' 
Hayward 's compensation package includes a pension valued at about $ 17 million and a severance of $ 1.6 million , or a year 's salary . 
Without costs from the spill , the company would have declared a profit of $ 5.6 billion for the second quarter . 
Spill charges turned that into a $ 17.2 billion loss . 
The appointment of Dudley , who will take charge Oct. 1 , comes at a turning point in the calamity . 
After gushing for three months , the damaged oil well in the Gulf of Mexico has been capped for the past 12 days . 
Kenneth Feinberg , the master for the $ 20 billion escrow fund , is taking over the task of scrutinizing and processing claims and proposing settlements . 
Still , Dudley 's task will be immense . 
Congress is set to raise liability limits for oil spills and to impose tougher regulations on offshore drilling . 
Some lawmakers want to prevent BP , the largest producer of oil and gas in the United States , from acquiring new federal leases . 
The Justice Department is investigating criminal charges against the company , which could complicate its ability to do business with the federal government or bid for leases . 
Asked how BP would be viewed in five years , Dudley said in `` a perfect world '' people would realize that `` BP met its commitments to restore the Gulf Coast and as a result of that BP has restored its reputation '' and it would be allowed to grow its U.S. business . 
He said , `` Five years from now , I hope that people look back and say that was a quite incredible response to a quite tragic accident . '' 
Although BP 's provision for claims and cleanup is unprecedented in size , some analysts questioned whether it is big enough . 
If found to be `` grossly negligent '' in the way it was drilling the Macondo well that exploded on April 20 , BP could wind up paying an additional $ 12 billion in fines alone and nearly twice as much overall , said Gheit of Oppenheimer . 
BP 's chief financial officer , Byron Grote , said that in calculating the size of anticipated federal fines under the Clean Water Act , BP assumed that it was not guilty of negligence . 
By doing so , it pegged its fines at $ 1,100 per barrel spilled . 
If found negligent , BP would have to pay $ 4,300 a barrel . 
It would also have to pay 100 percent of the fines , while Anadarko Petroleum and Mitsui , its partners in the lease , would not have to share the cost of the penalties . 
Critics in Congress decried the company 's failure to say precisely how much oil it thinks has spilled into the gulf . 
Hayward said only that BP had used a number around the middle of published estimates , which most recently have been 35,000 to 60,000 barrels a day . 
In addition , BP 's financial statement reflected an offsetting tax benefit from lower earnings . 
Because the reserve for claims is deducted from profit , BP will not pay $ 9.9 billion in taxes that it would have otherwise owed . 
Bracing for unknown costs , BP also said that it would shrink its outstanding debt to $ 10 billion to $ 15 billion , from its current $ 23.2 billion . 
Dudley assumed his new title with modesty . 
He said he has the `` greatest respect '' for Hayward . 
`` I did not seek out this job , '' he said in a conference call with journalists . 
`` I was asked to step into these shoes . '' 
But in Washington , some people were ready to bid good riddance to Hayward , who had aggravated public anger by saying he wanted his `` life back '' and by going sailing on his yacht on his return to England after weeks on the gulf coast and in Washington . 
`` While it 's now happy sailing for Tony Hayward , rough conditions will persist in the Gulf of Mexico for years to come because of his failed leadership , '' Markey said . 
`` The new leaders of BP will have an uphill climb to correct the legacy left by Hayward , indelibly inked by the disaster in the gulf . '' '' 
