A team of federal investigators known as the `` BP squad '' is assembling in New Orleans to conduct a wide-ranging criminal probe that will focus on at least three companies and examine whether their cozy relations with federal regulators contributed to the oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico , according to law enforcement and other sources . 
The squad at the FBI offices includes investigators from the Environmental Protection Agency , the U.S. Coast Guard and other federal agencies , the sources said . 
In addition to BP , the firms at the center of the inquiry are Transocean , which leased the Deepwater Horizon rig to BP , and engineering giant Halliburton , which had finished cementing the well only 20 hours before the rig exploded April 20 , sources said . 
While it was known that investigators are examining potential violations of environmental laws , it is now clear that they are also looking into whether company officials made false statements to regulators , obstructed justice or falsified test results for devices such as the rig 's failed blowout preventer . 
It is unclear whether any such evidence has surfaced . 
One emerging line of inquiry , sources said , is whether inspectors for the Minerals Management Service , the federal agency charged with regulating the oil industry -- which is itself investigating the disaster -- went easy on the companies in exchange for money or other inducements . 
A series of federal audits has documented the MMS 's close relationship with the industry . 
`` The net is wide , '' said one federal official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly . 
The Justice Department investigation -- announced in June by Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. and accompanied by parallel state criminal probes in Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama -- is one of at least nine investigations into the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
Unlike the public hearings held last week in Kenner , La. , by a federal investigatory panel , the criminal probe has operated in the shadows . 
But it could lead to large fines for the companies and jail time for executives if the government files charges and proves its case . 
Justice Department officials declined to comment Tuesday . 
Holder , in an interview with CBS News this month , confirmed that investigators are conducting a broad probe . 
`` There are a variety of entities and a variety of people who are the subjects of that investigation , '' Holder said . 
In an additional avenue of inquiry , BP disclosed in a regulatory filing Tuesday that the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission are looking into `` securities matters '' relating to the spill , although no more details were included . 
Scott Dean , a spokesman for London-based BP , said the company `` will cooperate with any inquiry the Justice Department undertakes , just as we are doing in response to other inquiries that are ongoing . '' 
Brian Kennedy , a spokesman for Transocean , a former U.S. firm now based in Switzerland , declined to comment , as did Teresa Wong , a spokeswoman for Houston-based Halliburton . 
Halliburton informed its shareholders about the Justice Department probe in its July 23 quarterly report to securities regulators . 
It also noted that the department warned the company not to make `` substantial '' transfers of assets while the matter is under scrutiny . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
