Heavy shelling is reported in the northern Syrian town of Idlib In talks on Saturday , Mr Assad rejected political dialogue while `` armed terrorist groups '' operated in Syria . 
Mr Annan is trying to arrange a ceasefire and gain greater access for humanitarian aid agencies . 
But many in the opposition will be sceptical that the Syrian leader will take any notice , the BBC 's Jon Donnison reports from neighbouring Lebanon . 
Activists say troops are continuing an assault on the north-western city of Idlib where Free Syrian Army fighters are holed up . 
The rebel fighters are vastly outgunned and fear a massive prolonged assault similar to that which took place in the city of Homs . 
Speaking to reporters after his meeting with the Syrian president , Mr Annan said he had presented proposals which , if agreed , `` will help launch the process and help end the crisis on the ground '' . 
`` Our discussions focused on the core objectives of this process , the immediate stop to the violence and the killing , access for humanitarian agencies and the start of a political dialogue , '' he said . 
Kofi Annan : `` I told the president that my main preoccupation is the welfare of the Syrian people '' He said he had urged Mr Assad to embrace change and reform . 
The Ghanaian diplomat , one of the world 's most seasoned negotiators , said he had told the president an old African proverb : `` You ca n't turn the wind , so turn the sail . '' 
`` It 's going to be tough , '' he said . 
`` It 's going to be difficult but we have to have hope . '' 
He said he was `` optimistic for several reasons '' . 
`` First of all , I 've been here for a very short period , almost every Syrian I 've met wants peace . 
They want the violence to stop ; they want to move on with their lives , '' he went on . 
But few are hopeful that his mission will bring a swift end to the bloodshed . 
Dr Bassma Kodmani , of the opposition Syrian National Council , told the BBC that Mr Assad must stand down as a `` first condition '' of any negotiations between the government and opposition figures . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut If Mr Annan is to stand a chance of producing a peaceful political solution , he would have to persuade the Saudis , Qataris and other key players in the Arab League , and indeed the West , that pushing for regime change is going to plunge Syria and the region into deeper chaos . 
The West , also set on regime change , finds itself casting around with few valid options for bringing that about swiftly and surely . 
Nato and its member powers have from the outset ruled out external military intervention as in Libya , and they continue to do so for a wide variety of compelling reasons - despite the hopes of many Syrian opposition groups that they can somehow be drawn in . 
The West is also wary of pouring arms into the opposition , for fear of fuelling a sectarian civil war in which Sunni Islamist radicals could come to the fore - especially since al-Qaeda has begun urging jihadis to join the fray , raising anxieties on which the regime has skilfully played . 
For his part , Mr Assad told Mr Annan during their first round of talks on Saturday : `` No political dialogue or political activity can succeed while there are armed terrorist groups operating and spreading chaos and instability . '' 
Mr Annan has flown on to Qatar and will visit Turkey on Monday . 
Both countries have taken a tough line against President Assad 's crackdown . 
Syrian troops are trying to crush an increasingly armed rebellion that sprang from a harsh crackdown on peaceful pro-democracy protests . 
The UN says more than 7,500 people have died since unrest began a year ago . 
UK-based activist group the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said 58 people had been killed in clashes across Syria on Sunday . 
The Observatory said 17 civilians and 12 rebels had died in a string of incidents in Idlib province . 
Tight restrictions on independent journalists inside Syria mean the figures can not be verified . 
Also on Sunday , gunmen in the north-western city of Aleppo killed former national boxing champion Ghiath Tayfour , Syria 's state news agency Sana reported . 
It said an `` armed group '' opened fire on the boxer as he drove past Aleppo University . 
It was not clear what the motive for his killing might have been . 
International disagreements have paralysed action on Syria , with Russia and China opposing Western and Arab calls for President Assad to stand down . 
The US has drafted a fresh UN Security Council resolution but the state department said on Friday it was not optimistic that the text would be accepted . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
