BEIRUT | Mon Nov 14 , 2011 12:21 pm EST BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syria 's President Bashar al-Assad , self-styled champion of Arab unity , faces deepening isolation after fellow Arab states announced sanctions on Syria for his eight-month crackdown on protests calling for his overthrow . 
For the leader of a country which , under 40 years of Assad family rule , has portrayed itself as the principal defender of Arab rights , the Arab League 's move on Saturday was a wounding blow . 
His military crackdown on the uprising , in which the United Nations estimates 3,500 people have been killed , had already alienated former ally Turkey and led Western nations to impose sanctions and call for him to step down . 
But the surprise decision by the Arab League to suspend Syria and announce political and economic sanctions marked a dramatic new low in Assad 's international standing , leaving him ever more dependent on a close alliance with non-Arab Iran . 
Assad 's determination to crush an uprising which he blames on Islamist militants backed by foreign powers , coupled with the resilience of street protests and the emergence of an armed insurgency , has made Syria 's uprising one of the most intractable conflicts of this year 's Arab revolts . 
His use of tanks to seize back control of the city of Hama in August revived memories of his father 's crushing of an uprising nearly 30 years ago , and led U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to accuse him of `` losing all sense of humanity . '' 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe warned Assad last month that the `` barbaric repression '' in Syria would `` end with the fall of the regime , '' and even ally Russia said he risked a `` sad fate '' unless he ended the violence and implemented reforms . 
`` If he just defiantly continues to defy signals from the Arab world and international community it 's increasingly grim for him , '' said Rami Khouri , a Beirut-based Middle East analyst . 
Just weeks before the uprising erupted in March , the 46-year-old leader said Syria was immune from the rebellions which have overthrown the leaders of Tunisia , Egypt and Libya because its foreign policy was closely aligned with popular Arab sentiment . 
In a speech at Damascus University in June , one of just a handful of addresses he has made since the unrest began , Assad justified the crackdown and said he was overwhelmed with support from Syrians he had met to discuss the crisis . 
`` The love I felt from those people who represent most of the Syrian people is something I have never felt at any stage of my life , '' he said . 
In fact the unrest has polarized Syria . 
Many demonstrators now openly chant for Assad 's execution -- a scene unimaginable eight months ago -- but he is still able to rally huge crowds for state-organized demonstrations and retains a core of support particularly among minority Christians and his own Alawite sect . 
Alongside the military campaign against protests , Assad has lifted a state of emergency in place for nearly 50 years , approved laws to allow parties other than his ruling Baath Party to be established , and promised dialogue with the opposition . 
The characteristically ambiguous stance , mixing iron-fisted security while holding out the promise of change , helped to mute international criticism in the early stages of the uprising . 
But critics said his decision to send troops into several cities in the Muslim holy month of Ramadan four months ago showed he had chosen the `` security option '' to crush the protests rather than address their grievances . 
Tall and softly spoken Assad was thrust into the spotlight after the death of his elder brother Basel in a car crash in 1994 . 
Called back from medical studies in London , he gradually assumed a higher profile and six years later inherited the presidency when his father died after ruling Syria for 30 years . 
To allow the 34-year-old to assume power , Syria 's parliament met hastily to amend a constitutional clause requiring the president to be at least 40 years old . 
In office , he held out the prospect of reforming one of the Arab world 's most tightly controlled states and oversaw a short-lived move toward political freedoms before his `` Damascus Spring '' faded amid a wave of repression and arrests . 
Assad also strengthened his father 's strategic alliance with Iran and supported militant Islamist groups including the Palestinian Hamas and the Lebanese Shi'ite group Hezbollah . 
He ended nearly three decades of Syrian military presence in neighboring Lebanon under international pressure following the 2005 assassination of Lebanese statesman Rafik al-Hariri . 
But the collapse in January of Beirut 's pro-Western government , led by Hariri 's son , was the latest sign that Assad had clawed back influence in Lebanon , one of only two countries to oppose Saturday 's Arab League move . 
Although he backs anti-Israel militants , he also pursued indirect peace talks with Israel and , despite continued Israeli occupation of the Golan Heights captured from Syria in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war , ensured the front line usually remained quiet . 
At home he started liberalizing the economy , easing decades of central control and allowing limited foreign investment . 
But while those around him , including his cousin Rami Makhlouf , acquired great wealth , ordinary Syrians saw few benefits . 
He also maintained the grip on power held by his family and Alawite sect in the mainly Sunni Muslim state . 
His brother Maher commands the Republican Guard and is the second most powerful man in the country while brother-in-law Assef Shawkat is deputy chief-of-staff of the armed forces . 
Assad 's wife Asma , who grew up in London and worked at an investment bank , helped him try to project a softer , liberal and modern image to the outside world , countering Syria 's reputation as a repressive police state . 
He insists that he remains in touch with his people even after a decade in power and eight months of trying to crush a determined uprising . 
`` I live a normal life . 
I drive my own car , we have neighbors , I take my kids to school , '' he told the British Sunday Telegraph newspaper last month . 
`` That 's why I am popular . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
