Tony Blair : a modern-day bogeyman ? 
Photo : Martin Argles The tail-slicing farmer 's wife and Muffet-scaring spider have been joined in the panoply of brutal nursery rhyme figures by a new bogeyman - Tony Blair . 
The prime minister is the star - or more accurately villain - of the winning entry of a competition to create new nursery rhymes for the millennium . 
The rhyme , which could make less politically-minded parents long for the simple innocence of Mary and her little lamb , is an earnest ditty intended to educate youngsters on the government 's decision to take Britain to war in Iraq . 
`` Baker Tony 's Pizza , '' victorious in the nationwide Time for a New Rhyme contest run by the children 's digital television channel Nick Jr , portrays Mr Blair as a baker creating deceptively-attractive pizzas of dye and sawdust that `` made all the children cry '' . 
The judges of the competition , who included the poet Michael Rosen and the television presenter Lorraine Kelly , thought that the rhyme 's `` political undertones '' reflected the contemporary social criticism of many much older verses familiar from the cradle or the playground . 
Its author , Angela Martin , 57 , said her inspiration had come from a `` desire to educate our children on the politics of the Iraq war in a light-hearted fashion '' . 
Whether or not the rhyme is adopted by parents crooning their babies to sleep or by skipping-rope jumpers in the playground remains to be seen . 
However , alternative themes behind other entries to the competition were no less serious : topics included the Pope 's death , the pressures of working parents , Jamie Oliver 's school dinners campaign -LRB- the subject of 16 % of entries -RRB- , the September 11 terrorist attacks and the Boxing Day tsunami . 
The second runner-up , by Jayne Fletcher Tomlinson , 48 , is an unchallenging verse titled Bus , Train , Bike and Car which only highlights the powerful plague-inspired grittiness of Ring a Ring o'Roses . 
The competition 's organisers hope the winners will follow in a powerful tradition of nursery rhymes , which have long supplied a sometimes coded oral history of key royal and political events . 
