Oil floats on the surface of the Gulf of Mexico around a work boat at the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico June 2 , 2010 . 
LONDON | Thu Jun 3 , 2010 12:52 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Reinsures have bumped up prices for offshore energy-related insurance premiums by 50 percent following insurance industry losses of up to $ 3.5 billion -LRB- 2.4 billion pounds -RRB- from the BP plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , Moody 's Investor Service said in a report on Thursday . 
Total insured losses from the worst oil spill in U.S. history are expected to be between $ 1.4 billion and $ 3.5 billion , although losses would be significantly higher if BP had purchased liability insurance instead of self-insuring its risks through its captive insurance program , said Moody 's . 
Like most larger oil companies BP is self insured for clean up costs , in its case through captive insurer Jupiter Insurance Ltd. . 
This substantially reduced the exposure of the commercial reinsurance industry to the event , said Moody 's , who predicted a lengthy and continuous period of class action lawsuits from other liable parties . 
Millions of gallons of oil have poured into the Gulf of Mexico since an April 20 blast on the Deepwater Horizon rig triggered a huge spill , soiling 100 miles -LRB- 160 km -RRB- of coastline , threatening some of the United States ' richest fisheries and endangering a fragile ecosystem . 
Moody 's said the event will have a meaningful impact on the market for offshore energy-related insurance coverages , with early reports indicating a 15 to 25 percent increase in property coverages for rigs operating in shallow waters and up to 50 percent higher for deepwater rigs . 
`` With hurricane season approaching , any additional losses in the Gulf of Mexico this year could further bolster pricing for this subclass . 
Likewise , pricing for offshore energy liability insurance is sure to trend higher as insurers and reinsurers take stock of their losses and re-evaluate the complex risks associated with drilling in deep waters , said James Eck , vice president - senior credit officer at Moody 's . 
Deepwater Horizon is the largest single oil drilling rig loss since the 1988 Piper Alpha platform disaster in the North Sea , which resulted in approximately $ 3.6 billion of insured losses , said Eck . 
Insurers and reinsurers have publicly reported at least $ 611 million in estimated losses arising from the event , with losses reported coming primarily from the global reinsurers , who sustained the majority of net losses , and from Lloyd 's and Bermuda market players , according to the report from Moody 's . 
VX has predicted the heaviest loss in the industry , estimating a $ 200 million loss from the disaster , according to the Moody 's report . 
It said Munich Re -LRB- MUVGn . 
DE -RRB- follows with $ 80 million , Partner Re with an estimated $ 65 million and Hannover Re -LRB- HNRGn . 
DE -RRB- with $ 53 million . 
`` Moody 's notes that a number of prominent Bermuda -LRB- re -RRB- insurers have not publicly released loss estimates , possibly indicating that they believe their exposure is below the relevant loss reporting threshold for their SEC filings , which is typically on the order of $ 25 million , '' said Eck . 
Last week , Lloyd 's of London LOL . 
UL estimated the net claims from the Deepwater Horizon explosion stands at between $ 300 million and $ 600 million . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
