\* Offshore energy-related premiums up by 50 pct - Moody 's \* Sector loss would be more if BP had bought liability cover \* Shallow waters rig coverage premiums up 15 to 25 percent \* Hurricane season could mean more losses , premium hikes LONDON , June 3 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Reinsures have bumped up prices for offshore energy-related insurance premiums by 50 percent following insurance industry losses of up to $ 3.5 billion from the BP plc -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , Moody 's Investor Service said in a report on Thursday . 
Total insured losses from the worst oil spill in U.S. history are expected to be between $ 1.4 billion and $ 3.5 billion , although losses would be significantly higher if BP had purchased liability insurance instead of self-insuring its risks through its captive insurance program , said Moody 's . 
Like most larger oil companies BP is self insured for clean up costs , in its case through captive insurer Jupiter Insurance Ltd. . 
This substantially reduced the exposure of the commercial reinsurance industry to the event , said Moody 's , who predicted a lengthy and continuous period of class action lawsuits from other liable parties . 
Moody 's said the event will have a meaningful impact on the market for offshore energy-related insurance coverages , with early reports indicating a 15 to 25 percent increase in property coverages for rigs operating in shallow waters and up to 50 percent higher for deepwater rigs . 
`` With hurricane season approaching , any additional losses in the Gulf of Mexico this year could further bolster pricing for this subclass . 
Likewise , pricing for offshore energy liability insurance is sure to trend higher as insurers and reinsurers take stock of their losses and re-evaluate the complex risks associated with drilling in deep waters , said James Eck , vice president - senior credit officer at Moody 's . 
Deepwater Horizon is the largest single oil drilling rig loss since the 1988 Piper Alpha platform disaster in the North Sea , which resulted in approximately $ 3.6 billion of insured losses , said Eck . 
Insurers and reinsurers have publicly reported at least $ 611 million in estimated losses arising from the event , with losses reported coming primarily from the global reinsurers , who sustained the majority of net losses , and from Lloyd 's and Bermuda market players , according to the report from Moody 's . 
VX has predicted the heaviest loss in the industry , estimating a $ 200 million loss from the disaster , according to the Moody 's report . 
It said Munich Re -LRB- MUVGn . 
DE -RRB- follows with $ 80 million , Partner Re with an estimated $ 65 million and Hannover Re -LRB- HNRGn . 
DE -RRB- with $ 53 million . 
`` Moody 's notes that a number of prominent Bermuda -LRB- re -RRB- insurers have not publicly released loss estimates , possibly indicating that they believe their exposure is below the relevant loss reporting threshold for their SEC filings , which is typically on the order of $ 25 million , '' said Eck . 
Last week , Lloyd 's of London LOL . 
UL estimated the net claims from the Deepwater Horizon explosion stands at between $ 300 million and $ 600 million . 
-LRB- ID : nWLA4879 -RRB- -LRB- Editing by Hans Peters -RRB- -LRB- Click here to join the Thomson Reuters Insurance Linked Securities Community for more news and analysis : here -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
What plans they had appear to have effectiveness under only the best of circumstances and for only a fraction of the size of this spill . 
-LRB- BP had stated that they would be able to manage a spill a day of the size of Exxon Valdez . -RRB- 
Furthermore , it seems to be a strong human and organizational trait to protect your ongoing reputation and limit blame . 
In other cases where errors were made or actual crimes were committed shredders and lies were concocted that eventually became exposed . 
BP has for several weeks already misrepresented the magnitude of the spill . 
It 's CEO continues to blather utter nonsense on various topics including the size of the spill , the widespread cases of headaches\/nausea\/etc that clean up workers experience . 
Instead of showing any understanding of the nature and effects of the oil and chemicals used in the dispersion , BP 's chief wondered out loud if food poisoning was at fault ! 
... And , icing on the cake : he said he `` wanted his life back '' ! 
Here is a guy who apparently was only effective in running an organization to make money not safely drill for oil . 
Since BP is not able to effectively manage this spill , and since BP has been less than honest it is time that : The Federal Government take over BP 's AMerican operations in Temporary Receivership . 
If we do not it is entirely conceivable we will be stuck with ALL the costs associated with the greatest disaster of our generation . 
The sharks are circling , BP 's stock is headed south and it may in fact be dead and we may be stuck with the consequences . 
It was only a matter of time and given the magnitude of oil drilling in the world it will surely happen again . 
Apparently , according to what we already think we understand about the errors made by BP and others -LRB- MMS included -RRB- the deck was stacked for this one event . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
