June 3 | Thu Jun 3 , 2010 9:10 am EDT June 3 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Millions of gallons -LRB- liters -RRB- of oil have poured into the Gulf of Mexico since an April 20 blast on the Deepwater Horizon rig triggered a huge spill , soiling 100 miles -LRB- 160 km -RRB- of coastline , threatening some of the richest U.S. fisheries and endangering a fragile marine ecosystem . 
Below is a timeline of the spill and its impact . 
April 20 , 2010 - Explosion and fire on Transocean Ltd 's drilling rig Deepwater Horizon licensed to BP -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- ; 11 workers are killed . 
The rig was drilling in BP 's Macondo project 42 miles -LRB- 68 km -RRB- southeast of Venice , Louisiana , beneath about 5,000 feet -LRB- 1,525 metres -RRB- of water and 13,000 feet -LRB- 4 km -RRB- under the seabed . 
April 22 - The Deepwater Horizon rig , valued at more than $ 560 million , sinks and a five mile long -LRB- 8 km -RRB- oil slick is seen . 
April 25 - The Coast Guard approves a plan to have remote underwater vehicles activate a blowout preventer and stop leak . 
Efforts to activate the blowout preventer fail . 
April 28 - The Coast Guard says the flow of oil is 5,000 barrels per day -LRB- bpd -RRB- -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 litres -RRB- -- five times greater than first estimated . 
A controlled burn is held on the giant oil slick . 
April 29 - U.S. President Barack Obama pledges `` every single available resource , '' including the U.S. military , to contain the spreading spill . 
-- Obama also says BP is responsible for the cleanup . 
Louisiana declares state of emergency due to the threat to the state 's natural resources . 
April 30 - An Obama aide says no drilling will be allowed in new areas , as the president had recently proposed , until the cause of the Deepwater Horizon accident is known . 
-- BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward says the company takes full responsibility for the spill and would pay all legitimate claims and the cost of the cleanup . 
May 2 - Obama visits the Gulf Coast to see cleanup efforts first hand . 
U.S. officials close areas affected by the spill to fishing for an initial period of 10 days . 
BP starts to drill a relief well alongside the failed well , a process that will take two to three months to complete . 
May 5 - A barge begins towing a 98-ton containment chamber to the site of the leak . 
BP says one of the three leaks has been shut off by capping a valve , but that will not cut the amount of oil gushing out . 
May 6 - Oil washes ashore on the Chandeleur Islands off the Louisiana coast , uninhabited barrier islands that are part of the Breton National Wildlife Refuge . 
May 7 - BP tries to lower the containment dome over the leak , but the device was rendered useless by a slush of frozen hydrocarbons that clogged it . 
A fishing ban for federal waters off the Gulf is modified , expanded and extended . 
May 9 - BP says it might try to plug the undersea leak by pumping materials such as shredded up tires and golf balls into the well at high pressure , a method called a `` junk shot . '' 
May 11\/12 - Executives from BP , Transocean and Halliburton appear at congressional hearings in Washington . 
Senate Energy Committee chairman Jeff Bingaman says that it appears that the explosion on the rig is due to a `` cascade of errors '' , technical , human and regulatory . 
The executives blame each other 's companies . 
May 14 - Obama slams companies involved in the spill , criticizing them for a `` ridiculous spectacle '' of publicly trading blame over the accident in his sternest comments yet . 
May 16 - BP succeeds in inserting a tube into the leaking riser pile of the well and capturing some oil and gas . 
May 18 - The U.S. nearly doubles a no-fishing zone in waters affected by the oil , extending it to 19 percent of U.S. waters in the Gulf . 
May 19 - The first heavy oil from the spill sloshes ashore in fragile Louisiana marshlands and part of the fragmented oil slick enters a powerful current that could carry it to the Florida Keys and beyond . 
May 26 - A `` top kill '' maneuver starts , involving pumping heavy fluids and other material into the well shaft to try to stifle the flow . 
May 28 - Obama tours the Louisiana Gulf coast on his second visit - `` I am the president and the buck stops with me , '' he said . 
-- BP CEO Tony Hayward flies over the Gulf . 
BP says the disaster has so far cost the company $ 930 million . 
May 29 - BP says the complex `` top kill '' maneuver to plug the well has failed , crushing hopes for a quick end to the largest oil spill in U.S. history already in its 40th day . 
June 1 - BP shares plunge 17 percent in London trading , wiping $ 23 billion off its market value , on news the latest attempt to plug the well has failed . 
-- U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder says the Justice Department has launched a criminal and civil investigation into the rig explosion and the spill . 
June 2 - BP continues work on a new plan to try to capture most of the escaping oil . 
This involves using robot submarines to cut off what is left of the leaking riser pipe , then lowering a containment cap over the wellhead assembly . 
Some difficulties are encountered with the cutting operation . 
-- U.S. authorities expand fishing restrictions to cover 37 percent of U.S. federal waters in the Gulf . 
June 3 - After previous sharp declines , BP shares rise more than 3 percent on market hopes that the latest plan to control the leaking well may make some progress . 
The six-week-old crisis has wiped a third off BP 's market value since it began . 
-LRB- Compiled by David Cutler , London Editorial Reference Unit ; Editing by Pascal Fletcher -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Those attending will include Dr. John W. Farrington , interim dean of the University of Massachusetts School of Marine Science and Technology and possibly scientist from WHOI , Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution is a private , independent , not-for-profit corporation with experts on the Buzzards Bay , Massachusetts 2003 oil spill . 
On Sunday , April 27 , 2003 , the Tank Barge Bouchard No. 120 struck rocks south of Westport , MA , when it passed on the wrong side of a navigational marker at the entrance of Buzzards Bay . 
The resulting 12-foot gash on the bottom of the hull released an estimated 98,000 Number 6 fuel oil in Buzzards Bay . 
They are calling the spill an accident ? 
Are they sure it was an accident ? 
I am no expert but the events and consequences seems to be so extreme . 
Surely BP knew the dangers ? 
Surely they knew the forces involved ? 
They are calling the spill an accident ? 
Are they sure it was an accident ? 
I am no expert but the events and consequences seems to be so extreme . 
Surely BP knew the dangers ? 
Surely they knew the forces involved ? 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
