HOUSTON | Thu Jun 3 , 2010 1:34 pm BST HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP 's oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico has become the worst in U.S. history , prompting speculation about the future of the company and its chief executive , Tony Hayward . 
Here are some potential scenarios facing BP : BP RUNS OUT OF CASH - UNLIKELY BP and the White House have said the oil giant has the financial muscle to cover the cost of cleaning up the oil spill and compensating those affected . 
All analysts consulted by Reuters agree on this , and that the key determinant of how much it does finally cost depends on how long the oil continues to flow . 
Analysts and investors have started to factor in that the spill lasts until August , when a relief well is expected to be completed . 
The relief well would end the spill even if earlier efforts to cap the ruptured well have failed . 
BP 's market capitalization has fallen by around $ 65 billion since the Deepwater Horizon rig sank on April 22 after exploding two days earlier , unleashing a torrent of oil into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Most analysts believe this more than factors in the total cost to BP . 
`` It 's not going to be anything in that ball park , '' Alex Morris , oil analyst at Raymond James in Houston said . 
Estimates for the total cost start at around $ 5.3 billion , an estimate from Dutch bank ING , assuming the current effort to fit a cap on the well to capture the oil works . 
However , estimates run to up to $ 37 billion -- the forecast from investment bank Credit Suisse . 
As costs , especially those for damages , will be absorbed over a period of years , BP is seen as able to handle them . 
The company generated cash of $ 7.7 billion from operating activities in the first quarter . 
Even after capital investment of $ 3.8 billion , it had $ 3.9 billion of free cash . 
Most analysts believe the company can foot the bill without cutting its dividend or raising debt levels . 
However , Credit Suisse said if its $ 37 billion estimate is accurate , the company can only maintain its dividend by raising its gearing ratio by 10 percentage points , something it may not wish to do . 
And even if BP can afford to maintain its dividend , it may cut it as a political gesture to bolster its flagging reputation . 
Democratic Senators Charles Schumer and Ron Wyden said on Wednesday BP should cut its dividend until the full costs for cleaning up the spill can be calculated . 
BP , which owns 65 percent of the leaking well , its partners Anadarko Petroleum , which owns 25 percent and Japan 's Mitsui & Co , which owns 10 percent , are legally liable for the clean-up on the basis of their shareholdings . 
BP has undertaken to cover all damages itself . 
CEO Hayward said in an interview with Britain 's The Daily Mail newspaper on Wednesday that clean-up costs could hit $ 3 billion if the leak continues until August . 
This is based on BP 's estimate of around $ 950 million spent in the first 41 days after the explosion . 
However , Credit Suisse estimated in a research note on Wednesday that clean-up costs could total $ 15-23 billion . 
Other analysts put the number as low as the $ 2 billion estimated by Panmure Gordon 's Peter Hitchens . 
BP has agreed to compensate all those affected by the spill for all legitimate costs , even though under the law BP and its partners are only liable to pay up to $ 75 million . 
BP has undertaken to pay this money itself , rather than in conjunction with its partners , so the full liability may fall to it . 
BP has offered no estimate but Hitchens at Panmure said on Wednesday he estimates compensation claims will be $ 10 billion . 
Credit Suisse estimates this at $ 23 billion . 
BP BECOMES A TAKEOVER TARGET - UNLIKELY The collapse in its share price means BP could become a takeover target , Dougie Youngson , oil analyst at brokerage Arbuthnot said on Tuesday . 
However , most analysts do not expect this to happen . 
Exxon Mobil , Royal Dutch Shell and Chevron are the only fully publicly traded oil companies larger than BP and deemed financially strong enough to buy it . 
The U.S. government blocked the takeover of Asia-focused U.S. oil company Unocal by China 's CNOOC for strategic reasons , so most analysts doubt it would allow BP -- the largest oil producer in the Gulf of Mexico -- to be taken over by a state-backed oil company . 
Antitrust issues could arise over BP 's refineries if it were acquired by Exxon , Shell or Chevron , Alex Morris said . 
This could force the sale of the refineries but in the current depressed refining environment that would be difficult . 
BP 's significant U.S. gas production assets could also cause regulatory problems for any of the above , Jason Kenney at ING said . 
However , the biggest barriers to an acquirer making a move are the unknown liabilities that arise from the spill . 
`` It would be hard to see one of the other supermajors taking on such an unknown liability , '' Raymond James 's Morris said . 
Similarly , selling of BP piecemeal may not attract buyers because the individual parts would still be liable for the spill . 
Washington may also block any deal seen to strengthen anyone in the oil industry . 
`` The last thing that President -LRB- Barack -RRB- Obama needs today is `` bigger oil , '' ING 's Kenney said in a research note . 
CEO HAYWARD LOSES HIS JOB - UNLIKELY , FOR THE MOMENT Inevitably , there have been questions over whether Hayward should stay . 
He told the Daily Mail '' ... it would be ridiculous to resign at this point '' and most analysts have defended the CEO 's position . 
John Hofmeister , former president of Shell Oil Company , Shell 's U.S. unit , and author of `` Why We Hate the Oil Companies , '' told Reuters it was unreasonable to blame the CEO . 
`` Ultimately the CEO is accountable and responsible ... but the individual on the rig may have a made a bad judgment . '' 
Investors had been happy with Hayward 's efforts as CEO . 
In the almost three years before the Deepwater Horizon rig sunk , he had improved refinery operations , boosted oil production and cut a lot of management overheads . 
`` People were happy with him -- he had done a good job turning around BP , '' Alex Morris said . 
So far , investors and analysts seem to be backing Hayward . 
However , documents and testimony submitted to government investigations into the incident have prompted some in Washington and Louisiana to question BP 's decisions about the drilling of the oil well . 
Hayward took up his role promising to standardize and streamline the way BP built facilities and drilled oil wells . 
If the structures he put in place are deemed to have led to any decisions that contributed to the accident , then the CEO 's position could come under pressure . 
BP IS BARRED FROM DOING SOME BUSINESS IN THE U.S. . 
AT LEAST TEMPORARILY - SOMEWHAT LIKELY Some commentators have called for BP to be banned from drilling in the United States , which would seriously damage the company 's business given that 40 percent of its assets are in the United States and it depends on the country for its growth plans . 
Analysts are divided on whether some debarment is likely . 
`` There are going to be heavy fines . 
The regulator is going to be tough on them getting permits but all companies have to be treated by the rules . 
This is n't Venezuela , '' said Morris . 
However , under federal law BP would have to be banned from government contracts for a period of time if convicted of a criminal offense under the Clean Water Act . 
The company could also be barred from contracts if civil judgments are entered against it for violations of environmental laws . 
BP has already faced partial bans on receiving federal contracts because of past violations of U.S. laws . 
After the pipeline leaks at its Prudhoe Bay Unit in Alaska and a fatal explosion at a Texas refinery , the company was ineligible to receive federally funded contracts for services from those two facilities . 
The company had been negotiating with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency over those bans but those talks were halted after the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
While BP could face such a penalty in the latest oil spill , one law professor and private practitioner , Anthony Sabino , noted that there were not a lot of other oil producers so it might only be a short-term debarment . 
That could be viewed as a punitive and politically motivated action , but regardless such a ban would likely `` be a short-term hit and not substantial , '' he said . 
BP TO FACE FINES AND PENALTIES - LIKELY In addition to facing billions of dollars in costs from the economic liability and damages , BP could also potentially face billions of dollars in civil and criminal penalties if the Justice Department 's investigation finds wrongdoing . 
Some legal experts have said that proving some criminal charges may be more difficult because it requires showing intent , negligence or other malfeasance . 
However , some environmental laws have simple criminal violations , including the one banning harm to migratory birds . 
For each barrel of oil that prosecutors can prove has spilled into the Gulf , BP could be fined $ 1,100 or as much as $ 4,300 if they are able to prove negligence was the cause . 
Prosecutors could use estimates from a team of scientists and experts who found between 12,000 barrels per day and 19,000 bpd are flowing from the broken well . 
That could equal as much as $ 81.7 million in fines per day at the high end . 
With 44 days of oil spewing from the well , that would equal $ 3.6 billion as of Wednesday . 
Additionally , U.S. laws protect endangered species and migratory birds , with fines of up to $ 25,000 per violation . 
Already more than 100 birds have been found oiled or dead , according to the Unified Area Command for the spill response efforts . 
There are also criminal fines associated with such violations , which could be as much as $ 50,000 . 
If other companies are also found to be responsible for the spill as well , the penalties could potentially be imposed on each violator . 
In some cases , most significantly the Exxon Valdez spill in 1989 , companies try to negotiate a settlement with the federal government , as is expected with BP . 
Two years after the Valdez spill , Exxon settled U.S. civil and criminal charges in a plea agreement that included just over $ 1 billion in penalties , damages and restitution . 
At the time , the $ 125 million in criminal penalties was the largest of its kind while $ 900 million went to reimburse federal and state governments for responding to the spill and later restoration projects . 
The federal government and state of Alaska in 2006 sought another $ 92 million from Exxon , however that request has not been resolved . 
BP TO FACE GROWTH HEADWINDS IN THE FUTURE - LIKELY BP 's targets for expanded production will become tougher to achieve following the oil spill , and its financial performance will suffer from higher costs -- even after spill costs and fines are paid . 
BP said earlier this year it was targeting oil and gas output growth of 1-2 percent over the medium term . 
This plan relies heavily on BP 's U.S. projects and especially the Gulf of Mexico , where it was leading the push into ever-deeper waters . 
The dislocation caused by dealing with the spill , including the diversion of vessels from other fields means BP will face a particular challenge in keeping its drilling plans on track . 
A moratorium imposed by Obama on new deepwater drilling after the spill will also slow development plans at BP and across the industry . 
Even when the oil spill has been dealt with and the drilling moratorium is lifted , BP 's damaged reputation is likely to mean more scrutiny from regulators than other companies , analysts said . 
This means it will likely take longer than it would have expected in the past to bring fields to production . 
`` The Gulf of Mexico position was much heralded by management as a differentiated position for BP relative to its peers only 12 months ago ... the full monetization of these assets is likely to take longer , '' Morgan Stanley oil analyst Theepan Jothilingam said in a research note . 
Lower-than-expected production would hit BP 's financial performance but in addition to this , higher costs could weigh on BP 's profits . 
Analysts at Bernstein estimated the company could face 10 percent higher operating costs in the United States after the spill , in part due to the need to impose tougher safety standards . 
