Here are some potential scenarios facing BP : BP RUNS OUT OF CASH - UNLIKELY BP and the White House have said the oil giant has the financial muscle to cover the cost of cleaning up the oil spill and compensating those affected . 
All analysts consulted by Reuters agree on this , and that the key determinant of how much it does finally cost depends on how long the oil continues to flow . 
Analysts and investors have started to factor in that the spill lasts until August , when a relief well is expected to be completed . 
The relief well would end the spill even if earlier efforts to cap the ruptured well have failed . 
BP 's market capitalization has fallen by around $ 65 billion since the Deepwater Horizon rig sank on April 22 after exploding two days earlier , unleashing a torrent of oil into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Most analysts believe this more than factors in the total cost to BP . 
`` It 's not going to be anything in that ball park , '' Alex Morris , oil analyst at Raymond James in Houston said . 
Estimates for the total cost start at around $ 5.3 billion , an estimate from Dutch bank ING , assuming the current effort to fit a cap on the well to capture the oil works . 
-LRB- ID : nN02139553 -RRB- However , estimates run to up to $ 37 billion -- the forecast from investment bank Credit Suisse . 
As costs , especially those for damages , will be absorbed over a period of years , BP is seen as able to handle them . 
The company generated cash of $ 7.7 billion from operating activities in the first quarter . 
Even after capital investment of $ 3.8 billion , it had $ 3.9 billion of free cash . 
Most analysts believe the company can foot the bill without cutting its dividend or raising debt levels . 
However , Credit Suisse said if its $ 37 billion estimate is accurate , the company can only maintain its dividend by raising its gearing ratio by 10 percentage points , something it may not wish to do . 
And even if BP can afford to maintain its dividend , it may cut it as a political gesture to bolster its flagging reputation . 
Democratic Senators Charles Schumer and Ron Wyden said on Wednesday BP should cut its dividend until the full costs for cleaning up the spill can be calculated . 
-LRB- ID : nWAT014519 -RRB- BP , which owns 65 percent of the leaking well , its partners Anadarko Petroleum , which owns 25 percent and Japan 's Mitsui & Co , which owns 10 percent , are legally liable for the clean-up on the basis of their shareholdings . 
BP has undertaken to cover all damages itself . 
CEO Hayward said in an interview with Britain 's The Daily Mail newspaper on Wednesday that clean-up costs could hit $ 3 billion if the leak continues until August . 
This is based on BP 's estimate of around $ 950 million spent in the first 41 days after the explosion . 
However , Credit Suisse estimated in a research note on Wednesday that clean-up costs could total $ 15-23 billion . 
Other analysts put the number as low as the $ 2 billion estimated by Panmure Gordon 's Peter Hitchens . 
BP has agreed to compensate all those affected by the spill for all legitimate costs , even though under the law BP and its partners are only liable to pay up to $ 75 million . 
BP has undertaken to pay this money itself , rather than in conjunction with its partners , so the full liability may fall to it . 
BP has offered no estimate but Hitchens at Panmure said on Wednesday he estimates compensation claims will be $ 10 billion . 
Credit Suisse estimates this at $ 23 billion . 
BP BECOMES A TAKEOVER TARGET - UNLIKELY The collapse in its share price means BP could become a takeover target , Dougie Youngson , oil analyst at brokerage Arbuthnot said on Tuesday . 
However , most analysts do not expect this to happen . 
Exxon Mobil -LRB- XOM . 
N -RRB- , Royal Dutch Shell -LRB- RDSa . 
L -RRB- and Chevron -LRB- CVX . 
N -RRB- are the only fully publicly traded oil companies larger than BP and deemed financially strong enough to buy it . 
The U.S. government blocked the takeover of Asia-focused U.S. oil company Unocal by China 's CNOOC for strategic reasons , so most analysts doubt it would allow BP -- the largest oil producer in the Gulf of Mexico -- to be taken over by a state-backed oil company . 
Antitrust issues could arise over BP 's refineries if it were acquired by Exxon , Shell or Chevron , Alex Morris said . 
This could force the sale of the refineries but in the current depressed refining environment that would be difficult . 
BP 's significant U.S. gas production assets could also cause regulatory problems for any of the above , Jason Kenney at ING said . 
However , the biggest barriers to an acquirer making a move are the unknown liabilities that arise from the spill . 
`` It would be hard to see one of the other supermajors taking on such an unknown liability , '' Raymond James 's Morris said . 
Similarly , selling of BP piecemeal may not attract buyers because the individual parts would still be liable for the spill . 
Washington may also block any deal seen to strengthen anyone in the oil industry . 
`` The last thing that President -LRB- Barack -RRB- Obama needs today is `` bigger oil , '' ING 's Kenney said in a research note . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
But oil-auto companies have spent billions killing the real alternatives to oil-burning cars : solar power and plug-in Electric cars . 
We drive them every day , and make more electric on our rooftop than we need to drive 2000 miles per month -LRB- two Toyota NiMH RAV4-EV -RRB- . 
What 's stopping others from doing so ? 
Chevron-GM sued Toyota to kill use of NiMH Nickel batteries , the only proven battery that lasts longer than the life of the car ; and government opposes solar power , preferring to fund tax breaks and handouts to coal and nuke power scammers . 
Nickel-Metal Hydride is the only proven EV -LRB- Electric Vehicle -RRB- battery ; after 100K or 200K miles NiMH can be remelted down into new batteries without new mining . 
Instead of `` research '' , we need to start making and improving plug-in cars right now , not waiting for the perfect that never comes . 
Lowering cost is the name of the game . 
Solar power and plug-in cars is the only sustainable way to power individual autos . 
Running an EV 1000 miles per month takes only 250 kilo-Watt-hours of electric , about $ 25 worth ; about what two old refrigerators cost and about a third of the average home usage . 
It would take only a tenth of the average home roof -- 6 square yards -- to make 250 kWh per month , enough electric energy to run a plug-in car 1000 miles per month . 
Because solar power and plug-in cars would cut oil profits , Big Oil has used its financial power to strangle and delay use of these obviously simple and working alternative to oil and coal . 
No matter how many nuke or coal plants we build , it wo n't replace one drop of oil unless there are plug-in cars to use the electric ; but if we had plug-in cars , we would n't even need new power plants . 
The money not spent on oil pays for solar . 
We can make it happen . 
America 's largest open-pit coal mine is a witches cauldron of toxic waste and caustic destruction ; but if the ground were left alone , and covered with solar panels , we 'd get more electric energy from the same space -LRB- 28,000 acres -RRB- than we get from the coal . 
Instead of risking death in criminal coal mines , or skirting safety rules on oil rigs , the same workers could be manufacturing and installing solar panels and building and recycling electric plug-in cars and reforming their batteries . 
Electric cars are all powered with American electrons ; no electric is imported . 
Buying oil from people who hate us gives them our money and leaves only air and ground pollution , asthma and smog after it 's burned . 
If there were no alternative to oil-fired cars , the permanent lung damage caused by burning oil might be necessary ; but there IS an alternative , solar and plug-in cars . 
There is no higher cost than killing your kids lungs - and the Earth - to enrich Big Oil . 
it could happen to any company , that is new to the industry ? 
That will take years so the financial impact most likely will be divided on several years as for the valdez incident . 
In the end , with probable stricter regulations on offshore drilling as well as the fallout effects on higher liability costs , of which these costs will be passed on to each one of us , will this be enough to either force more alternative energy use or just make US production uncompetitive against foreign oil , ie . 
from the middle east ? 
The latter of which would be hypocritical , as the energy policy is to be more energy independent and keep US dollars at home to be put to good use in pumping up the nuclear industry that have probably backed so many key policy makers that would make everyone believe that nuclear power is clean and without risks vs. oil . 
Can anyone make sense of all this ??? This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
