This week , Congress is expected to commit hundreds of billions of taxpayer funds to a revitalization program to halt our financial hemorrhaging . 
Twenty years ago , in the midst of another financial crisis , I was part of a banking industry effort to solve the savings and loan problem . 
The result of that effort was the Resolution Trust Corporation , which , under Bill Seidman 's masterful leadership , cleaned up the S&L mess in 48 months . 
The situation then was very different . 
The S&L problem involved only one sector of the economy and was just 3 percent of gross domestic product . 
We were not so dependent on foreign savings , and the crushing pressure on our federal budget from tax policies and entitlements was far off . 
This crisis is many times larger than that created by the S&Ls . 
We are deeply dependent on savings from other countries , and our fiscal resources are limited and shrinking . 
One lesson is clear : If Congress commits money without firm principles to guide its use , the cost to taxpayers will be far higher and the economy will remain weaker longer . 
Before the 1989 legislation , efforts to stem losses growing inside the S&L industry lacked firm principles ; as a result , they did not remove the swelling tumor of losses and in some instances actually helped it grow . 
Here are five principles Congress needs to impose now : Put individual taxpayers first . 
The program needs to focus on keeping taxpayers in their homes , strengthening their local economies and protecting their savings . 
It has to help Americans broadly , not just a few , and certainly not the managers who got us into this mess . 
Minimize taxpayer costs over the long term . 
Short-term thinking created this crisis . 
Only long-term efforts will end it . 
The S&L crisis was limited to the financial sector . 
It was best addressed on an aggressive basis , bank by bank . 
This meant that least-cost resolutions were the way to go and that the RTC should buy and sell assets quickly , which it did . 
But the current situation is systemic . 
It involves our entire economy . 
This means the revitalization program should buy distressed assets early and plan to hold them for a long time . 
The goal is to make the economic adjustment as shallow as possible , to limit the injury to families , jobs , homes and savings . 
Avoid creating an interim program . 
This program must not be like the S&L `` rescues '' of the mid-1980s , which merely enabled the problems to grow . 
The program needs to have the capacity , flexibility and scope to address the vast size of the current crisis . 
Congress should put no dollar or time limit on our national commitment . 
Yes , markets will want dollar figures . 
If numbers must be given , let them be in statements about the program -- and let them be big . 
Do not shy away from saying that the United States is prepared to commit a trillion dollars over the next 10 years to halt this meltdown here and now . 
Remember global investors , whose confidence we must regain . 
This crisis is an economic heart attack , but not a fatal one . 
We must assure global investors that we are fully prepared to cover American losses . 
No one suggests that this will be easy . 
The budget choices being forced on us will be profoundly difficult . 
But we have the strongest democracy and the most durable legal and financial systems in the world . 
We have the capacity to absorb losses and the ability to reshape our economy . 
Foreign investors need evidence that we are committed to the changes necessary for recovery . 
When they see that , they will buy our private assets again . 
Bill Seidman 's greatest lesson was action . 
It is far better to deal with a few assets , even without knowing quite what to do , than to do nothing while trying to work out the details . 
Whoever is in charge of the revitalization program must not hesitate to buy the assets that institutions offer -- these will be what is burdening the institutions and clogging our credit system the most . 
There are many strategies for buying assets and infusing capital that can protect the program from paying too much and ensure that taxpayers benefit from price increases as recovery occurs . 
The key is to get the assets in-house quickly and learn how to manage them effectively . 
The writer is a managing partner of a global hedge fund and chairman of the Partnership for America 's Economic Success . 
As policy director of the American Bankers Association , he led a panel of bankers in developing a plan that became the RTC . 
