BP 's Gulf of Mexico oil well to be sealed ` by Sunday ' Adm Thad Allen says the well should be sealed within 96 hours BP 's ruptured oil well in the Gulf of Mexico is expected to be permanently sealed by Sunday . 
Adm Thad Allen , in charge of cleaning up the oil spill , has said a relief well , which has taken more than four months to drill , should intersect the damaged well later on Thursday . 
A mixture of mud and cement will then be pumped in , permanently sealing it . 
On Wednesday , the US said it would require oil firms to plug 3,500 non-producing Gulf of Mexico oil wells . 
`` We are within a 96-hour window of killing the well , '' former Coast Guard chief Adm Allen told reporters . 
No oil has spilled into the Gulf since a temporary cap was placed on the well in mid-July . 
Mud and cement were later pushed down through the top of the well , and the cap removed . 
The relief well is being drilled 2.5 miles -LRB- 4km -RRB- through dirt and rock beneath the sea floor so that the ruptured well can also be sealed from the bottom , ensuring it never causes a problem again . 
On Wednesday , the US government said it also wanted energy firms to dismantle hundreds of unused platforms to prevent potential leaks ; some installations have been sitting idle for decades without inspection for leaks . 
The new requirements are due to take effect in October . 
BP 's Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded in April , killing 11 people and causing one of the worst ecological disasters in US history , with nearly five million barrels of oil spilling into the Gulf . 
In London on Wednesday , BP 's departing boss Tony Hayward told MPs that the oil spill was `` devastating '' to him . 
`` I understand why people feel the way they do , and there is little doubt that the inability of BP , and the industry , to intervene to seal the leak ... was unacceptable . '' 
But he said it would be wrong to blame only BP . 
`` No single factor caused the accident , and multiple parties including BP , Halliburton and Transocean , were involved , '' he told MPs on the Commons Energy Committee . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
