MELBOURNE | Sat Mar 26 , 2011 12:02 pm GMT MELBOURNE -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Red Bull 's world champion Sebastian Vettel blew away his rivals in a dominant qualifying performance to claim pole position for the season-opening Australian Grand Prix on Saturday . 
The 23-year-old German set the quickest time in all three sessions and managed a searing best lap of one minute 23.529 seconds , 0.778 seconds quicker than second-placed Briton Lewis Hamilton . 
`` Although the gap now might appear to be big , it 's a long season and a lot of things can happen , '' said a cautious Vettel , who failed to finish the race here last year . 
`` It 's a good position to be in , and I 'm very happy with that -LRB- but -RRB- we need to keep our feet on the ground . '' 
Hamilton 's late lap of 1.24.307 in his McLaren knocked Vettel 's team mate Mark Webber -LRB- 1.24.395 -RRB- off the front row of the grid , leaving the Australian to line up alongside Jenson Button in the second McLaren -LRB- 1.24.779 -RRB- . 
Ferrari 's twice former world champion Fernando Alonso claimed a spot on the third row in fifth place next to Renault 's Vitaly Petrov , the best ever qualifying position for the Russian . 
Button , who will be gunning for a third successive win at Albert Park , conceded that Vettel had been untouchable . 
`` If you look at the pace of Sebastian , I mean they 're in a different league really in qualifying , whether it 's the same in the race I do n't know , '' said Button . 
`` We do n't really know what our pace is really going to be like in the race distance yet . '' 
McLaren struggled for reliability in testing and Hamilton paid tribute to the `` fantastic job '' done by the team to give their two British drivers a competitive car . 
`` Absolutely thrilled to be here today , we 've really got ourselves back on track and , although there 's a lot of work to do , we laid a fantastic base , '' the 2008 world champion said . 
Webber is aiming to become the first Australian to win his home grand prix and was clearly disappointed at being so far behind his team mate . 
`` I 'm not overly rapt to be third on the grid , '' he said . 
`` I was n't really in the fight for pole and I need to address that . '' 
German Nico Rosberg steered his Mercedes to seventh place on the grid ahead of Brazilian Felipe Massa on what was a disappointing day for Ferrari . 
`` Position we are happy , distance from pole we are not so happy , so it 's what we have to look at and analyze tonight , '' Spaniard Alonso said . 
German Michael Schumacher failed to fulfil the promise of good pre-season testing with Mercedes when he was unable to get through to the final session of qualifying by 0.089 seconds . 
`` After testing , coming to the first race we had expected certainly a different performance so naturally there is some disappointment , '' the seven-times world champion , who will start 11th , told the BBC . 
`` We do n't match this performance here and we need to understand why we do n't and that 's going to be the major job that we have in front of us . '' 
HRT 's Vitantonio Liuzzi and Narain Karthikeyan failed to get within 107 percent of the best time in the first qualifying session so will not be allowed to race . 
The struggling Spanish-based team 's appeal to the stewards was dismissed later on Saturday , leaving just 22 cars on the grid for Sunday 's race . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
