Syrians shout '' freedom '' during a protest at Dael region , near the city of Deraa , southern Syria , March 25 , 2011 . 
DERAA , Syria | Sat Mar 26 , 2011 11:08 pm GMT DERAA , Syria -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syrian security forces have killed six people in two days of anti-government protests in the key port city of Latakia , reformist activists living abroad told Reuters on Saturday . 
President Bashar al-Assad , facing his deepest crisis in 11 years in power after security forces fired on protesters on Friday in the southern town of Deraa , freed 260 prisoners in an apparent bid to placate a swelling protest movement . 
But the reports from Latakia , a security hub in the northwest , suggested unrest was still spreading . 
There were reports of more than 20 deaths in protests on Friday , mainly in the south , and medical officials say dozens have now been killed over the past week around Deraa alone . 
Such demonstrations would have been unthinkable a couple of months ago in this most tightly controlled of Arab countries . 
Bouthaina Shaaban , a senior adviser to Assad , told the official news agency that Syria was `` the target of a project to sow sectarian strife to compromise Syria and -LRB- its -RRB- unique coexistence model . '' 
Syrian rights activist Ammar Qurabi told Reuters in Cairo : `` There have been at least two killed -LRB- in Latakia -RRB- today after security forces opened fire on protesters trying to torch the Baath party building . '' 
`` I have been in touch with people in Syria since last night , using three cell phones and constantly sitting online . 
Events are moving at an extremely fast pace . '' 
Exiled dissident Maamoun al-Homsi told Reuters by telephone from Canada : `` I have the name of four martyrs who have fallen in Latakia yesterday . '' 
The state news agency quoted a government source as saying security forces had not fired at protesters but that an armed group had taken over rooftops and fired on citizens and security forces , killing five people since Friday . 
In Damascus and other cities , thousands of Assad 's supporters marched or and drove around , waving flags , to proclaim their allegiance to the Baath party . 
The unrest in Syria came to a head after police detained more than a dozen schoolchildren for scrawling graffiti inspired by pro-democracy protests across the Arab world . 
President Assad made a public pledge on Thursday to look into granting greater freedom and lifting emergency laws dating back to 1963 , but failed to dampen the protests . 
On Saturday a human rights lawyer said 260 prisoners , mostly Islamists , had been freed after serving at least three-quarters of their sentences . 
Amnesty International put the death toll in and around Deraa in the past week at 55 at least . 
In Sanamein , near Deraa , 20 protesters were shot dead on Friday , a resident told Al Jazeera . 
One unidentified doctor told CNN television that snipers had been shooting people in Deraa from atop government buildings . 
`` We had 30 people got shot in the head and the neck and we had hundreds of people got wounded , '' he said . 
`` We put two wounded in an ambulance sending them to the hospital . 
We had security forces stop the ambulances , get the wounded outside the ambulance and shoot them , and said : ` Now you can take them to the hospital ' . '' 
Some of the dead protesters were buried on Saturday in Deraa and nearby villages , residents said . 
Several thousand mourners prayed over the body of 13-year-old Seeta al-Akrad in Deraa 's Omari mosque , scene of an attack by security forces earlier in the week . 
Police were not in evidence when they marched to a cemetery chanting : `` The people want the downfall of the regime , '' a refrain heard in uprisings from Tunisia to Egypt and Yemen . 
Emboldened by the lack of security presence , the mourners also chanted : `` Strike , strike , until the regime falls ! '' 
Abu Jassem , a Deraa resident , said : `` We were under a lot of pressure from the oppressive authority , but now when you pass by -LRB- the security forces -RRB- , nobody utters a word . 
They do n't dare talk to the people . 
The people have no fear any more . '' 
In nearby Tafas , mourners in the funeral procession of Kamal Baradan , killed on Friday in Deraa , set fire to Baath party offices and the police station , residents said . 
There were also protests on Friday in Damascus and in Hama , a northern city where in 1982 the forces of president Hafez al-Assad , Bashar 's father , killed thousands of people and razed much of the old quarter to put down an armed uprising by the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood . 
Syria 's establishment is dominated by members of the minority Alawite sect , an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam , a fact that causes resentment among the Sunni Muslims who make up some three-quarters of the population . 
Latakia is mostly Sunni Muslim but has significant numbers of Alawites . 
Edward Walker , a former U.S. ambassador to Egypt , said sectarian friction made many in the establishment wary of giving ground to demands for political freedoms and economic reforms . 
`` They are a basically reviled minority , the Alawites , and if they lose power , if they succumb to popular revolution , they will be hanging from the lamp posts , '' he said . 
`` They have absolutely no incentive to back off . '' 
Asked if there could be a crackdown on the scale of Hama , Faysal Itani , deputy head of Middle East and North Africa Forecasting at Exclusive Analysis , said this was a `` real risk . '' 
`` For a minority regime this is an existential struggle , '' he said . 
`` If the unrest continues at this pace , the Syrian army is not going to be able to maintain cohesion . '' 
Many believed a tipping point had been reached . 
`` The Syrian regime is attempting to make promises such as a potential lifting of the state of emergency , which has been in place since 1963 , a record in the Arab world , '' Bitar said . 
`` But if this happens it will be the end of a whole system , prisoners will have to be released , the press will be free ... when this kind of regime considers relaxing its grip , it also knows that everything could collapse . '' 
Central Bank Governor Adeeb Mayaleh said the central bank was ready to supply the market with foreign currency liquidity , hinting at rising demand for U.S. dollars . 
Syria has a close alliance with Iran and links to the Palestinian Islamist militant group Hamas and the Lebanese Shi'ite political and military group Hezbollah . 
Its allies in the region have yet to comment on the unrest . 
`` Syria is Iran 's main ally in the Arab world . 
A fall of the regime would have consequences for Hezbollah and Hamas ... I 'm not sure that the region 's big powers would allow such a big shock , '' said Karim Emile Bitar , research fellow at the Institute for International and Strategic Relations in Paris . 
Syrian border police were stopping a number of Syrians entering from Lebanon , a Lebanese security source said . 
-LRB- Reporting by a Reuters correspondent in Deraa , Yara Bayoumy in Beirut , Arshad Mohammed in Washington , Lionel Laurent in Paris , William Maclean in London ; Dina Zayed in Cairo ; Writing by Peter Millership and Kevin Liffey ; editing by Ralph Boulton -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
