Comparisons between today 's financial crisis and the 1930s are looking less strained by the day . 
So what better to lighten the tension than to revive everybody 's favorite Depression-era board game , Monopoly ? 
SOURCES : RealtyTrac , Standard & Poor 's , The Economist , The Financial Times , International Monetary Fund , Bank for International Settlements Three reasons why Monopoly is the perfect symbol of the financial crisis ... Loose money . 
Monopoly games start swimming in money , which is briefly mopped up as the players buy everything in sight . 
But then money starts to flood the system again , courtesy of the mysterious Banker who hands out cash to everyone who passes `` Go '' . 
The game is one big property boom , funded by an overly generous central banker -- a diagnosis many economists would also apply to the sub-prime crisis . 
Alan Greenspan , the Fed chairman who presided over the boom , was nine when Monopoly was widely published . 
It is not known whether he played the game as a child , but he seems to have taken inspiration from it somehow . 
Vague and constantly-changing rules . 
Most enterprising kids treat Monopoly the way enterprising investment bankers treat the financial system , quickly making up their own rules and striking side-deals insuring each other against catastrophe . 
These side-deals now add up to a nerve-wracking $ 596 trillion , more than forty times the size of the US economy . 
Monopoly 's rules on buying unwanted assets at auction are disturbingly vague -- the Banker is simply empowered to run the auction . 
Perhaps Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson , who now has $ 700bn to spend in a similarly vague set of auctions , is also a Monopoly fan . 
For all Monopoly 's merits , fans complain about the way it tends to end in a slow capitulation , one player after another dropping out as ever greater sums of money slosh around unpredictably between an ever smaller group of people . 
Remind you of anything ? 
... and three reasons why Monopoly led us all astray . 
Any Monopoly property can be instantly re-mortgaged to raise cash . 
The bank never refuses , and never frets about illiquidity or negative equity . 
The world of 2006 looked much like the world of Monopoly in that respect , but it is no longer quite so easy to persuade banks to hand out mortgages . 
Monopoly 's rules note that the Banker can not go bankrupt ; they grant him the power to issue as much money as necessary `` in the form of IOUs written on ordinary paper '' . 
Sometimes the banks behaved as though that rule applied to them . 
Monopoly is a game of risk-taking , but a game in which the risks can be precisely calculated . 
Monopoly 's dice rolls are known unknowns , and skilled Monopoly players know the risks of landing on any square and take them into account when crafting their strategies -LRB- hint : buy the Orange properties -RRB- . 
The wizards of Wall Street have to deal in unknown unknowns . 
As they crafted their credit derivatives , they thought that they understood the risk of a loss in the same way that a Monopoly player knows the risk of throwing three doubles in a row . 
