Historians identify changes in eras in terms of decades , even centuries . 
Commentators are a much more impatient bunch : A few weeks of turmoil on Wall Street , a year of the credit crunch , and they 've formed an instant consensus that a new era has begun , that points have turned or tipped or gushed over a watershed . 
This consensus , on both sides of the Atlantic , has formed around four themes . 
One is the idea that the dividing line between the market and the state , between conservative economic thinking and progressive intervention , will now shift decisively away from the market . 
A second is that America 's status as a free-market beacon and provider of the dollar standard will decline sharply . 
A third idea is that this Western economic crisis is going to confirm , and probably accelerate , the shift in economic power to Asia , and in particular to China . 
And when you put those three themes together , you get a fourth : that authoritarian nations , where the state runs the economy and where the political leaders are instinctively hostile to America , are going to become stronger , both internally and as role models . 
The haste with which this agreement has been reached should make us suspicious . 
It 's time to wonder whether all four of these themes may be wrong . 
In fact , it 's time to wonder whether the ultimate consequence of this economic turmoil could be the precise opposite of what 's expected . 
Consider each of the agreed-upon themes in turn . 
The last big financial crisis -- in fact the biggest stock and real estate collapse -- to have occurred in any large industrial economy since 1929 was the one that began in Japan in 1990-91 . 
Did that lead to a decisive shift in the balance between the state and the market ? 
Yes , it did : It pushed Japan far more toward the market and away from state intervention and regulation . 
The reason , in part , was that the collapse destroyed the Japanese bureaucracy 's reputation . 
-LRB- In the United States , it is bankers ' reputations that have suffered , along with Alan Greenspan 's . -RRB- 
But the biggest reason was pragmatic : The cost of rescuing the financial system and supporting the economy was so high that it left the annual budget deeply in deficit . 
With gross government debt at 180 percent of GDP -LRB- Washington 's is now about 90 percent -RRB- there was little choice but to cut the state back . 
In the United States , the cost so far of recapitalizing the banks , taking control of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and so on has been smaller than the Japanese expenditure : 5 percent or so of GDP here vs. 20 to 24 percent in Japan . 
That extra debt and a higher deficit will extend government , but it will also constrain other spending by the new administration and Congress . 
There will almost certainly be a fresh fiscal stimulus package after Jan. 20 , perhaps focusing on rebuilding infrastructure . 
But other projects will have to be put on hold . 
In the medium term , the net effect on the government 's financial role may turn out to be neutral , unless a potential President Obama succeeds in persuading Congress to finance his scheme for universal health care . 
In Europe , however , the extra debts and deficits being taken on in Britain , France , Germany and elsewhere are already larger than those in the United States and are being piled onto already overloaded public finances . 
There , the Japanese outcome is a real possibility : Rather than extend the state , these extra burdens could in fact give a powerful push to pro-market , state-trimming reform . 
Europe had already been moving in that direction under leaders such as Nicolas Sarkozy in France and Angela Merkel in Germany ; this crisis may well accelerate that process considerably . 
Yes , regulation of banking and other financial firms is likely to increase , as it has in Japan . 
But that is quite a technical matter of capital-adequacy rules and the treatment of derivative securities , not the stuff of new eras and paradigm shifts . 
What of the second theme , of a post-American world with a shrinking role for the dollar , analogous to the demise of sterling and of Britain 's economic and financial status after 1945 ? 
The first point to be made is that the dollar 's role in global foreign-exchange reserves was much smaller in 1990 -LRB- 50 percent of global reserves -RRB- than it is today -LRB- about 63 percent -RRB- , so even a fresh decline in its use would not be path-breaking . 
The second is to ask what the alternative is : the euro , the currency of a region that has gone into recession more quickly than the United States , and whose banks are just as troubled ? 
And not , certainly , China 's yuan , unless that country 's leaders are poised to surprise us all by making it convertible and reducing controls on capital flows , both of which are necessary before a currency can take on reserve status . 
By default , the dollar is likely to keep its leading role . 
Whether the United States will again be a beacon of economic policy and performance depends on how bad its recession proves to be and on how well it adjusts to a new period of higher household savings and lower consumption and debt . 
It depends , too , on how American politics respond to rising unemployment and whether Congress tries to move sharply away from fairly open trade and toward protectionism . 
That 's what happened in the recession of the 1980s . 
Membership in the new World Trade Organization will make that much harder , however , as will either a President Obama or a President McCain , both of whom profess to be multilateralists . 
China will certainly be an issue for the new Congress and administration : Its extraordinary current-account surplus of 10 percent of GDP , its slowing but still rapid growth -LRB- down to `` just '' 10 percent a year from 12.9 percent -RRB- , its accumulation of capital in its sovereign investment funds could all provoke resentment , envy and fear . 
But will its global status and role really , as the third theme claims , be strengthened by this Western economic crisis ? 
It could be : If China 's leaders were to abide by Western recommendations and revalue the yuan while also increasing public spending to stimulate the domestic economy , the country could become a crucial source of import demand for the world . 
That , however , requires China 's domestic interests to become neatly aligned with global interests , for it is those internal interests with which its leadership is principally concerned . 
And even reflation and revaluation would not make China an American-style buyer of last resort , because its economy is German-size , not American-size -- $ 3.2 trillion as opposed to $ 13.8 trillion for the United States . 
Moreover , China 's leadership has other preoccupations besides seeking loftier global status . 
Thanks to its capital controls , its savings surplus and its state-controlled banking system , China is well insulated from the Western financial crisis -LRB- unlike India , where companies ' foreign debts are high and private banks are getting squeezed -RRB- . 
Its low-end exporters , however -- cheap labor and high-volume industries such as toys and textiles -- are already in trouble due to both rising wages and a higher valuation for the yuan since 2005 . 
Other export industries now look set to lose business as Western markets shrink . 
Meanwhile , public concern about pollution , combined with political fears about dependency on imported resources , is bringing about a new emphasis on efficiency and , to some extent , tighter environmental controls . 
