According to the Guardian ; William Hague , the -LRB- UK -RRB- foreign secretary , approved the botched plan to send a team of armed diplomats and SAS -LRB- Special Air Service -RRB- soldiers into eastern Libya in an effort to build diplomatic contacts with anti-Gaddafi rebels . 
The eight M16 officers and SAS soldiers were arrested then deported after only two days in the country . 
The prime minister 's official spokesman was reluctant to reveal details , partly due to the involvement of special forces , but told a briefing Hague had approved the operation `` in the normal way '' . 
How could that happen to a British delegation that was trying to help ? 
Hague 's statement at the Commons created more questions than answers . 
He said : On 5 March opposition groups in the East formed an Interim National Council based in Benghazi . 
Ministers and FCO -LRB- Foreign and Commonwealth Office -RRB- officials are in contact with members of this Council , who welcomed the idea of a British diplomatic mission to Libya ... Last week I authorised the despatch of a small British diplomatic team to Eastern Libya , in uncertain circumstances which we judged required their protection , to build on these initial contacts and to assess the scope for closer diplomatic dialogue . 
I pay tribute to that team . 
They were withdrawn yesterday after a serious misunderstanding about their role leading to their temporary detention . 
The British opposition smells blood . 
Shadow Foreign Secretary , Douglas Alexander is accusing the government of `` serial bungling , '' saying that `` The British public are entitled to wonder whether , if some new neighbors moved into the Foreign Secretary 's street , he would introduce himself by ringing the doorbell or instead choose to climb over the fence in the middle of the night ? '' 
Menzies Campbell , a former opposition leader from the Liberal Democrats , called the mission `` ill-conceived , poorly planned and embarrassingly executed . '' 
But that 's just rhetoric at the Commons . 
It 's part of the usual thrust and parry of British politics , and it 's internal . 
The real embarrassment for Britain was played out across TV screens in Tripoli . 
Here 's what happened : 10 Downing Street 's man in Libya was called in to explain what the `` diplomats '' were doing in eastern Libya . 
British Ambassador Richard Northern spoke to a rebel leader to explain the mission . 
And , you guessed it , the call was intercepted by Gadhafi 's regime and duly found its way to Libyan state television on Sunday . 
Now all of Libya will have a very different take on James Bond . 
The whole fiasco makes it ever more important for countries to think very carefully before they engage with Libya . 
There 's also the question of who you 're dealing with in Libya -- Gadhafi himself , or the varied opposition groups that are rising up in arms ? 
And how will they respond ? 
As U.S. Defense Secretary Gates testified at a House hearing last week , discussing no-fly zones without fully understanding the repercussions is just '' loose talk . '' 
The British military like ours have absolutely no business in Libya except for humanitarian purposes . 
We need to stay out of Libya 's civil war and stop instigating the insurrection there and let the chips fall where they may . 
March 7 , 2011 at 9:29 pm | Reply Actually , I believe you will find that as fighting began to break out it was the Royal Navy -LRB- part of the British military -RRB- Which rescued Us citizens living in Libya , as well as British , French and other foreign nationals , or do you think the UK left US citizens to become collateral damage ? 
Of course it might be the ` business ' of a different country to rescue our people ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:19 pm | Reply Who can rule out Al Quida , Jehad or other Muslim Fundamentalists behind Libya Freedom Fighters Movement ? 
col Gadhafi was fighting against those forces otherwise Libya already may be Muslim fundamentalist country ! 
What is better for Libyan people is better for world . 
I think Libyan people like Gadhafi over Muslim Fundamentalist Regime . 
So Libyan issue is complex thing which need to handle very carefully without allowing any blood bath there . 
March 19 , 2011 at 12:21 pm | Reply To the Editor , CNN March 7 2011 There is an ongoing debate and Republican Party pressure on Pres. Obama to intervene militarily on the side of the Rebels in Libya . 
Another suggestion is to create a No-Fly zone . 
Defense Secretary Gates has rightly labeled this as ` Loose Talk ' . 
In case US acts without concurrence and active participation of the World Powers and without a UN Security Council Resolution backing such action , and if Gaddafi survives the rebellion , we will have created a problem for the world as Libya exports 12 % of the worlds petroleum exports . 
And our military participation on the Libyan Rebels side might create expectations in the other democratic\/rebel movements in the Middle East . 
Libya is not our business plain and simple , the Libyans must engage in their own self-determination efforts as bloody as it may become . 
The Republicans will just need to chill on this latest opportinity to engage in war-profiteering for their favored corporate interests , our goverment needs to spend money on people , infrastructure , research and development here at home . 
March 9 , 2011 at 3:23 pm | Reply Yes you are correct , british and french rulers playing political games in the trouble waters . 
How can Leaders who ca n't solve domestic economic and social issues solve international complex problems ! 
March 19 , 2011 at 12:28 pm | March 8 , 2011 at 9:21 am | Reply The USA is still the worlds strongest economy , much like the UK before WW2 . 
China is growing , very strong economy , like the USA before WW2 . 
Before WW2 Great Britain was the worlds richest country , and spent all of its wealth -LRB- and lost its empire -RRB- during the war . 
The United States an upcoming great power did not get involved in the war for two years , preferring to sell arms to the UK , in order to make money . 
In fact it took a direct assault an US sovereign territory to provoke the nation to fight , rather than turn a profit . 
Asking China to get involved is ridiculous , if the USA is allowed to profit from a war -LRB- a slightly more important one in terms of human rights and world peace -RRB- , why not China ? 
After WW2 The United States was the only major participant to have made a profit , largely by sitting on the side and letting British , Soviet , and free European soldiers do the fighting . 
These days the USA posses the worlds largest armed forces and strongest national economy , like the British Empire before WW2 , why cant the USA make a stand and fight against Libya , like Britain against The third Reich , after all , Libya is n't as powerful a country as Nazi Germany was is it ? 
Or is the US government still afraid to fight the bad guys ? 
March 9 , 2011 at 6:24 pm | Reply Now that 's just BS . 
We saved your a $ $ es from getting kicked by the Nazis . 
No matter how long it took us to get into the war , its obvious that we were the ones who helped the most to end it . 
March 10 , 2011 at 9:13 am | Best solution is to send multinational peace keeping troups after permanent cease fire . 
China , Russia , India , Germany and others will support it . 
But UK , France & USA want to see blood in Libya like allied forces killed thousands of civilians by areial bombardments ! 
Civilized world should not allow this to happen again in any country . 
Gadhafi is Dictator but he is better than Islamic Fundamentalists . 
World can foce Gadhafi to go for democratic reforms which they have signalled to do in the future . 
Majority Libyan people like to see Gadhafi become prodemocratic than to power is transfer to Islamic Fundamentalists ! 
So it is complex issue . 
March 19 , 2011 at 12:38 pm | The British SAS was conducting `` special operations '' in Basra , Iraq a few years ago . 
They dressed up as Arabs and were shooting at a police station . 
They got arrested for doing this and then the British sent in tanks to `` rescue '' them from jail . 
I wonder what sort of hijinks they had planned for Libya ? 
March 8 , 2011 at 10:42 am | Reply It s really great that people are sharing this inmforation . 
July 17 , 2011 at 1:01 pm | Reply Protesters , if you want Obama 's change & America 's freedoms sing ` OBAMA FOR THE WORLD ' ! 
Obama is a light , Obama is so right , For America , For The World ! 
Hey , CNN , pay a few dollars for real editors , will you ? 
Does your house sit on a `` floudation ? '' 
Are you sticking to `` fludamental principals ? '' 
A `` flouder '' is a fish . 
Unless you meant to say the SAS team was flopping around like a fish , the verb you want is `` founder , '' is in , `` the leaking ship foundered on the rocks . '' 
Derived from the Latin `` fundus , '' bottom - as in , where a ship -LRB- or covert team -RRB- goes when it founders . 
March 9 , 2011 at 2:33 pm | Reply to struggle with stumbling or plunging movements -LRB- usually followed by about , along , on , through , etc. -RRB- : He saw the child floundering about in the water . 
to struggle clumsily or helplessly : He floundered helplessly on the first day of his new job . 
Please at least look up definitions before you post your incorrect thoughts on word usage . 
March 9 , 2011 at 4:07 pm | Reply Hahaha , The game has just started . 
Libyan people think twice . 
This guys never care about your life s , they are after your crude . 
To get control of OPEC March 22 , 2011 at 3:36 am | Reply -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email . 
What #Pope Benedict leaves behind : Kathleen Sprows Cummings gives her take on GPS : bit . 
ly\/11C7KM4 Poor sanitation , water supply cause economic losses of about $ 260 billion annually in developing nations : World Bank bit . 
ly\/11Bw3d6 3:44 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET `` Since peaking in 2009 at 10.1 % of GDP , U.S. budget deficit has fallen . 
This year , CBO says , it will be 5.3 % '' : Cassidy nyr . 
kr\/12tXrci 12:35 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET What has #China banned TV advertisements for ? 
Try the GPS weekly quiz to find out : bit . 
ly\/Y4AvJ6 9:32 am ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Five Arab leaders give their take on regional issues on GPS this Sunday at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. ET on CNN 
