Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi took aim at the rebel-controlled town of Ras Lanuf Monday , launching aerial strikes as part of an assault aimed at crushing the uprising against him . 
At the end of the third week of unrest -- protests began February 15 -- Gadhafi 's aerial forces targeted the main road heading into the oil town after launching another air strike earlier , five kilometers southeast of the city . 
In what has turned into a civil war , members of the opposition fired anti-aircraft guns toward Gadhafi 's planes . 
Some families fled Ras Lanuf , hoping to escape the violence that has engulfed some of the country 's most populous areas . 
Meanwhile , U.K. Foreign Secretary William Hague said `` there are credible reports of the use of helicopter gunships against civilians by government forces . '' 
Three members of the U.N. Security Council -- France , Britain , and the United States -- were working Monday on a possible resolution that would include language on a no-fly zone over Libya , diplomatic sources at the United Nations said . 
But any kind of military intervention could face sharp criticism from Russia and China , two permanent members of the council that wield veto power . 
U.S. President Barack Obama said Monday he had a `` very clear message to those who are around Col. Gadhafi : It is their choice to make how they operate moving forward and they will be held accountable for whatever violence continues to take place there . '' 
`` We 've got NATO as we speak consulting in Brussels around a wide range of potential options , including potential military options , in response to the violence that continues to take place inside Libya , '' he said . 
In a statement , NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said NATO did not intend to intervene in Libya , but `` as a defense Alliance and a security organization , it is our job to conduct prudent planning for any eventuality . '' 
NATO has begun around-the-clock surveillance flights of Libya , as it considers options for dealing with the Libyan violence , U.S. Ambassador to NATO Ivo Daalder told reporters Monday . 
While the opposition has managed to fight off onslaughts by Gadhafi 's forces in some places -- including what a witness described as an `` amazing '' victory against Gadhafi 's heavy artillery Sunday in the town of Misrata -- the regime has advanced as well . 
Gadhafi 's forces seemed to make headway in the city of Bin Jawad , where the Libyan army appeared to have control Monday after fighting over the weekend . 
