2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
The unrest has been going on for weeks and is affecting oil prices worldwide as gas prices have spiked in recent weeks . 
Check out CNN 's reporting around Libya , city by city . 
On Monday , air strikes continued to target the opposition-controlled oil town of Ras Lanuf as Gadhafi supporters tried to take back the city . 
CNN correspondent Ben Wedeman was just outside Ras Lanuf and heard someone say , `` We 'll capture -LRB- Gadhafi -RRB- , put him on top of this car and drive all around Libya . 
Every Libyan will get one shot -LRB- at the leader -RRB- . '' 
Wedeman was one of the first journalists inside the country when the protests began , and he reports on who will be fighting in the conflict . 
CNN 's Nic Robertson reports that fighting is getting closer to the Libyan capital of Tripoli . 
Also Monday , as several families in Ras Lanuf fled for cover , Gadhafi 's forces made headway in the city of Bin Jawad , which was hotly fought over during the weekend . 
Anti-government protesters have been rallying for weeks in the hopes that Gadhafi , who has ruled the country for 42 years , will leave power . 
Similar uprisings occurred earlier this year in Egypt and Tunisia , and other protests have raged throughout the Middle East and North Africa as demonstrators have called for changes in leadership and power structures in their countries . 
What 's next in Libya ? 
Do you have a story that relates to the country ? 
Hearings on radical Islam - Over the weekend , protesters demonstrated in New York ahead of congressional hearings on radical Islam scheduled for this week . 
Other critics of the hearings include music mogul Russell Simmons . 
The topic is sure to remain hot all week as CNN covers every angle of the debate . 
Rep. Peter King , chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee , called the for hearings on what is being called `` the radicalization of American Muslims . '' 
Critics say the hearings would unfairly target Islam and could stoke fear and fuel violence against Muslims . 
King and Rep. Keith Ellison , who is the first Muslim elected to Congress , talked about the reasons for the hearings on CNN on Sunday with Candy Crowley . 
Freedom Project begins - CNN has launched its Freedom Project , a first-of-its-kind global effort to draw attention to and end all forms of slavery around the world , including in the United States . 
See what the project is about , and read the first story in the series . 
It 's about a group of boys from Zambia who were trafficked into the U.S. to make money for a faith-based organization . 
The boys saw little profit for their work and were not given the education or school in their home country that they were promised . 
Have you noticed how one-sided the right-wing news media handled the Civil War in Libya ? 
I have and I find that gross how they keep cheering each `` rebel '' victory while castigating Mohammar Qadaffi . 
Obama hopes to get another pro-Western stooge to goven Libya and I guess that a lot of ignoramuses hope he does , too !!! March 7 , 2011 at 12:12 pm | Report abuse | I do n't know why I posted the above . 
Ya , I was about to say it seemed as though , you were in a trance of some kind . 
I almost fell into one my self reading it . 
March 8 , 2011 at 6:43 am | Report abuse | There is no right-wing news media . 
What is that fake RuffNutt talking abou ? 
Any hot bods on here today . 
Me need luby duby . 
I 'm sick and tired of all the bias from the right-wing media , especially the bad rap that they 're giving Mohammar Qaddaffi . 
I for one , hope that the `` rebels '' fail as I 'm afraid of seeing another pro-Western stooge come to power in the Middle East . 
March 7 , 2011 at 6:46 pm | Report abuse | Now who wants to become a KKK member when they can join the Tea Party Movement ? 
Both have the same agenda ! 
And you 're using their lingo . 
March 7 , 2011 at 10:08 pm | Report abuse | 40yrs of being the leader of his country and now libyans and america saying he must go kadafi is right u want me out then take me out u c ~ ~ k suckers -LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
