A rebel runs for cover during a government airstrike in the area of Ras Lanuf , Libya , on Monday . 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman recounts moments before , after air strikes in area of Ras Lanuf , Libya Wedeman : Journalists in hotel awakened early Monday amid fear of government attack CNN crew drove within eyesight of what probably was Libyan army Editor 's note : CNN 's Ben Wedeman filed this first-person account of the scene in rebel-controlled Ras Lanuf , Libya , as Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi 's forces prepared to launch an aerial strike against the town Monday . 
Ras Lanuf , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- `` Down ! 
the man at my hotel room door said . 
It was 4:30 a.m. Monday in Ras Lanuf , and I had hoped to get a decent night 's sleep for the first time in weeks . 
Yet again , my hopes were dashed . 
Through the haze of sleep deprivation and exhaustion , I could say nothing . 
The staff of the Fadeel Hotel was going from room to room , telling guests -- journalists only -- that they had to leave , at once . 
I quickly dressed , packed my bag , and went downstairs . 
It was still pitch black outside , and the lobby was teeming with still photographers , cameramen , translators , fixers , producers and print and TV reporters , all trying to understand why the urgent need to leave . 
Libya conflict moves closer to capital The young and inexperienced go to war Opposition at work in Benghazi Thousands trying to leave Libya There were plenty of rumors , and no facts . 
Gadhafi is using poison gas ! '' 
one of the fighters told me . 
`` The army is coming here , they 'll be here soon , '' said another . 
`` You must go now , '' the hotel manager told me . 
`` It 's not safe in Ras Lanuf . '' 
The television in the lobby was tuned to the Arabic satellite news channel Al-Arabiya , which was flashing that Libyan government forces had taken up defensive positions around Ras Lanuf , which had been taken over by anti-Qaddafi rebels two days before . 
The rebels had advanced beyond Ras Lanuf , by about 30 kilometers , to the town of Bin Jawad , but were pushed out within hours . 
Their advance westward , begun in the refinery town of Al-Brega , had come to a screeching halt . 
And now it was beginning to look as if the tide was turning . 
As we waited in the lobby , I had visions of the Libyan army pulling up outside the hotel , rounding us all up and taking us back to Tripoli , hands bound and blindfolded , to be put on trial . 
Libyan state television had announced that all journalists who had entered the country from Egypt without visas would be considered outlaws and , worse , collaborators with al Qaeda . 
As the first Western television journalist to enter Libya from Egypt during the current crisis , I had reliable information I was high on Tripoli 's wanted list . 
I watched as the Ras Lanuf press corps bundled into cars , or onto the back of pickup trucks , and drove away in the dark . 
We decided to wait until first light before moving . 
In the meantime , the hotel staff was removing the big flat-screen TV in the lobby , and desktop computers and printers from behind the reception desk and back offices . 
After the other journalists had left , the cleaning staff -- migrant workers from Bangladesh -- cleared away dozens of paper coffee cups , mopped the floor and emptied ashtrays overflowing with the butts of dozens of jumpy journalists . 
When it became light , instead of going east -- away from the supposedly advancing Libyan army -- we and a crew from the BBC went west , toward Bin Jawad , to see if there was any truth to the claims Gadhafi 's men were on the move . 
Libya witness : Rockets on the ground Searching the Gadhafi family tree We drove slowly , stopping regularly to survey the terrain , to ask any fighters along the way about what they had seen and what they knew about the front lines . 
The few we met assured us the government forces were still on the outskirts of Bin Jawad and were n't moving forward . 
It was disconcerting , however , that as we continued to drive , there was almost no one to speak with . 
The usual gatherings of boisterous , friendly rebel fighters gathered around cars , pickup trucks and Chinese - and Soviet-made anti-aircraft guns were nowhere to be seen . 
The road was almost empty . 
We stopped one last time about five kilometers east of Bin Jawad . 
Three kilometers away we could see something blocking the road . 
The BBC crew , who had a bigger and better camera , went a bit further to get a better look , but after about five minutes came racing back , lights flashing . 
Meanwhile , we heard a jet overhead . 
We 'd had two close misses with bombs a few days before , so we jumped to the side of the road , ready to lie flat in the sand in case they bombed again . 
In the distance we heard the loud , hollow pop of anti-aircraft fire . 
The plane flew in a wide arch twice above us , but dropped no bombs . 
When it flew on , we regrouped with the BBC crew , who recounted that while videotaping down the road , a shot had been fired over their heads . 
The cameraman said he saw in his viewfinder vehicles pointing east toward Ras Lanuf , and men who were all wearing identical uniforms . 
That did n't sound like the motley opposition forces . 
And if they had been opposition forces , they would have opened fire with everything they had on the jet above . 
But they did n't . 
In other words , those dots down the road were probably soldiers from the Libyan Army . 
Driving back toward Ras Lanuf , we saw a huge plume of black smoke and brown dust a few kilometers up ahead . 
Libyan Air Force jets were attempting to bomb rebel targets again . 
It was just one of many such air strikes in the area Monday . 
Along the main Benghazi-Tripoli road that skirts Ras Lanuf , we found groups of opposition fighters chanting and joking about Gadhafi `` the dog , '' Gadhafi `` the donkey , '' but it was beginning to all ring hollow . 
There seemed to be less of them about , and fewer and fewer appeared to be moving to the front . 
We returned to the hotel in mid-afternoon . 
It was open again , but the staff had fled . 
The new `` staff '' was comprised of men and teenagers with machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades . 
They were going from room to room , turning on the TVs , using the bathrooms , calling to their friends from the balconies . 
In the parking lot outside , they regularly fired rounds from their automatic weapons . 
Although I did n't see it , a print reporter friend told me they had spent much of the afternoon smoking hashish . 
To borrow a line from one of my old scripts , `` morale is high , and so are the troops . '' 
In the coffee shop , more fighters were crowded behind the bar , helping themselves to whatever was available , handing out bowls of cornflakes with milk and chocolate syrup . 
Pickup trucks had pulled up in front of the hotel , and they were loading them with food and crockery from the kitchen . 
Theoretically , I suppose , they were commandeering supplies for opposition forces in the area . 
All the while , they were eager to reassure the few journalists who had returned in the hopes of spending another night in the Fadeel Hotel that all was well , that they would be safe , that they would sleep soundly . 
The more insistent their reassurances , however , the more tenuous the prospect of a night at the hotel became . 
The thought of stoned adolescents armed to the teeth stumbling around the halls at night , in addition to the very real possibility of a nighttime assault by the Libyan army on Ras Lanuf , was more than even the most battle-hardened war correspondents cared to ponder . 
The CNN crew was among the last guests to leave the hotel just after sunset . 
There was no need to settle the bill or return the keys . 
