'' Follow The World Desk On : Chiefs of World Bank and International Monetary Fund to Miss United Nations Forum UNITED NATIONS , Nov. 24 -- The chiefs of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have declined to participate in a major U.N. conference next week on the financing of development assistance for poor countries , upsetting an effort to secure high-level attendance at a meeting aimed at goading the beleaguered financial giants into stepping up aid . 
World Bank President Robert B. Zoellick and IMF chief Dominique Strauss-Kahn confirmed Monday that they will not lead their agencies ' delegation at a four-day conference in Doha , Qatar , beginning Saturday . 
But they will send senior advisers and remain committed to the goals of the conference , which will be attended by all of the 192 U.N. members , said officials from the two financial institutions . 
Some top U.N. officials were visibly infuriated by what they viewed as a snub of Secretary General Ban Ki-moon . 
One official accused Zoellick of trying to ensure that the major decisions on the financial crisis would be made by the less unwieldy Group of 20 nations , which met in Washington on Nov. 15 to try to coordinate international response to the meltdown . 
`` It 's fair to say that the secretary general was very disappointed and does n't understand completely '' why they will not be attending , the official said . 
Ban had envisioned the Doha meeting as a forum that would allow a broader group of countries , including some of the poorest , to have a say in the way the economic powerhouses respond to the crisis . 
He hoped the leaders of the main financial institutions would help him drive home the message that donor countries must not reduce development assistance , officials said . 
Donor countries acknowledge that `` there is a moral obligation not to cut back because this crisis , after all , was not made in the poorest countries in the world , '' said Kemal Dervis , executive director of the U.N. Development Program . 
`` It was due to some failures of markets and of regulations in the richer parts of the world . '' 
The Doha meeting is a follow-up to the 2002 International Conference on Financing for Development , in which more than 50 world leaders , including President Bush , gathered in Monterrey , Mexico , to galvanize international support for aid to poor countries . 
But the Doha review conference comes as the world is facing its worst economic crisis in a generation . 
Dervis said that there will be a deep recession in 2009 and that every industrialized nation will see its gross domestic product shrink by 0.5 percent to 1 percent . 
`` It 's clear we 're heading toward a very difficult 2009 , '' he said , referring to the economy . 
`` This kind of volatility has never been seen before . '' 
Oscar de Rojas , executive secretary of the conference , said the crisis has had a chilling effect on negotiations leading to the summit . 
He said delegates negotiating a 96-page outcome document in the basement of U.N. headquarters this week remain deadlocked on several issues , including language calling on states to increase their commitments to aid or accelerating spending on prior commitments . 
He said negotiations probably will resume in Doha . 
Rojas said Monday that Zoellick provided no formal explanation for why he will not attend the conference . 
Senior U.N. officials said he had informed Ban that the gathering conflicted with Thanksgiving plans . 
One U.N. official said Zoellick has been pressing world leaders to restrict deliberations on the financial crisis to the G-20 countries . 
In a letter to G-20 members , Zoellick proposed they set up a steering group of finance ministers , drawn from top industrialized and developed nations that control most of the world 's GDP and energy production , to manage the global response to the crisis . 
`` While bringing the rising economic powers to the table is clearly necessary , I suggest considering something new , not just an expansion of the old , '' Zoellick wrote . 
Geetanjali Chopra , a World Bank spokeswoman , said Zoellick decided he would send two top bank officials , chief economist Justin Yifu Lin of China and Marwan Muasher of Jordan , to Doha as part of a policy to increase representation by officials from the developing world . 
Strauss-Kahn , the IMF chief , had committed several months ago to attend the conference but decided to pull out sometime in the past two weeks . 
An IMF official , who spoke on the condition of anonymity , said Strauss-Kahn was overwhelmed with work implementing the policy initiatives agreed to by the G-20 this month . 
The IMF will send an eight-member delegation to the meeting , led by Deputy Managing Director Murilo Portugal , spokesman Niels H. Buenemann said . 
