U.S. Downturn Dragging World Into Recession Report Says Global Economy Will Shrink for First Time Since 1940s Job candidates tussle for enrollment forms at a career fair in India , where more than half a million jobs vanished in the last three months of 2008 , according to the World Bank . 
-LRB- By Mahesh Kumar -- Associated Press -RRB- Your browser 's settings may be preventing you from commenting on and viewing comments about this item . 
See instructions for fixing the problem . 
Monday , March 9 , 2009 ; Page A01 The world is falling into the first global recession since World War II as the crisis that started in the United States engulfs once-booming developing nations , confronting them with massive financial shortfalls that could turn back the clock on poverty reduction by years , the World Bank warned yesterday . 
The World Bank also cautioned that the cost of helping poorer nations in crisis would exceed the current financial resources of multilateral lenders . 
Such aid could prove critical to political stability as concerns mount over unrest in poorer nations , particularly in Eastern Europe , generated by their sharp reversal of fortunes as private investment evaporates and global trade collapses . 
In its report , released ahead of a major summit of finance ministers in London this week , the World Bank called on developed nations struggling with their own economic routs to dedicate 0.7 percent of the money they spend on stimulus programs toward a new Vulnerability Fund to help developing countries . 
The report predicted that the global economy will shrink this year for the first time since the 1940s , reducing earlier estimates that emerging markets would propel the world to positive growth even as the United States , Europe and Japan tanked . 
The dire prediction underscored what many are calling a mounting crisis within a crisis , as the downturn that started in the wealthy nations of the West washes over developing countries through a pullback in investment , trade and credit . 
Despite the United States ' position as the epicenter of the crisis , investors are flocking to U.S. Treasury bills and the dollar , squeezing developing nations out of global credit markets . 
`` We need to react in real time to a growing crisis that is hurting people in developing countries , '' World Bank President Robert B. Zoellick said in a statement . 
Action is needed by governments and multilateral lenders `` to avoid social and political unrest , '' he said . 
The report said that 94 out of 116 developing countries have been hit by economic slowdowns . 
The World Bank projected that the economic crisis will push around 46 million people into poverty in 2009 through job and wage cuts , as well as declining flows of remittances , the money that foreign workers send to their families . 
Net private capital flows to emerging markets are plunging , set to fall to $ 165 billion this year -- or 17 percent of their 2007 levels . 
Falling demand in the West is sparking the sharpest drop in world trade in 80 years , sending sales of the products and commodities of poorer nations spiraling down , the report said . 
That decline is touching off a wave of job losses . 
Cambodia has lost 30,000 jobs in the garment industry . 
In India , more than half a million jobs vanished in the last three months of 2008 , including cuts in the gem , jewelry , auto and textile industries , according to the World Bank . 
As a result , the report estimates that at least 98 countries may have problems financing at least $ 268 billion in public and private debt this year . 
It noted a worsening in market conditions could raise that figure as high as $ 700 billion . 
Additionally , only one quarter of vulnerable developing countries , the World Bank said , have the ability to launch their own stimulus programs or to independently finance measures such as job-creation or safety-net programs . 
To help them , multilateral lenders will need to dig deep . 
The World Bank remains well financed and is positioned to almost triple spending to $ 35 billion this year . 
But it warned the scope of the need in the developing world will exceed the combined ability of major multilateral lenders , and it called on governments in major nations and the private sector to pitch in more . 
For instance , its sister organization , the International Monetary Fund , recently received $ 100 billion more from Japan but is still asking more affluent nations to come up with an additional $ 150 billion to replenish its rapidly diminishing funds . 
While the World Bank aims to reduce global poverty largely through long-term projects in the developing world , the IMF is charged with offering bigger , more immediate bailouts to countries on the verge of economic collapse . 
The list of countries fitting that description has soared in recent months . 
In November alone , the IMF parceled out $ 50 billion to nations in crisis -- the most the institution has ever spent in a single month . 
With more nations , particularly in Eastern Europe and Central Asia , facing serious trouble , the IMF is preparing to hand out tens of billions more . 
It is hoping to raise more funds from Western nations and other cash-rich countries such as China and those in the Middle East . 
The concern now , however , is that the scope of the crisis may be so vast that even an extra $ 150 billion may not enough . 
Some fear that nations in Western Europe such as Austria , Ireland and Spain -- believed to have graduated from IMF lifelines decades ago -- may soon require bailouts , taking funds that would have been spent on poorer nations . 
It could also prove difficult to raise more money from hard-hit countries including the United States and Britain , where politicians and citizens may decide that charity begins at home . 
`` I 'm worried about what happens when you see that a Greece or an Ireland that might need bailouts , '' said Simon Johnson , an MIT economics professor and former IMF chief economist . 
`` Where is the money going to come from ? '' 
Error occurred during initialization of VM Could not reserve enough space for object heap Explore economy news through text and photos from around the world . 
