The author is a Reuters Breakingviews columnist . 
The opinions expressed are her own . 
LONDON -- Syria 's crackdown will stamp on its economic dream . 
Bashar al-Assad 's regime had an ambitious plan to quadruple foreign investment and boost tourism in order to drive growth in a poor country with dwindling oil . 
But the violent suppression of protestors will scare off both investors and tourists . 
When George W. Bush was U.S. president , Syria was brought into an expanded `` axis of evil '' , which included countries like Iran . 
But until last month , Assad was having some success in normalising relations with the West . 
The United States recently appointed its first ambassador to the country in years . 
Assad jetted around Western capitals , portraying Syria as on the path to modernisation . 
There was even a glossy profile earlier this year of his photogenic wife in American Vogue . 
Against that backdrop , Syria 's plans to improve infrastructure by attracting foreign direct investment worth $ 55 billion by 2015 -- roughly equivalent to its entire annual GDP -- looked plausible , even though current FDI is around just $ 2.5 billion a year . 
The same was true of Syria 's five-year goal to capitalize on its rich history by boosting tourism a further 40 percent to reach over 12 million visitors a year . 
Indeed , tourist numbers were up 40 percent last year alone . 
This would have helped Syria achieve its growth target of 5 percent to 6 percent a year over the next five years . 
While that 's not much faster than in previous years , it would have offset the steady decline in oil related revenues , currently around 5 percent of GDP , and problems in agriculture -- an even bigger pillar of the economy which , in a good year , accounts for as much as one quarter of GDP . 
But the escalating violence in Syria has left the country 's economic plans looking more like a fantasy . 
While over 70 percent of visitors to Syria come from the Arab region -- a chunk of tourism that may not be so easily frightened away -- it was from Europe that Syria hoped to attract the bulk of new big-spending tourists . 
Equally , it was from the West that Syria aimed to bring in new investment . 
Every bullet fired makes that less likely . 
Just goes to show that you can not hope to develop and sustain a open economy without the inevitable social revolution . 
Whats going on in Syria is ahead of the game and hopefully in the long run it will benefit the people there . 
Also , How will Israel and Lebanon respond to any new form of government in Syria ? 
I could see freedom fighters streaming into Syria and an itchy Israel fearing that any new state may take on a more extremist position . 
We have to remember that Syria 's borders are just lines on a map . 
I 'm hoping for a more peaceful outcome , but that is very unlikely because the west let Egypt 's Mubarak go to jail when he should have been rewarded for letting democracy win . 
There is no incentive for any other abusive dictators to step down voluntarily . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The company was founded in 1999 as Breakingviews.com and was acquired by Thomson Reuters in 2009 , becoming Reuters brand for financial commentary . 
Every day , we comment on the big financial stories as they break . 
Our expert analysis is provided by a global team of 30 correspondents based in New York , Washington , London , Hong Kong , Madrid , Dubai and Mumbai . 
For the full commentary and analysis service from breakingviews.com , including regular emails containing the latest views , contact sales@breakingviews.com . 
Breakingviews has published a selection of books for purchase and download . 
