The escaping oil volume was calculated by studying high-resolution video clips US scientists who have analyzed videos of the oil gushing from the Deepwater Horizon well say about 4.4 million barrels of crude escaped into the Gulf . 
This new figure is in good agreement with calculations produced by federal government advisers who used different estimation techniques . 
The Columbia University team reports its findings to the journal Science . 
They indicate the volume leaking from the well at one stage could have filled four Olympic-sized pools every day . 
Marine geophysicists Timothy Crone and Maya Tolstoy used a technique called optical plume velocimetry to study the oil escaping through the failed blowout preventer on the seafloor . 
The technique analyses the images from video footage to gauge the velocity of flowing fluids . 
It was originally devised by Dr Crone to study hydrothermal vents - volcanic areas in the deep ocean where super-heated waters are being spewed from cracks in the seabed . 
Velocimetry converts what is a flat , two-dimensional image in the video pictures into a volumetric flow rate . 
`` Using this optical image analysis method we can apply essentially a conversion factor for what the apparent motion is -LRB- in the video -RRB- and obtain what the average velocity is at the opening , '' explained Dr Crone . 
`` And if you know the average velocity at the opening , you can then multiply that by the area of the opening and that gets you the volume . 
The work relies heavily on laboratory experiments which we have used to calibrate this method , '' he told BBC News . 
One key assumption is the recognition that not all the plume seen in the video comprises oil . 
It is thought only 40 % of it does , with the rest being gas and water . 
For the Science study , the team assessed two short , high-resolution sequences of the BP Deepwater Horizon oil plume . 
The impact on the economy and wildlife has yet to be fully assessed One of these 20-30-second sequences was taken while the collapsed riser pipe was still connected to the well 's blowout preventer . 
The second sequence was taken after this riser pipe was cut and removed . 
Crone 's and Tolstoy 's analysis suggests that the average flow rate of oil from the well between 22 April -LRB- the day the Deepwater Horizon rig sank -RRB- and 3 June was 56,000 barrels per day . 
After the riser pipe was removed , the researchers say some 68,000 barrels of oil was flowing into the ocean each day , until the well was finally capped on 15 July . 
Their total spill figure is 4.4 million barrels . 
This number assumes constant flow rate and the subtraction of the 800,000 or so barrels BP managed to recover at the disaster site . 
The researchers stress their figures have a large uncertainty of perhaps 20 % , but they compare well with the 4.1 million barrels estimate produced by the federal government 's Flow Rate Technical Group -LRB- again , taking account of the 800,000 barrels recovered by BP -RRB- . 
Four-point-four million barrels is 185 million US gallons , or just over 700,000 cubic metres . 
To put it another way , the total volume is equivalent to about 280 Olympic-sized swimming pools -LRB- minimum specification -RRB- . 
The explosion on the Deepwater Horizon killed 11 workers and injured 17 By comparison , the volume lost from the Exxon Valdez tanker in Alaska in 1989 , the largest previous US oil spill , amounted to 260,000 barrels . 
`` Our estimate should be viewed as preliminary , '' Dr Crone said . 
`` It was based on these two short clips . 
It 's sort of a proof of concept . 
What we 'd like to do in the future is apply this technique to more videos - if they can be made available - to get a better estimate of how the flow rate changed over time . 
This will help us narrow the uncertainties . '' 
Commenting on the research , Dr Simon Boxall , from the UK 's National Oceanography Centre , said the most important on-going issue remained not the size of the spill but its environmental impact . 
`` Whilst this may be the largest single marine spill of oil , it has not proven to be the most destructive , '' he explained . 
`` The depth of the spill , ocean conditions and the methods of coastal protection all helped to avoid catastrophic impact . 
Such research methods have an important application in identifying spill rates in determining best practice during an incident ; but post-spill , it is the fate rather than volume of oil that still needs attention . '' 
The federal government 's Flow Rate Technical Group estimated some 4.9 million barrels -LRB- see chart -RRB- came out of the well , with BP managing to capture only 800,000 barrels . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
