President Assad 's government is continuing its efforts to crush protests across the country European countries proposing a new UN resolution over Syria have dropped demands for immediate sanctions against President Bashar al-Assad 's government . 
The draft , proposed by the UK , France , Germany and Portugal and backed by the US , threatens sanctions only if the repression of protests does not end . 
The scaled-back version is aimed at winning the support of China and Russia , which oppose sanctions . 
Western diplomats say they are planning for a vote by the end of the week . 
The draft resolution `` demands an immediate end to all violence '' , according to copies obtained by news agencies . 
It says the 15-nation Security Council `` expresses its determination , in the event that Syria has not complied with this resolution , to adopt targeted measures , including sanctions '' . 
Last month the US , Britain , France , Germany and Portugal put forward a draft resolution calling for sanctions against President Assad , members of his family and close associates . 
But Russia and China have threatened to veto any sanctions resolution against Syria . 
Lyse Doucet BBC News , Damascus Damascus is hoping its remaining friends will continue to block more concerted international action . 
The president 's senior advisor Bouthaina Shabaan told the BBC the West should join forces with Syria to fight what she called `` fundamentalist terrorist groups '' . 
But that 's not the way the West sees it or what many here see on the ground . 
Britain 's Ambassador Simon Collis , in his first official blog from Damascus , wrote : `` The regime does n't want you to know its security forces and the gangs that support them are killing , arresting and abusing mostly peaceful protesters . '' 
Sanctions imposed so far , by the United States and the EU , are already starting to bite . 
Industry is suffering , business activity is sliding . 
The Aleppo Chamber of Commerce has now called on the government to reconsider its ban on imports to save on dwindling foreign currency reserves . 
The government knows it must keep the support of the powerful business communities in Aleppo and Damascus , Syria 's two biggest cities , which have seen less unrest than other parts of the country . 
The BBC 's Barbara Plett at the UN in New York says some countries fear any outside involvement in Syria could trigger a much wider crisis . 
Their position has been hardened by Nato 's actions in Libya , which they say has overstepped a UN mandate to protect civilians there , she adds . 
One European diplomat quoted by Reuters news agency called for `` a strong and unified message to ensure that the Assad regime does not remain deaf to the demands of the international community '' . 
Meanwhile , Syrian forces are continuing efforts to suppress protests that began six months ago . 
On Tuesday troops stormed the restive central town of Rastan after besieging it for two days , activists said . 
A resident of Rastan told the BBC that defected soldiers were fighting government forces within the city . 
Video has emerged purportedly showing a group of soldiers announcing their defection . 
The video , which can not be independently verified , shows a man identifying himself as Captain Youssef Hammoud flanked by about eight men in uniform . 
`` We promise them that the town of Rastan will be their graveyard , '' he warns the Syrian army . 
`` We promise them big surprises . '' 
Footage has emerged that appears to show Syrian soldiers announcing their defection There are reports that with the addition of defectors the protest movement is becoming more militarised . 
The BBC 's Owen Bennett Jones , in neighbouring Lebanon , says there are growing signs that some activists believe peaceful protests will not be enough to bring down the government and that they need to use more force . 
The UN estimates that more than 2,700 people have been killed across Syria since the crackdown began . 
The Syrian government says it is battling `` armed gangs '' that have foreign backing . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
