NEW ORLEANS -- BP took some of the blame for the Gulf oil disaster in an internal report issued Wednesday , acknowledging among other things that it misinterpreted a key pressure test of the well . 
But in a possible preview of its legal strategy , it also pointed the finger at its partners on the doomed rig . 
The highly technical , 193-page report attributes the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history and the rig explosion that set it off to a complex chain of failures both human and mechanical . 
Some of those problems have been made public over the past 4 ? 
months , such as the failure of the blowout preventer to clamp the well shut . 
The report is far from the definitive ruling on the cause of the catastrophe . 
For one thing , government investigators have not yet begun to fully analyze the blowout preventer , which was raised from the bottom of the sea over Labor Day weekend . 
But it provides an early look at the company 's probable legal strategy -- spreading the blame among itself , rig owner Transocean , and cement contractor Halliburton -- as it deals with hundreds of lawsuits , billions of dollars in claims and possible criminal charges in the coming months and years . 
Critics of BP called the report self-serving . 
`` This report is not BP 's mea culpa , '' said Rep. Edward J. Markey , D-Mass . 
, a member of a congressional panel investigating the spill . 
`` Of their own eight key findings , they only explicitly take responsibility for half of one . 
BP is happy to slice up blame as long as they get the smallest piece . '' 
The report 's conclusions stand in contrast to a widely seen BP ad campaign in which the company casts no blame for the explosion and vows to clean up and restore the Gulf Coast . 
`` BP blaming others for the Gulf oil disaster is like Bernie Madoff blaming his accountant , '' said Robert Gordon , an attorney for fishermen , hotels and restaurants affected by the spill . 
Another plaintiff 's lawyer , W. Mark Lanier , scoffed : `` This is like the ringleader of a lynch mob saying , ` Well , I did n't bring the rope ; he did . ' '' 
The disaster began when the Deepwater Horizon exploded off the coast of Louisiana on April 20 , killing 11 workers . 
BP 's well spewed more than 200 million gallons of oil into the Gulf before a temporary cap stopped it in mid-July . 
Members of Congress , industry experts and workers who survived the blast have accused BP 's engineers of cutting corners to save time and money on a project that was 43 days and more than $ 20 million behind schedule at the time of the blast . 
Nearly 24 hours before the explosion , Halliburton was using cement to seal the gap between the well casing and the hole drilled in the seafloor . 
It was also cementing the bottom of the well shut until the day BP was ready to begin extracting oil and gas from it . 
In its report , BP said that it was a bad cementing job that contributed to the blowout and that the design of the well was probably not to blame . 
It also said `` more thorough review and testing by Halliburton '' and `` stronger quality assurance '' by BP 's well team might have identified weaknesses in the plan for cementing . 
The report acknowledged , as investigators have previously suggested , that BP 's engineers and employees of Transocean misinterpreted a pressure test of the well 's integrity before the explosion . 
`` The Transocean rig crew and BP well site leaders reached the incorrect view that the test was successful and that well integrity had been established , '' the investigators said . 
They also blamed employees on the rig from both companies for failing to respond to other warning signs that the well was in danger of blowing out . 
The words `` blame '' and `` mistake '' never appear in the report . 
`` Fault '' shows up 20 times , but only once in the same sentence as the company 's name . 
`` The team did not identify any single action or inaction that caused this accident , '' the investigators said . 
`` Rather , a complex and interlinked series of mechanical failures , human judgments , engineering design , operational implementation and team interfaces came together to allow the initiation and escalation of the accident . 
Multiple companies , work teams and circumstances were involved over time . '' 
Mark Bly , who as BP 's safety chief led the internal investigation , said the report was a reconstruction of what happened on the rig based on the company 's data and interviews with mostly BP employees and was not meant to focus on assigning blame . 
The six-person investigating panel had access to only a few workers from other companies , and samples of the actual cement used in the well were not released to BP . 
Transocean blasted the report as a self-serving attempt to conceal what it called the real cause of the explosion -- `` BP 's fatally flawed well design . '' 
Halliburton said it found a number of omissions and inaccuracies in the report and is confident the work it completed on the well met BP 's specifications . 
`` Contractors do not specify well design or make decisions regarding testing procedures as that responsibility lies with the well owner , '' the company said . 
White House press secretary Robert Gibbs noted `` there is an active investigation into what went wrong '' and said the administration 's job is to find out what happened and hold those responsible accountable . 
Federal prosecutors are among those investigating . 
In Wednesday trading in New York , BP stock rose $ 1.18 , or 3.2 percent , to close at $ 38.37 . 
Investigators know the explosion was triggered by a bubble of methane gas that shot up the drill column and ignited . 
But they do n't know exactly how and why the gas escaped . 
And they do n't know for certain why the blowout preventer did n't work . 
But in its report , BP said the blowout preventer did n't do its job because it was damaged in the explosion and because it had a bad valve and weak batteries . 
Transocean , which was responsible for maintaining the blowout preventer , has insisted the batteries were in working order . 
-- Its use of six centralizers during the cementing , instead of the 21 recommended by Halliburton , probably did not contribute to the cement 's failure . 
Centralizers make sure the casing is running down the center of the well bore . 
If the casing is cemented off-center , there is a risk of an imperfect seal that could allow oil and gas to escape . 
-- Just before the blast , the flammable gas leaking from the well was directed onto the rig instead of being vented overboard . 
The rig 's ventilation system may have allowed the gas to enter the engine rooms , where it may have ignited . 
-- Recommendations should be considered to improve offshore drilling practices . 
It suggested , among other things , that standards for reporting and investigating incidents be clarified and strengthened . 
Separately on Wednesday , the Obama administration said it sent a sixth bill , for $ 128.5 million , to BP and others for costs associated with the spill . 
The first five bills , totaling $ 389.9 million , have been paid in full by BP , the government said . 
