Michael Jackson 's mother sues concert promoter Jackson was preparing for a series of concerts at the time of his death Katherine Jackson contends it failed to provide life-saving equipment and oversee a doctor who was hired to look out for the pop star 's well-being . 
Her legal action claims the singer was put under great pressure to complete the London concerts for which he was rehearsing at the time of his death . 
AEG has yet to comment on the action . 
Ms Jackson 's civil action , which seeks unspecified damages , was filed in Los Angeles Superior Court on Wednesday . 
Kenny Ortega , director of the planned This is It series of concerts , was also named as a defendant . 
Katherine Jackson contends that AEG and its agents told her son it would provide the equipment and hire Dr Conrad Murray to care for him so he could perform at the concerts in London . 
Her action alleges its representations were false `` because in reality AEG was merely doing whatever it took to make sure that Michael Jackson could make it to rehearsals and shows '' . 
`` At the time of his death , Michael Jackson was under the immediate care of a doctor selected by , hired by , and controlled by AEG , '' the complaint continues . 
It claims the company `` demanded and required '' the singer be treated by Dr Murray , who is alleged to have administered a lethal dose of Propofol and other drugs which resulted in the pop star 's death on 25 June 2009 . 
Michael Jackson 's parents have both filed wrongful death lawsuits Dr Murray has pleaded not guilty to a charge of involuntary manslaughter and is expected to stand trial next year . 
Katherine Jackson is the guardian of the singer 's three children and is suing AEG on their behalf . 
Her action claims Jackson 's eldest son , Prince , suffered great trauma and severe emotional distress because he witnessed his father 's final moments . 
`` The purpose of this lawsuit is to prove to the world the truth about what happened to Michael Jackson , once and for all , '' Katherine Jackson 's lawyer said in a statement . 
Earlier this year Jackson 's father , Joe , filed a wrongful death lawsuit against Dr Murray , accusing him of professional negligence . 
Mr Murray 's attorneys filed a motion on Wednesday seeking a dismissal of that action , which did not name AEG . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
