Monday 24 January 2005 02.16 GMT Plagued by mission fatigue , casualties and a public starting to ask just how long the US plans to keep its soldiers in Iraq , the American army may have come up with a solution : robots . 
From March or April this year , it plans to deploy 18 armed robots to Iraq to help fight the `` war on terror '' . 
Although the robots have a snappy name - Swords , or Special Weapons Observation Reconnaissance Detection Systems - they are n't quite the sleek , cold-blooded androids of I , Robot . 
Rather , they look more like the sort of contraption dreamt up for the program Robot Wars . 
The Swords are essentially modified bomb disposal robots of the sort commonly deployed in Northern Ireland and Iraq , where they have been successfully used to defuse roadside bombs . 
Mounted on tracks , they have a standard army-issue automatic weapon bolted on top , capable of firing between 300 and 350 rounds a minute . 
The firing is done by a human soldier via a video camera . 
`` It 's important to stress that not everything has to be super hi-tech , '' Anthony Sebasto , an official at Picatinny Arsenal in New Jersey , which helped develop it , told Associated Press . 
Developed at a cost of $ 2m -LRB- # 1.07 m -RRB- , Swords have certain advantages over the traditional human fighting unit . 
They are cheap and require no food ; they can be packed away between campaigns ; they are unlikely - barring modifications - to write anguished letters home to loved ones or the media . 
They are also a much better shot than the average GI . 
But there are downsides : each robot has a top speed of 4mph and can only operate for one to four hours before it needs to refuel . 
Swords , made by a small company in Massachusetts , are the first in a new generation of gizmos to go to war . 
Coming soon is the Future Combat System from Lockheed Martin , which includes a six-wheel , 2.5-tonne vehicle . 
The Pentagon 's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is backing research into robots that can be dropped into combat zones from aircraft . 
