Since the war , life has badly deteriorated for women in Iraq and girls are being forced to wear the veil again . 
Rory McCarthy meets those determined to fight back A workman is pinning a banner to the wall as a chill draft swirls through the near-empty ballroom at the Palestine hotel . 
`` An equal , secular constitution is the first step to total fairness , '' the sign says in Arabic . 
This is supposed to be one in a series of pioneering public meetings to address the growing inequalities of women in the new Iraq . 
A year ago , in the weeks after the invasion , hundreds of women marched in the streets outside this hotel in central Baghdad . 
The women were optimistic , most walked without veils and they made forceful speeches in front of the TV cameras . 
Those days of mass protest are over . 
Today there are barely a dozen women present . 
Half are veiled and most have come with male relatives or colleagues for protection . 
It is a quiet indictment of the occupation and underscores the astonishing collapse in security , particularly for women , that it has brought . 
`` Do you feel how threatening it is to go out in the streets ? 
Can you guarantee that you are safe and alive by the end of the day ? '' 
asks Yanar Mohammad , the conference organiser and one of the most ardent women 's rights activists in Iraq . 
`` It is the insecurity that handicaps the organising of woman . '' 
The few women there describe how things have changed for them since the fall of Saddam Hussein and the subsequent rise in Islamic parties . 
Many more cover their hair now , sometimes in belief , often through peer-group pressure or simply to protect themselves in anonymity . 
`` Veils are imposed on young girls , '' says Nadam Moaeed . 
`` What do girls understand from this veil ? 
It will have a bad psychological effect . 
She will become a negative presence in society . '' 
She describes the new pressures on children in schools and the pervasive influence of the religious parties , particularly the conservative Shia groups , which are certain to dominate the new parliament after this weekend 's elections . 
`` Political parties come and take a room in the school building and they impose on every female student veils and even gloves , '' she says . 
`` Where is the humanity in that ? 
They are always putting up Islamic pictures in the school and the children do n't understand it at all . 
We heard of one school where Christian girls were made to wear the veil . '' 
Thiqra Faisal , a student , has traveled up from Basra , a city regarded as more liberal than most . 
`` Even in the universities , women ca n't wear what they want , '' she says . 
`` If you see a woman without a scarf in the street , everyone will be surprised . 
You have to be fully covered . '' 
It was not always this way . 
In the 1950s , Iraq was the first Arab country to appoint a female government minister . 
Women worked freely in banks and government and administrative departments and were involved in a vibrant public debate . 
The changes came in the 1990s when Saddam Hussein began to appease the tribes and the imams . 
He allowed men to take four wives and ruled there would no longer be any punishment for a man who killed a woman in his family if he suspected her of an `` honor crime '' . 
These conservative rulings have been inherited and tacitly endorsed by the major religious parties . 
At one stage a year ago , hardliners in the US-appointed governing council tried to pass article 137 that would impose Islamic Sharia law over rights of personal status , drastically diluting the legal protection for women . 
After a series of vocal protests the article was dropped , but it was a clear warning of the conservative political program that lies ahead . 
These are the public problems . 
In private there is so much more that remains unspoken . 
The conference organiser Mohammad , 44 , runs the Organisation for Women 's Freedom in Iraq , an outspoken campaigning movement . 
She is rare among Iraqi women : avowedly secular and unafraid to stand up in public and pugnaciously condemn the failings of the male-dominated establishment . 
She dresses as she might in the west - today she is wearing a smart trouser suit and her long dark hair is , as always , uncovered . 
Her views are so radical in today 's Iraq that she has twice had death threats , always travels with a guard and has a small silver pistol hidden in her purse . 
Her group has already established two women 's shelters - in Baghdad and Kirkuk . 
In the past year perhaps a dozen women have been taken in and many more have asked for help , telling stories of brutality and oppression rarely acknowledged in public . 
They found one woman from a strict Islamic family in the Kurdish north who had been raped before she was married . 
`` After her husband found out he decided she was filthy and not allowed to touch her newborn child . 
It was bad , daily beatings . 
We found her on the street weeping , '' says Mohammad . 
Now the woman , 23 , is back at school , living in the shelter and planning to go to university . 
The group 's campaigning and shelters is largely down to the energy of Mohammad herself . 
An architecture graduate from Baghdad University , she lived abroad for 10 years before the war , mostly in Toronto . 
There she met socialist feminists and decided to return to Iraq to campaign after the fall of the regime . 
She sold her house and left her husband and 17-year-old son behind in Canada . 
`` I became obsessed with the shelter . 
It had to be done , '' she says . 
Now , a year on , she is worried that many people 's frustration at the failures of the occupation are being channeled into hardline Islamic movements . 
`` The liberation should happen through a civil and secular alternative . '' 
She makes her case in an unrepentant way . 
The latest copy of her group 's newspaper , al-Musawat , or Equality , shows a photo of her burning a veil . 
`` They should be afraid of us , '' she writes . 
She refuses to take part in the elections this Sunday , even though rules are in place to ensure that each party includes 25 % women among its candidates . 
She argues that the overwhelming influence of the Islamists has unfairly tipped the balance and says her group would be unlikely to win a seat . 
Instead she will continue campaigning from outside government . 
`` There are thousands of secular people supporting me . 
With short , certain steps we will get somewhere , '' she says . 
`` But it will take time . '' 
