July 23 | Fri Jul 23 , 2010 7:55 am EDT July 23 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Efforts to plug BP 's -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- -LRB- BP . 
N -RRB- Gulf of Mexico oil leak for good were being hampered as Tropical Storm Bonnie approached . 
Millions of gallons -LRB- liters -RRB- of oil had spilled into the Gulf since the April explosion on a rig that killed 11 workers and led to an economic and environmental catastrophe along the U.S. Gulf Coast . 
Below is a timeline of the disaster and its impact . 
April 20 , 2010 - Explosion and fire on Transocean Ltd 's drilling rig Deepwater Horizon licensed to BP Plc ; 11 workers are killed . 
The rig was drilling in BP 's Macondo project 42 miles -LRB- 68 km -RRB- southeast of Venice , Louisiana , in 5,000 feet -LRB- 1,525 metres -RRB- of water and 13,000 feet -LRB- 4 km -RRB- under the seabed . 
April 22 - The Deepwater Horizon rig , valued at more than $ 560 million , sinks and a 5-mile -LRB- 8-km -RRB- oil slick forms . 
April 25 - The well 's blowout preventer fails . 
April 29 - U.S. President Barack Obama pledges `` every single available resource , '' including the U.S. military , to contain the spreading spill and says BP is responsible for the cleanup . 
April 30 - An Obama aide says no drilling will be allowed in new areas , as the president had recently proposed , until the cause of the Deepwater Horizon accident is known . 
-- BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward says the company takes full responsibility and will pay all legitimate claims and the cost of the cleanup . 
May 2 - Obama visits the Gulf Coast . 
U.S. officials close areas affected by the spill to fishing for 10 days . 
BP starts drilling a relief well alongside the failed well , a process that may take two to three months to complete . 
May 7 - An attempt to place a containment dome over the spewing well fails . 
May 11\/12 - Executives from BP , Transocean and Halliburton appear at congressional hearings in Washington . 
The executives blame each other 's companies . 
May 14 - Obama slams companies involved in the spill , criticizing them for a `` ridiculous spectacle '' of publicly trading blame in his sternest comments yet . 
May 19 - The first heavy oil from the spill hits fragile Louisiana marshlands . 
Part of the slick enters a powerful current that could carry it to the Florida Keys and beyond . 
May 28 - Obama tours the Louisiana coast , saying , `` I am the president and the buck stops with me . '' 
-- Hayward flies over the Gulf . 
May 29 - BP says the complex `` top kill '' maneuver , started three days earlier to plug the well , has failed . 
June 1 - BP shares plunge 17 percent in London trading , wiping $ 23 billion off its market value , on news the latest attempt to plug the well has failed . 
-- U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder says the Justice Department has launched a criminal and civil investigation into the rig explosion and the spill . 
June 2 - BP tries another capping strategy but has difficulty cutting off a leaking riser pipe . 
-- U.S. authorities expand fishing restrictions to cover 37 percent of U.S. federal waters in the Gulf . 
June 4 - Obama , on his third trip to the region , warns BP against skimping on compensation to residents and businesses . 
June 8 - Obama says he wants to know `` whose ass to kick '' over the spill , adding to the pressure on BP . 
-- U.S. weather forecasters give their first confirmation that some of the oil leaking has lingered beneath the surface rather than rising to the top . 
June 9 - U.S. Interior Secretary Ken Salazar says BP must pay the salaries of thousands of workers laid off by a moratorium on drilling , at a congressional hearing . 
June 10 - In first comments , British Prime Minister David Cameron says Britain is ready to help BP deal with the spill . 
-- U.S. scientists double their estimates of the amount of oil gushing from the well , saying between 20,000 and 40,000 barrels -LRB- 840,000 and 1.7 million gallons\/3 .2 million and 6.4 million liters -RRB- flowed out before June 3 . 
June 11 - Supportive comments from Britain lift BP 's shares in London by 6.4 percent . 
But the rise does not mend the damage done -- the company is worth 70 billion pounds -LRB- $ 102 billion -RRB- against more than 120 billion pounds in April . 
June 14 - Obama , makes a fourth trip to the Gulf . 
-- Two U.S. lawmakers release a letter to Hayward saying : `` It appears that BP repeatedly chose risky procedures in order to reduce costs and save time and made minimal efforts to contain the added risk . '' 
June 15 - Lawmakers summon top executives from Exxon Mobil , Chevron , ConocoPhillips , Royal Dutch Shell and BP . 
-- Obama says in his first televised speech from the Oval Office : `` But make no mistake : we will fight this spill with everything we 've got for as long it takes . 
We will make BP pay for the damage their company has caused . '' 
June 16 - BP agrees to set up a $ 20 billion fund for damage claims from the spill , suspends dividend payments to shareholders and says it will pay $ 100 million to workers idled by the six-month moratorium on deep-sea drilling . 
June 17 - Hayward faces the wrath of U.S. lawmakers as he appears before a congressional hearing . 
He apologizes for the spill and says everything is being done to stop it . 
Members of Congress accuse BP of cutting corners for the sake of profit . 
June 18 - Anadarko Petroleum , part owner of the gushing well , says BP 's behavior before the blowout was `` reckless '' and likely represented `` gross negligence or willful misconduct '' that would affect obligations of the well owners . 
June 20 - Internal BP document released by U.S. congressman shows BP estimates that a worst-case scenario rate could be 100,000 barrels -LRB- 4.2 million gallons\/15 .9 million liters -RRB- a day . 
This is far higher than the U.S. government estimate of 60,000 barrels -LRB- 2.5 million gallons\/9 .5 million liters -RRB- a day . 
June 22 - Hayward is handing day-to-day control of the spill operation to Bob Dudley -- a reflection , says BP , of the need for the CEO to return to other aspects of the business . 
June 24 - A U.S. judge refuses to put on hold his decision to lift a ban on deepwater drilling imposed after the spill . 
June 30 - Obama formally directs officials to draw up a long-term economic and environmental plan to help the Gulf Coast region get back on its feet after the oil spill . 
July 3 - A supertanker converted into a `` super skimmer '' begins tests . 
The vessel can remove up to 500,000 barrels -LRB- 21 million gallons\/79 .5 million liters -RRB- of oil and water from the sea surface a day . 
July 5 - BP says the cost of the spill had reached $ 3.12 billion . 
July 7 - Tests show tar balls washed up on the Texas coast are from the spill , meaning every U.S. Gulf state -- Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama , Florida and now Texas -- has been soiled by the spill . 
July 12 - BP installs a `` capping stack , '' which has a better seal than the last cap placed on the well and aims to stop oil from spewing out . 
-- BP starts shutting a sequence of valves after getting approval from the U.S. government , delaying testing by 24 hours on fears the process could irreparably damage the well . 
BP starts a critical pressure test to gauge pressure in the well on July 14 . 
July 15 - BP says it has stopped the leak -- at least during testing -- with the new tight-sealing containment cap . 
July 16 - The company is carrying out tests on whether the well remains intact as BP moves to plug the leak permanently . 
July 19 - BP says it has spent $ 3.95 billion so far on efforts to tackle its leaking well . 
July 20 - BP says it has reached a deal to sell $ 7 billion in assets to Apache Corp as it raises money to cover costs related to the spill . 
July 23 - BP says it is temporarily suspending relief well activities due to the approach of Tropical Storm Bonnie . 
An evacuation could delay operations with vessels and rigs involved in the operation to move out of the storm 's path . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
The internet is buzzing with articles and excellent blogs . 
But could it be simply the biblical sequence of God 's wrath being poured out upon the earth which is relevant to current events in today 's world . 
What if we are dealing with the wrath of God ? 
Please understand the wrath of God is letting man slip deeper and deeper into the consequences of their own sin . 
Author of the book Final Warning The public records are key . 
The CEO of Sun Healthcare Group Inc -LRB- SUNH -RRB- actually threatened me in mediation for wrongful death of my mother , Evelyn Calvert , that I 'd be harmed if I pursued my case to a jury trial and that I was n't getting the keys to his Bentley . 
I was weak from surgery and coerced into signing off on a fraud charge . 
7 mos later I sued that corrupt attorney who passed on those messages and he died 2 weeks later in his sleep at age 59 , of undetermined causes later declared diabetes related . 
I believe it was from the stress of knowing I could have a tape recording of those threats . 
The Dept of Justice turned a blind eye and did ' t fine or punish Sun for killing 5 patients I knew died from their lack of staffing with known broken equipment in a Sunbridge nursing home in Newport Beach , Calif in 2003 . 
Ask them - the public record even reflects what I say is true . 
CEO Richard K Matros should resign and leave town out of embarrassment . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
