When the finance ministers of the world 's top economies convened in Washington last month , around the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund , they developed a remarkably successful international strategy for responding to the financial crisis , which had reached panic proportions in the markets . 
It was promptly implemented at the national level by all the key countries and quelled the worst of the anxieties . 
When the leaders of the top 20 of these countries meet on Saturday , they must build on that outcome by adopting a similarly global approach to counter the sharp downturn in the world economy that could otherwise become the most severe since the Depression . 
To do so , the Group of 20 must at a minimum do no harm . 
Any surfacing of significant conflicts over such contentious issues as internationalization of financial regulation would undermine confidence , which remains extremely fragile , dissipating the hard-won gains to date and throwing markets into a new tailspin . 
Leaders must , for example , avoid the temptation to agonize over who caused the crisis and recognize that , while the United States was clearly at its center , there is plenty of blame to go around . 
The most positive step the leaders could take would be to pledge to adopt fiscal stimulus programs amounting to at least 1 to 2 percent of most of their national economies . 
Such an injection of domestic demand throughout the G-20 would provide a critical spur to world economic expansion and substantially reduce the depth of the recession . 
China , which now accounts for more than one-third of all global growth , has demonstrated admirable leadership by announcing an expansion program of much greater magnitude . 
It is up to the United States and Europe , in particular , to follow suit ; an international commitment should help overcome internal opposition to such steps -LRB- especially in the United States and Germany -RRB- . 
The G-20 should also disavow the imposition of any new trade distortions . 
It was a wave of protectionist trade measures , triggered by the infamous Smoot-Hawley tariff in the United States and quickly emulated by most Europeans , that converted the depression of the early 1930s into the Great Depression . 
China has recently adopted new export subsidies , a particularly unhelpful step by a country running the world 's largest trade surplus and , despite its recent slowdown , the world 's fastest growth rate . 
Any new outbreak of border restrictions or their domestic equivalents would threaten growth everywhere and further jeopardize market stability . 
The leaders also need to pledge at least $ 500 billion to augment the resources of the International Monetary Fund so it can meet the potential needs of developing countries hammered by the crisis . 
The IMF is already lending to Hungary , Iceland , Pakistan and Ukraine , but a longer queue is forming rapidly . 
Japan has offered $ 200 billion , and China , with reserves nearing $ 2 trillion , could provide at least as much . 
The rich oil exporters , represented by Saudi Arabia at the G-20 , could do so as well . 
The lenders would , of course , receive an IMF guarantee on their money and should welcome this alternative to U.S. Treasury securities . 
The final component of the G-20 package should be the creation of working groups to address systemic issues that helped bring on the crisis , most of which require careful analysis and preparation before thoughtful action is feasible . 
The most obvious is financial regulation , which clearly broke down in the United States and numerous other countries ; there is an important international dimension because of the cross-border nature of many financial institutions and market instruments . 
Another is the failure of the IMF , and its major member countries , to anticipate the crisis and to initiate preventive actions . 
A closely related third issue is the growing lack of political legitimacy of the IMF thanks to its gross under-representation of rapidly emerging Asian powers and the parallel over-representation , for historical reasons , of Europeans . 
Thoughtful analysis by the new working groups could tee up these issues for decisive action at future summits and help considerably in avoiding repetitions of today 's predicament . 
It is difficult for the United States to lead the preparation of such a package , given the lame-duck status of President Bush , who is hosting the summit . 
It is critical , then , that President-elect Barack Obama concur with the outcomes of the gathering , both to ensure their faithful pursuit in the future and to avoid internal U.S. rancor that could be as destabilizing for markets as conflict among the countries . 
Effective consultation between the outgoing and incoming administrations is central to the success of the gathering . 
So is active leadership from the Europeans , who called for the meeting , and the Asians , who have the most dynamic economies and most of the money . 
History may regard this weekend as the beginning of a transition in global economic power as well as a milestone in resolving the crisis of 2008 . 
C. Fred Bergsten , director of the Peterson Institute for International Economics , was assistant Treasury secretary for international affairs from 1977 to 1981 and assistant for international economic affairs to the National Security Council from 1969 to 1971 . 
