A car used by Arab League monitors was attacked in Damascus Damascus on a rainy winter 's evening . 
The lights are blazing , the traffic flows smoothly , the smart boutiques of the new town and the souks in the old city seem busy enough . 
But for all the assurances of the government , life in the Syrian capital is far from normal . 
`` We do n't work well , we do n't sleep well , '' one middle-class woman , a graphic designer in her thirties , tells me . 
`` We are scared . '' 
She does n't take part in street protests herself . 
Like many others , she thinks it is too dangerous . 
But she certainly supports their aim . 
And those protests - once mainly in towns well away from Damascus - now spring up ever more frequently in suburbs of the capital , creeping closer and closer , it appears , to the well-guarded center . 
The impression of ever-deepening crisis is one the government is determined to resist . 
This week President Bashar al-Assad made what was said to be an impromptu appearance with his family on a huge city-centre square . 
President al-Assad made a reportedly impromptu rally appearance He was cheered by thousands of supporters also said to have gathered spontaneously to greet him . 
`` Nothing was arranged beforehand , '' my government minder tells me . 
`` If people had known the president was going to appear , millions would have turned out to cheer . 
But he just decided to stop to talk on the square because he 's that kind of person . 
He lives among the people . 
You can often see him in a local shop buying sweets for his children . '' 
In his unscripted speech on the square , the president returned yet again to his favorite theme : Syria is threatened by a foreign conspiracy that is in league with `` terrorists '' within the country . 
He is talking not only of Western powers such as the United States , which this week accused him of `` cynicism , '' but also of Arab states such as Qatar , one of the chief movers behind the Arab League monitoring mission being sent to Syria . 
Qatar has now suggested the mission is so ineffective in stopping the violence that it should be withdrawn . 
Anti-government protests are moving ever closer to the city center Speaking anonymously - because the terms of their engagement forbid them talking to the media - some of the monitors tell me they are more afraid of going into pro-government areas than into opposition strongholds . 
Crowds have vented their anger on what they see as the monitors ' interference in Syrian affairs . 
And in the car park of the Sheraton Hotel , one of their bases , you can see the evidence of that anger - Arab League vehicles with windows smashed and plastered with stickers of Mr Assad , the bumpers caved in and tyres let down . 
At the Foreign Ministry , spokesman Jihad Makdissi tells me that should not have happened . 
People have now been told , he says , to let the monitors work freely . 
And he is also keen to stress that the president 's talk of a conspiracy was `` for internal consumption '' . 
Syria wants the mission to continue , he says . 
But on Thursday another 18 deaths were reported in the continuing struggle between demonstrators and security forces - bringing to more than 400 the number killed since the mission began in late December . 
More than 5,000 civilians have been killed , says the UN More than 400 killed since start of Arab League mission on 26 December UN denied access to Syria Information gathered from NGOs , sources in Syria and Syrians who have fled Vast majority of casualties were unarmed , but the figure may include armed defectors Tally does not include serving members of the security forces In the meantime , Mr Assad continues to insist that he wants dialogue with opposition forces , and he has set out what he says is a timetable for democratic reforms . 
But he has been saying the same thing for months , without any sign of his government reaching out even to those elements of the highly-fractured opposition that would be prepared to talk to him . 
It is a stalemate , but a dangerous one in which more and more protesters , who once insisted demonstrations must be peaceful , now believe some of their number should carry guns - not to attack the security forces , but at least to defend themselves against attack . 
`` The regime is launched down a cul-de-sac '' , one Western diplomat tells me . 
And many fear that at the end of it will be even more violence . 
Watch Tim Whewell 's full report from Damascus on Newsnight at 10.30 pm on BBC Two on Friday 13 January 2012 . 
