BP spill released 4.4 m barrels of oil into the ocean , study finds Scientists use underwater video of the gushing well to tackle one of the `` known unknowns '' of the BP oil spill Oil floats on the surface of the water near a controlled burn above BP 's Deepwater Horizon well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Ann Heisenfelt\/EPA The starting up of the hype machine for Donald Rumsfeld 's upcoming memoir has got me thinking about his famous line before the US invasion of Iraq . 
There are known knowns . 
These are things we know that we know . 
There are known unknowns . 
That is to say , there are things that we know we do n't know . 
But there are also unknown unknowns . 
There are things we do n't know we do n't know . 
In Rumsfeld 's case , the former Pentagon chief was basically admitting , albeit in an extremely convoluted way , that there was no evidence linking Saddam Hussein to terrorists and that he really had no idea why he was taking the country to war . 
In the case of the BP oil disaster though , when the true environmental and economic toll could take months or even years to become evident , the idea of `` known unknowns '' and `` unknown unknowns '' does not seem that ridiculous . 
Among the biggest `` known unknowns '' is the long-term effects on the marine environment of a spill of this magnitude . 
There are questions too about what additional damage , if any , rendered by the government 's decision to use such huge quantities of chemical dispersants to prevent the oil from coming ashore . 
And then there is the uncertainty , fuelled by a lack of transparency by BP and the Obama Administration , even about the `` known knowns '' . 
Independent scientists and environmental organizations have grown suspicious of official reports on the oil spill . 
Do we really know what we think we know ? 
Now a team led by Timothy Crone , a marine geophysicist at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University , has tackled another of the great `` known unknowns '' : how much oil entered the Gulf of Mexico in the nearly three months it took for BP to gain control over its Macondo well ? 
The team , which published their research in the journal Science , claim to have produced the first estimate of the flow rate from the well that is independent , transparent in its methodology , and reviewed by other scientists . 
The team arrived at its estimate by analyzing video of the gushing well shot from the ocean floor . 
And it turns out , their numbers are very close to the final figure produced by a special team of experts assembled by the Obama administration . 
That 's a bit of a break for government agencies who have been routinely accused by scientists and environmentalists of spinning the spill . 
Crone 's team concluded that some 56,000 to 68,000 barrels a day gushed out of the well , releasing some 4.4 m barrels into the ocean before it was capped on July 15 . 
The study found that the oil gushed with greatest force in the first six weeks after the explosion , when there was a jagged break in the pipe leading up from the reservoir . 
The estimate is very close to the official tally arrived at by the Obama Administration 's scientific team . 
Their estimate was 4.9 m barrels , of which 800,000 were siphoned off by BP directly to a waiting tanker ship , leaving 4.1 m barrels in the water . 
But the team did not make their methodology available to other scientists for review . 
But while that agreement might lead some to immediately dismiss the study as pro-government spin , it 's worth remembering that Crone was among the first scientists to take on BP 's claim that it was impossible to estimate the flow from the well . 
Crone 's efforts , supported by Congressman Ed Markey , forced BP to release video from its undersea cameras , which showed giant clouds of oil billowing out of the broken well . 
And as weeks turned into months , government officials kept raising their estimates of the flow rate from 1,000 barrels a day to 19,000 by late May , and then 69,000 . 
When the Deepwater Horizon went down , Crone was one of a small group of people who had experience measuring oil and gas on the ocean floor . 
He spent four years developing a technique for measuring natural releases of oil from the ocean floor , using high resolution video from underwater cameras . 
The seemingly endless video from BP 's webcam had very low resolution and could not be analyzed . 
Back in May , when BP released its first brief clips from the ocean floor , Crone immediately asked the oil company to share more higher resolution images , to no avail it seems . 
The researchers had access only to a few brief high resolution clips released to Congress . 
`` We clearly acknowledge the limits of our technique ; we 're unlikely to ever know the exact figure , '' he said in a statement . 
But it is an important start . 
As time goes on , I hope to keep track of the work of government and independent scientists , environmental organizations , and local groups on the ground to fill in the blanks around the `` known unknowns '' . 
I am looking forward to getting a first hand look at some of those efforts today aboard the Greenpeace ship , the Arctic Sunrise . 
A team of scientists is lowering monitoring equipment and gathering samples from depths of 1,000 m to gauge the effects of the remaining oil and gas in the Gulf . 
Here is their early account : The first piece of science work started on Monday morning and continued until first thing Tuesday dropping a half-tonne apparatus that includes a ` CTD ' , or `` conductivity , temperature and depth '' device , along with an array of water sampling containers and various other water monitoring instruments , down 1000m or so below the ocean 's surface . 
They will be sharing these samples with other scientists to help build a broad , and importantly , a more independent picture of just what is going on beneath the waves of the Gulf . 
