\* Gaddafi troops briefly battle rebels on Tunisian territory \* Tunisians demand immediate stop to Libyan incursions \* Gaddafi trying to crush rebels outside eastern stronghold \* Loud blasts heard in Tripoli By Lin Noueihed and Tarek Amara TRIPOLI\/TUNIS , April 29 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya 's two-month civil war spilled over the border into Tunisia , provoking outrage in the western neighbor , while rebels in Misrata said only NATO could halt the bombardment of the besieged city . 
The struggle between forces loyal to Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi and rebels trying to end his more than four decades of rule drew in outsiders last month , as NATO began air strikes on government troops under a United Nations mandate . 
But on Thursday the fighting spilled over Libya 's land frontier , when Gaddafi troops battled rebels on Tunisian territory for control of the Dehiba-Wazin frontier crossing . 
The incursion was brief and limited , and Gaddafi 's troops even apologised locally . 
But the response was nevertheless furious from Tunisia , where the Arab world 's wave of uprisings began late last year , leading to the overthrow of President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali in January . 
Illustrating the difficulty of keeping the Libyan conflict sealed within the country 's land borders , artillery shells fired by Gaddafi forces also struck the Tunisian side of the crossing . 
Rebels seized the post a week ago , as it controls the only road link which their comrades in Libya 's Western Mountains have with the outside world , making them rely otherwise on rough tracks for supplies of food , fuel and medicine . 
After weeks of advances and retreats by rebel and government forces along the Mediterranean coast , fighting has settled into a pattern of clashes and skirmishes . 
Thursday 's battle for the crossing between Dehiba in Tunisia and Wazin on the Libyan side was typical of the fluid and confused conflict , which broke out in mid-February . 
First government troops stormed the post in what appeared to be part of a broader offensive to root out rebel outposts beyond their eastern heartland around Benghazi , Libya 's second city . 
Gaddafi 's soldiers apologised to their Tunisian counterparts for the incursion and hoisted their flag at the border , tearing down a pre-Gaddafi era flag that had fluttered for a few days . 
But then the rebels , who had retreated into Tunisia , counter-attacked and as the fog of war descended , rumors spread that the post was back in their hands . 
In the confusion , scores of vehicles headed for the border from the Tunisian side with civilians on board shouting `` We 've won ! 
We 've won ! '' 
but they swiftly turned back when they found Gaddafi 's forces were still there . 
In the port city of Misrata , the rebels ' biggest enclave in western Libya , the plight of residents worsened . 
Rebels accused Gaddafi 's forces of firing bigger rockets than the Russian-made Grad missiles largely used until now . 
A rebel called Marwan said in an audio statement on YouTube that the bigger rockets cause much greater destruction . 
`` Gaddafi the tyrant is trying to wipe out the city of Misrata , '' he said . 
Gaddafi denies his forces are attacking civilians and says his opponents are Islamist militants and foreign-backed agitators who deliberately put non-combatants in harm 's way . 
Rebel spokesman Abdelsalam said from Misrata that there had been sporadic clashes on the road to the port and shelling of residential areas . 
`` Those areas are packed with civilians who fled the fighting in the city center , '' he said . 
`` The ball is now in NATO 's court . 
After Gaddafi 's soldiers and snipers were driven out from the city center and Tripoli Street by the rebel fighters , their strategy has been to shell the city from the outskirts . 
This can only be solved by NATO . '' 
The Western alliance has been conducting air strikes on Libya since last month under a U.N. Security Council resolution calling for civilians to be protected . 
But military deadlock in Libya has exposed growing international rifts , with critics of NATO bombing calling it another case of the West trying to overthrow a government by stretching the terms of a U.N. resolution . 
At least two loud explosions were heard in Tripoli on Thursday night and NATO jets rumbled overhead . 
It was not immediately clear what the targets were . 
The official Libyan news agency Jana also said that `` the colonial , crusader aggression '' hit civilian and military sites in a Western Mountains region town on Thursday evening . 
Two people were killed and many others were wounded , it said . 
Gaddafi forces also took a town in the remote southeastern desert , state television reported . 
`` Libyan forces have seized full control of the town of Kufra and purified it of the armed gangs , '' it quoted a military spokesman as saying . 
But rebels denied this . 
`` The battle is not over and the situation is unclear , '' said spokesman Mohamed al-Muntasser . 
