Tide of anger may turn an ecological tragedy into a political nightmare Fifty days in , the backlash from the BP oil spill is being felt on both sides of the Atlantic . 
As the special relationship comes under strain , Obama invests an unprecedented amount of presidential time on a visit to the Gulf , while Cameron faces rightwing flak Activists with the group Seize BP hold a protest in front of the BP Amoco Government Affairs Office in Washington , DC , on 3 June 2010 . 
Photograph : Saul Loeb\/AFP\/Getty Images The anger is palpable in the southern Louisiana towns where livelihoods are being slowly and inexorably choked by oil . 
Pickup trucks with '' BP sucks '' scrawled on their panels bounce along the roads . 
Anti-BP rallies are planned this weekend in communities too small to rate a petrol station but which now sport giant billboards advertising law firms touting for people who want to sue the oil giant for compensation . 
Locals in Plaquemines , a long spit of marshy land between the Gulf of Mexico and Mississippi , complain that BP has been too slow in hiring fishermen and shrimpers to help fight the spill , as promised . 
`` Fifty days into it and they are still trying to get out the booms and set up their equipment , '' said Therese Creppel , who owns a seafood restaurant and is now struggling to find oyster and shrimp for her menu . 
Gripes about the delays and aggravation involved in filing compensation claims dominate the airwaves of local radio stations . 
Creppel has put in her own call to BP seeking compensation , but is worried the oil company could collapse under the financial and political pressures now engulfing it . 
`` Someone told me right at the very beginning that this is going to bankrupt BP , '' she said . 
`` I did n't believe it then , but now it 's a little scary . '' 
But it is not only the locals who are afraid . 
The oil washing up on the shores of America 's deep south is proving toxic to more than the local wildlife . 
Both President Barack Obama and Britain 's prime minister , David Cameron , are finding to their cost that a crisis for a globalised company like BP carries collateral damage . 
The urgent question for both men now is of who will be damaged more by the collision of politics and big business that is testing the UK 's special relationship with the US to its limit . 
The crisis is as much about money as it is about the environment . 
In Plaquemines , where rigs and refineries line the roads , there is as much anger at Obama for putting a moratorium on offshore drilling as there is at BP for provoking the six-month timeout in the first place . 
Almost everybody has someone who has worked in the industry and there is as much talk about fears that the offshore industry might migrate elsewhere as a result of the crisis as there is about the black tide washing into the marshes . 
Gary Sercovich and his sons hire out crew boats to BP that are normally used to service the stricken Deepwater Horizon rig . 
Now they ferry workers and containment booms to the source of the gusher , a new , more lucrative business . 
Sercovich , while upset about the lasting damage from the spill , is almost zenlike as to its cause . 
`` It was bound to happen one day , '' he said . 
`` We are used to oil spills here , only not as gigantic as this , of course . '' 
For Obama , who will make his fourth trip to the site of America 's greatest environmental disaster tomorrow , no other issue not Iran 's nuclear ambitions , not Middle Eastern turmoil , not two active wars nor the looming November elections now so dominates his time . 
Accompanied by top staffers , he will stay overnight in the Gulf for the first time . 
In a world where every single minute of a president 's time is accounted for , it is a huge investment of political capital . 
Obama 's advisers hope the TV cameras and huge pool of White House reporters that follow his every movement will portray him as someone in control of the situation . 
They are desperate to avoid a growing comparison between his reaction to the spill and President George W Bush 's complacency over Hurricane Katrina in nearby New Orleans . 
Until now the president has largely confined himself to withering attacks on BP 's management , an approach that has savaged the reputation of the company and its share price , which has fallen 39 % since the rig exploded on 20 April , killing 11 men . 
There is little doubt that it has been a deliberate White House strategy to lash out at BP , not only because the company clearly has much to answer for , but also because it provides a useful political foil . 
The oil giant is easy to portray as foreign even though it is a fully-fledged global business with huge numbers of operations and employees in America . 
Much has been made of Obama and others referring to the firm as British Petroleum , though it long ago dropped the moniker . 
The attack was its sharpest when Obama who had faced protracted calls to show more anger at BP staged a carefully choreographed appearance on NBC 's Today show . 
Obama said that he had been far from cool in his response and had been speaking to experts on oil spill '' ... so I know whose ass to kick '' . 
The words immediately created headlines across America . 
`` It was the ass heard round the world , '' remarked Los Angeles Times White House correspondent Alex Wagner . 
It was not the first use of bellicose language by the Obama administration . 
Earlier Obama 's press spokesman , Robert Gibbs , said : `` We will keep our boot on the throat of BP . '' 
The Obama administration 's anger at BP may be strategic but it taps into a sentiment bubbling up across the nation . 
BP chief executive Tony Hayward has been portrayed in the US media as a comic villain . 
Not only does he have a clipped English accent familiar to Americans from the portrayal of many Hollywood villains , he has a talent for foolish statements , not least his bleating comment at the height of the crisis that `` I want my life back '' . 
On a visceral level , the anger has been displayed in vandalism at BP petrol stations . 
A public boycott of BP stations has been organised and sales have dropped by as much as 25 % at some outlets . 
In Pennsylvania , the consumer backlash against BP is so strong that a chain of convenience stores is changing its branding at three of its stations . 
Democracy for America , a liberal grassroots group , has organised an `` Anyone but BP '' campaign that has had a huge impact across the nation . 
`` BP had the resources to drill and create this horrible disaster , now they have the responsibility to clean it up . 
But they wo n't do it on their own . 
They need to know we will make them pay one way or another , '' said Levana Layedecker , the group 's communications director . 
Robert Reich , a labor secretary under President Bill Clinton , has gone as far as to call for Obama to take BP 's North American operations over in a manner similar to that of stricken insurer AIG at the height of the financial crisis . 
`` We have a national emergency on our hands , '' Reich said . 
`` No president would allow a nuclear reactor owned by a private for-profit company to melt down in the United States while remaining under the direct control of that company . 
The meltdown in the Gulf is the environmental equivalent . '' 
While BP does make a convenient target , other companies can consider themselves fortunate not to be caught up in the crisis . 
Of the 126 people working on the Deepwater Horizon rig , only eight were BP employees . 
The oil giant may have a 65 % share of the well , but its partner , Anadarko , has a 25 % share . 
The rig was owned and operated by offshore drilling company Transocean , which leased it to BP . 
Dick Cheney 's former company , Halliburton , played a crucial role in carrying out cement work that was supposed to cap the doomed well . 
The failed blowout preventer was made by an American firm , Cameron . 
There is a bewildering array of potential bad guys to blame , not just one single villain . 
But that argument is unhelpful to those looking for a simple narrative to explain such an overwhelming catastrophe . 
By the end of last week the narrative had taken a new direction , as British politicians accused Obama of anti-British sentiment . 
`` I do think there 's something slightly worrying about the anti-British rhetoric that seems to be permeating America , '' said Boris Johnson , the mayor of London . 
`` I would like to see a bit of cool heads rather than endlessly buck-passing and name-calling . '' 
The former chairman of the Tory party , Lord Tebbit , accused Obama of displaying a `` despicable '' attitude . 
`` The whole might of American wealth and technology is displayed as utterly unable to deal with the disastrous spill so what is more natural than a crude , bigoted , xenophobic display of partisan political presidential petulance against a multinational company ? '' 
One of Britain 's top business figures , John Napier , the chairman of the insurance company RSA , waded into the row , calling on Obama to act in a `` more statesmanlike way '' . 
In an open letter to the US president , Napier said Obama 's comments were `` coming across as somewhat prejudicial and personal '' . 
Napier wrote : `` There is a sense here that these attacks are being made because BP is British . 
There is no doubt that BP , as a UK plc , is totally committed to do everything possible to contain the oil leak and meet all its obligations in the USA . '' 
This weekend BP is under pressure to cancel its dividend until the scale of its liabilities is clear . 
The oil giant 's official position remains that no decision is likely on payouts to shareholders until closer to 27 July , when it releases half-year figures . 
But privately its executives recognize the company will be forced to to take a decision much earlier . 
At a BP board meeting tomorrow three options will be considered cut the second-quarter dividend , which is due out in September , defer it , or issue dividend payments as `` scrip '' , effectively an IOU to shareholders , rather than cash . 
The company could opt to put the dividend into an escrow or trust fund until the full scale of its liabilities , which some analysts believe could total $ 40bn , is known . 
Given what is at stake , it is no surprise that BP is now adopting a more humble tone , pledging to `` listen very carefully '' to what Obama tells its executives when they meet in Washington this Wednesday . 
But canceling , or even cutting the dividend , the most generous paid by a UK company and a significant source of income for pension funds , will bring problems for Cameron . 
It has become a totem of national pride . 
As Lord Jones , a government trade ambassador and former trade minister , put it last week : `` Pension fund beneficiaries will be saying : ` Are you standing up for us , Mr Cameron ? ' '' 
Some in the rightwing press have adopted a similar line , dismayed by Cameron 's initial response , a statement in which he said he understood the US government 's frustration because the Deepwater explosion was a `` catastrophe '' for the environment . 
`` Stand up for your country , Mr Cameron , '' screamed the Daily Mail . 
`` Cameron fails to back BP in fight with Obama , '' concluded the Daily Telegraph . 
Tim Montgomerie , editor of the ConservativeHome blog , believes the `` BP saga '' highlights Cameron 's fraught relationship with newspapers that have historically been allies of the Tories . 
`` He never really sealed the deal with the Mail and the Telegraph can be pretty hostile as well , '' Montgomerie said . 
`` Cameron is stuck on 37 % in the opinion polls . 
There has been no honeymoon effect from entering government . 
Tony Blair was on about 55 % to 60 % at this stage . 
Cameron has very little support in the media . 
I think partly it is his failure to win the election . 
Fairly or unfairly , the right feels as though he stuffed them once by not winning the election , then he stuffed them again by giving away too much to the Liberal Democrats . '' 
Others believe it may be a case of naked self-interest rather than ideology that is at work . 
`` There is a feeling that under Andy Coulson -LRB- Cameron 's spin doctor -RRB- the administration has favored News International the Times and the Sun , '' said one senior figure working for a rightwing newspaper . 
`` There is a feeling that the Mail and Telegraph have been treated as second class citizens and now they do not feel loyalty . '' 
But even on the right of his own party there is discord over what Cameron should do . 
`` Let 's separate our interests as a democratic nation from those of a company , '' said Douglas Carswell , Tory MP for Harwich and Clacton . 
`` This was a major catastrophe it was environmental vandalism . 
We ca n't wrap ourselves in the flag now . '' 
Find out more and buy the ebook on Kindle from Amazon UK and US or iTunes UK or US Follow all the top stories of the day on Twitter with the Guardian 's world news team achrisafis : RT News : One of the #Algeria hostages is Irish . 
