Gulf oil spill : Barack Obama and David Cameron move to end rift over BP A telephone call to David Cameron eases tension amid fears that stock markets will dump oil giant 's shares tomorrow Oil from the BP spill washes up on a Gulf coast beach in Alabama yesterday . 
Photograph : Dan Anderson\/EPA The following correction was printed in the Observer 's For the record column , Sunday 20 June 2010 We reported below that `` private companies , councils and public bodies have invested hundreds of billions of pounds of their pension funds into the company '' . 
According to National Association of Pension Funds estimates , the amount invested in BP by UK pension funds is 1.5 % of total assets , which are in excess of # 800bn . 
President Barack Obama moved to defuse a growing political row over the Gulf of Mexico oil spill yesterday by assuring the prime minister that he was not trying to blame Britain for the catastrophe . 
In a 30-minute phone call , the US president took the extraordinary step of insisting he had not been trying to undermine the value of BP when criticising the company . 
He had reacted furiously to delays by BP in capping the leak , which has been described as the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
Obama , who has been criticised for calling BP `` British Petroleum '' despite the fact the company dropped the name more than a decade ago , insisted his anger had nothing to do with national identity . 
In a revealing statement , Downing Street said : `` President Obama said to the prime minister that his unequivocal view was that BP was a multinational global company and that frustrations about the oil spill had nothing to do with national identity . 
The prime minister stressed the economic importance of BP to the UK , US and other countries . 
The president made clear that he had no interest in undermining BP 's value . 
`` The president and prime minister reaffirmed their confidence in the unique strength of the US-UK relationship . '' 
Government officials insisted the discussion had been amicable and the two men had even bet each other a beer over the result of the England-US World Cup encounter . 
The prime minister has been under intense pressure from senior figures in his own party and parts of the press to stand up for his country and defend the British-based company . 
Boris Johnson , the London mayor , was among those who complained that the tone of the attacks on BP were `` anti-British '' . 
Cameron had resisted calls to respond to the attacks , instead saying he understood Obama 's anger and was `` frustrated and concerned about the environmental damage caused by the leak '' . 
One Tory backbencher , Douglas Carswell , said there had been an act of `` environmental vandalism '' and now was not the time to `` wrap ourselves in the flag '' . 
Eleven men were killed following an explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig . 
Scientists have said the amount of oil gushing out of the well is far higher than previously estimated . 
The US Geological Survey has calculated that as many as 40,000 barrels a day could have been escaping before containment efforts were put in place . 
Obama , also under political pressure , reacted furiously and insisted he would have fired BP 's chief executive had he employed him . 
Tony Hayward was criticised for saying the leak was `` relatively tiny '' compared to the size of the ocean . 
BP shares have fallen by 40 % since the explosion and could be hit again if the company decides to suspend its quarterly dividend payout . 
The company is the biggest dividend-payer in the UK and has been expected to pay more than # 7bn over the year . 
Private companies , councils and public bodies have invested hundreds of billions of pounds of their pension funds into the company because it is normally considered a safe bet . 
The company reiterated yesterday that no decision had been made on the dividend . 
Various options will be discussed at a board meeting tomorrow . 
Ed Miliband , the Labor leadership candidate and shadow climate change secretary , said the lesson was that the world had to be serious about weaning itself off a chronic dependence on oil . 
The environmental group Greenpeace had called on local authorities to reconsider the heavy reliance of their pension funds on BP in the months leading up the accident . 
They argued it was wrong to invest public money in the company because of its involvement in risky projects . 
One of the councils that had invested most in the company was West Yorkshire , which had ploughed in 3.35 % , or # 197m , of its pension fund . 
Charlie Kronick , senior climate advisor for Greenpeace , said the lessons of the Gulf spill were that `` chasing the last drops of oil '' carried huge risks and the likelihood of accidents and unreliable dividends was likely to rise . 
But Ros Altmann , an expert on pensions policy , pointed out that all investments carried risks . 
`` If you do n't want your pension to be at risk of a BP-style or bank-style disaster , buy gilts . 
You have to take some risks to make some returns , '' she said . 
