George Galloway addresses the US senate subcommittee for homeland security and governmental affairs in Washington . 
Photograph : Dennis Cook\/AP George Galloway today accused US senators of manufacturing `` the mother of all smokescreens '' as he defended himself from charges that he profited from Iraqi oil sales . 
The anti-war Respect MP for Bethnal Green and Bow , in east London , told the Senate subcommittee it had made a `` schoolboy howler '' in its investigation of illegal Iraqi oil sales . 
He said it was attempting to divert attention from the aftermath of the US-led invasion of Iraq . 
In a defiant performance on Capitol Hill , Mr Galloway said senators had confused the dating of evidence against him and relied too much on the testimony of a former Iraqi vice president held prisoner in Abu Ghraib . 
`` I know that standards have slipped over the last few years in Washington , but for a lawyer you are remarkably cavalier with any idea of justice , '' he told Senator Norm Coleman , the Republican subcommittee chairman . 
`` I am here today - but last week you already found me guilty . 
You traduced my name around the world without ever having asked me a single question , without ever having contacted me , without ever having written to me or telephoned me , without any contact with me whatsoever - and you call that justice . '' 
Mr Galloway 's testimony rested on two key points : that the documents naming him in the senate report were the same documents the Daily Telegraph had relied upon in a story he later successfully sued over , and that the subcommittee had no evidence he had made the financial gains from Iraqi oil that it alleged . 
`` What counts is not the names on the paper . 
What counts is where 's the money , senator ? 
Who paid me money , senator ? 
Who paid me hundreds of thousands of dollars ? 
`` The answer to that is nobody - and if you had anybody who paid me a penny , you would have produced them here today . '' 
The senate report claimed Mr Galloway and Charles Pasqua , the former French interior minister , were given potentially lucrative oil allocations as a reward for their support in calling for sanctions against Saddam Hussein 's regime to be loosened . 
Mr Pasqua also denies the claims . 
Mr Galloway told the senators they had made a `` schoolboy howler '' in dating their evidence against him to almost a decade earlier than the Daily Telegraph and a period from 1992-93 when the UN oil for food program - the center of the investigation - was not even in existence . 
The MP , elected to parliament on May 5 on an anti-war ticket in the former seat of Oona King , a Tony Blair loyalist , said the Christian Science Monitor , which used documents from the same period had retracted its story and admitted the documents were fake . 
`` It is a proven fact these forged documents existed and were being circulated among rightwing newspapers , '' Mr Galloway told Sen Coleman . 
`` You have nothing on me , senator , except my name on lists of names from Iraq , many of which have been drawn up after the installation of your puppet government in Baghdad , '' he said . 
One of the main allegations in the senate report is that Mr Galloway received oil allocations with the help of Fawaz Zureikat , a Jordanian businessman and chairman of the Mariam appeal set up by the MP to help a 4-year-old Iraqi girl with leukemia . 
The allegations of oil trading links between the two men - denied by both parties - formed the bulk of the questioning of Mr Galloway after he had finished his opening statement . 
He told the senators : `` I can assure you Mr Zureikat never gave me a penny from an oil deal , a cake deal , a bread deal or from any other deal . '' 
When not defending himself against the senate report 's allegations , Mr Galloway attacked the morality of the post-Gulf war sanctions on Iraq and the wisdom of the 2003 US-led invasion . 
He described the sub-committee 's claims as the `` mother of all smokescreens '' , intended to divert attention from the `` crimes '' committed in the invasion of Iraq . 
`` Senator , in everything I said about Iraq I turned out to be right and you turned out to be wrong - and 100,000 have paid with their lives , 1,600 of them American soldiers sent to their deaths on a pack of lies , '' Mr Galloway told Sen Coleman . 
He insisted he had been a longer-standing opponent of Saddam Hussein than anyone questioning him . 
`` I was an opponent of Saddam Hussein when the British and American governments and businessmen were selling him guns and gas , '' he told the subcommittee . 
`` I have a better record of opposition to Saddam Hussein than you do . '' 
