Thursday 14 July 2005 11.13 BST Terror came to the doorstep of King 's College London last week - one variant of modern warfare that its department of war studies has been researching and teaching about for more than three decades . 
For many of those struggling to understand the conflicts that are rocking the world , one path has been to the Strand where the department has offices that look like a bunker below street level , under the command of Sir Lawrence Freedman , official historian of the Falklands campaign . 
Its postgraduate students have been drawn from far and wide . 
Now King 's is taking its war degree to the world , launching an e-learning masters , War in the Modern World , for which , from September , it hopes to have 70 students signed up around the globe . 
This expeditionary move has been more than three years in the planning and involved writing a completely new degree , suited to the internet , says Anne-Lucie Norton , director of the e-learning program . 
The possibilities for the use of pictures , maps and video material are obvious - and using the net students will role-play the Cuban missile crisis . 
-LRB- They came very close to nuclear war in the pilot earlier this year , apparently . -RRB- 
There is archive footage of Kennedy 's `` Ich bin ein Berliner '' speech from the height of the cold war , for instance , as well as of more recent wars . 
But Ms Norton points out that the academic rigor of the degree , its entry standards and the assessment by essays are all pretty traditional . 
The point of e-learning is not the technology : `` It 's the learning , stupid , '' she says . 
There have been academic casualties in previous e-learning campaigns , including Fathom , an e-learning portal created by the London School of Economics and Columbia University in the US . 
The most spectacular defeat was perhaps UKeU , the British e-university , which spent # 50m of taxpayers ' money to recruit 900 students and still could not get its technology to work before the funding council closed it down . 
The war studies e-degree was originally going to be delivered by UKeU and that debacle delayed the King 's launch by about a year , Ms Norton reckons , but she is confident the ground for this new learning exercise has been well reconnoitred , the academic ammunition is tried and tested and , above all , that the mission is clear to go . 
Core modules cover contemporary warfare from 1945 to the present day , including a unit on the `` war on terror '' and its prospects . 
A web-CT e-learning platform links students to tutors and the King 's College library - and to each other in chatrooms designed to foster an online community of interest and to stimulate discussion . 
Some of the discussion promises to be passionate - Israel and Palestine and the Iraq wars , for instance . 
More than 600 people have registered an interest in the e-learning degree over the past couple of years as it has been prepared , and there is an established international audience for King 's war studies degrees among people working in the government and non-governmental organizations as well as the services and the defense industries . 
But the college now has to convert that interest into paying customers - who would have to part with # 12,000 for the MA taken part-time over three years and # 10,500 for a diploma . 
Not at all , they 're changing lives , says @NUS_Liam -LRB- who knew he used to be a scout ? -RRB- 
