Thursday 14 July 2005 00.03 BST In the West Bank and Gaza , portraits of dead suicide bombers and graffiti extolling their deeds are plastered all over walls . 
Videos of their last interviews are on sale on street stalls . 
Their funerals are occasions for mass mourning . 
That celebrity factor helps in the recruitment of suicide bombers , young men and women brought up in the occupied territories . 
Anne Marie Oliver , an American academic who has spent years studying the phenomenon in the West Bank and Gaza , believes the `` star factor '' and the acquiring of glory could also have motivated the Yorkshire bombers . 
They will not have posters up in Britain or mass mourning , but they will attain glory on internet sites across the Muslim world , according to Ms Oliver , who has co-written with Paul Steinberg the newly published The Road to Martyrs ' Square : A Journey into the World of the Suicide Bomber . 
`` It does not matter whether it is Britain or Syria or the West Bank , they are highly romantic figures , '' she said . 
The fact that they carried with them credit cards and other personal ID suggests they wanted to be known . 
The British media has , in the main , demonised the Yorkshire bombers in much the same way as the IRA was in the 1980s and 1990s . 
The adjectives come readily : fanatics , mad , evil . 
Ms Oliver does not believe suicide bombing is a brave act , but , she says , `` I steer away from the rubric of evil . 
You have to develop a concept of the suicide bomber without either of these extremes '' . 
Suicide bombings , which have their origins in medieval times , can be traced through Japan 's kamikaze pilots to the Iranians during the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war , and to the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka . 
The modern version was developed by Hizbollah and its predecessor during the Lebanese civil war , with attacks on the US and then Israelis , and was refined by the Palestinians in 1994-96 and in the second intifada , beginning in 2000 . 
The number of suicide bombings has increased in the past five years , a combination of the Palestinian attacks and those in Iraq , where the numbers now outstrip those in Israel . 
Ms Oliver said : `` The motives are diverse : religion , nationalism , grievance , fame , glory and money , and , last of all and most important of all , they have to have an entire system that supports their actions -LRB- sympathetic groups round the world -RRB- . '' 
She said the Yorkshire bombers would not necessarily have needed outside help from al-Qaida and could have gained all the knowledge , including practical advice , they needed from the internet . 
Boaz Ganor , head of the International Policy Institute for Counter-Terrorism in Herzliya , Israel , disagreed , saying that suicide bombers needed experienced handlers to provide explosives and choose targets . 
His view is that all suicide attacks worldwide are organised by movements . 
`` If one wants to understand the phenomenon , do not understand the motivation of the perpetrator but the motivation of the organization , '' he said . 
For organizations , whether Hamas or al-Qaida , the motivation was the same : the suicide bomber is the most effective weapon available . 
`` The suicide bomber is the smartest of smart bombs . 
He can look around and decide when he can maximize the terror , maximize the casualties , '' Dr Ganor said . 
Even if he is caught , he or she can detonate the explosives , killing those trying to intervene . 
The figures bear out Dr Ganor 's assessment . 
According to Israel , it has faced 160 suicide bombers in the last five years : they account for only 0.6 % of the attacks but half the Israeli casualties - 514 . 
The movements lock the recruits in , in part through the recording of the final videos for release after the bombing . 
Among Palestinians , a further factor , one that does not apply in Yorkshire , is poverty . 
The suicide bomber knows his family will be cared for after his death by various Arab charities and will often be better off than before . 
The family will also enjoy greater prestige . 
Most of the bombers tend to be young , well-educated , and from lower middle-class backgrounds rather than those fighting for daily survival . 
An Israeli government study found that 23 % of suicide bombers between 2000 and this year had been university graduates . 
Their families , like those in Yorkshire , were often unaware of their intentions . 
Dr Ganor said that religion was the predominant motive . 
`` He believes he is carrying out God 's will . 
They do not call it a suicide but shuada , martyrdom . 
They believe they do not die : they just transfer from life to heaven , a one-way ticket . 
And they believe there will be 72 virgins that serve them . '' 
But religion is not the sole explanation . 
The Tamil Tigers were just as eager for self-sacrifice but were not motivated by religion . 
It was a matter of revenge , a way for the powerless to fight back , to create fear . 
There is a desire among jihadists for revenge over what is seen as the brutal treatment of fellow Muslims : Russia 's suppression of Chechnya , the Israeli occupation of Gaza and the West Bank , and the US and British role in Iraq . 
Toby Dodge , one of Britain 's leading academics specialising on Iraq , said that Iraq has had a bigger impact on British Muslims than Chechnya or the Israeli-Palestinian conflict . 
`` How Iraq is different is that Americans and British are killing Muslims . 
If you are a radical imam trying to mobilise a set of poorly integrated Yorkshire youths of Pakistani origin , it is a much more potent message to say the Americans and British are killing Muslims , '' Dr Dodge said . 
Ms Oliver said that one of the most important motivating factors was what she described as `` an element of ecstatic camaraderie , which is central to the group '' . 
She believed the Yorkshire bombers shared the happiness of camaraderie . 
`` The people we studied , a Hamas cell , described their time before their death as the happiest day of their life . 
What I have read of the London bombings , police officers described the three guys on CCTV as looking as if they were going on holiday , '' she said . 
