cents Firm hopes containment box could be working by Monday cents Concerns grow for rare birds on island wildlife preserve Thursday 6 May 2010 19.41 BST The oil spill containment box aboard a barge in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP The giant steel and concrete box which is seen as the best chance of stopping the BP oil spill arrived at the disaster scene in the Gulf of Mexico today , as authorities struggled to control oil breaching an island wildlife preserve . 
Over the next few days cranes will attempt to lower the 100-tonne contraption around 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 metres -RRB- to the sea floor and position it over a leaking pipe that has been gushing 210,000 gallons of crude a day into the Gulf . 
If all goes accord to plan , the four-storey box will serve as a giant funnel , collecting the oil and piping it to a ship . 
BP officials have said repeatedly that the plan for capturing and redirecting the oil is exceedingly complex , and has never before been tried at such depths . 
`` You have 100 tonnes of steel . 
You have to stop , reposition , and stabilise these sorts of things . 
I do n't think it 's a fast process , '' said John Curry , a BP spokesman . 
He said the system had been successfully deployed at depths of 365 metres after hurricane Katrina , but not by a BP crew . 
In a best-case scenario , the contraption should be operational by Monday . 
One bookmaker rated the chances of shutting off the leak completely at 1,000-1 . 
The US coastguard confirmed for the first time that oil had made its way past protective booms and was surrounding Freemason Island . 
The area is part of a chain of uninhabited barrier islands in the Breton national wildlife refuge . 
Meanwhile , the Obama Administration suspended planned lease sales for drilling off the coast of Virginia . 
Environmentalists who have visited the area described a thin band of orange-coloured oil lapping at the shore . 
`` The expanse itself is made up of three to four different kinds of oil ranging in thickness , including bright orange ribbons of weathered oil on the surface , '' said Rick Steiner , a conservation professor at the University of Alaska , who flew over the region for Greenpeace . 
`` There were no visible research vessels , and the only visible relief effort in this area was about 30 shrimp boats off the shore of Little Gozier island pulling booms , with no skimmers taking the oil off the surface . '' 
Efforts to hold back the oil by repositioning booms were undermined by BP 's decision to break up the spill with dispersants . 
The resulting thinner oil was proving much harder to contain . 
`` The oil just scoots right under the boom . 
There is as much oil behind the booms as in the booms , '' he said . 
`` It 's an exercise in futility . '' 
The breach deepened fears for brown pelicans and other endangered birds . 
`` This is an important nesting season , '' said David Ringer , of the Audubon Society . 
Heavier concentrations of crude remained further offshore , and the coastguard said weather forecasts suggested it would remain so until the weekend . 
BP said it was relying on cameras from submersible robots to help guide the containment box into place and avoid further damage to the pipe . 
In addition to the dark , frigid temperatures and extreme high pressures at such depths , crews will be worried about triggering another explosion because of the volatile mix of oil , gas and water . 
BP faces an equally daunting challenge to contain the political and financial fallout . 
The Obama administration has kept up the pressure on the oil giant , a move seen in part as a tactic to divert criticism of its own role in the disaster . 
Recent news reports have suggested the interior department exercised lax oversight in approving BP 's operations in the Gulf , accepting too readily its claims there was little risk of an accident . 
The department was further embarrassed by an ABC television report disclosing that Tom Strickland , who is in charge of fish and wildlife , went on a rafting trip in the Grand Canyon with his wife and other officials five days after the spill . 
