When Doonesbury was dropped from G2 , hundreds of enraged fans were quick to point out our mistake . 
To celebrate its return , lifelong fan Linda Grant explains what the fuss is about , and talks to its creator Garry Trudeau ` It would be a disservice to Mr Mitchell and his character to prejudge the man , but everything known to date could lead one to conclude he 's guilty . 
Guilty , guilty , guilty !! '' If , whenever you sniff out a lying politician or crook with a good lawyer , you want to look him in the eye and shout : `` Guilty , guilty , guilty ! '' 
, you are , whether you know it or not , uttering the words of that great student revolutionary and radical radio jock Mark Slackmeyer , speaking in this instance of the Watergate conspirator John Mitchell , in 1973 . 
And guilty , guilty , guilty is the indictment of the dolt who thought that it would n't matter if the Guardian , after 25 years of Doonesbury , the comic strip in which Slackmeyer appeared , decided to drop it . 
Why does Doonesbury matter ? 
OK , here 's why . 
It 's all one big 35-year story , starting with the cartoon 's inception in 1970 , with the lives of the eponymous Mike Doonesbury , Mark Slackmeyer and Zonker Harris , from their layabout days on Walden Pond , the student commune in New England , to the baby-boomer middle age we are all stunned to have found ourselves reaching . 
I first came across the strip when I was hitchhiking across the US a year after the Nixon resignation , a 2lb copy of Pynchon 's Gravity 's Rainbow weighing down my backpack . 
I was in America because , well , wow ! 
No one I knew back then was anti-American ; out of the response to the Vietnam war had come the counter-culture . 
America was the country of Gloria Steinem and Ms Magazine , of the Black Panthers and the Chicago Seven , Jane Fonda astride a tank in Hanoi , Vermont communes , hash brownies -LRB- whatever brownies were -RRB- , group marriage , Cheech and Chong . 
You could not turn your back on America if you were at all interested in your own generation and its future . 
I crossed the border into Canada to look up an old boyfriend , a graduate student at the University of Manitoba . 
`` Here , look at this , '' he said , showing me the local newspaper . 
It was a comic strip which did n't just satirise but editorialised , sustaining a day-by-day argument against the government and its domestic and foreign policy , told in narrative form . 
But what jumped out at you about Doonesbury was that it was a comic strip about us . 
We were those student layabouts , and there in the little boxes were our political discussions , our lives , our values . 
The character who most engaged my attention then was Joanie Caucus , the escapee wife and new feminist who tried to bring women 's liberation to the stoned guys in the Walden Pond commune . 
Joanie was a cartoon character with baggage : an ex-husband who would rather go bowling than talk to her , a daughter she was trying to bring up as a free woman . 
And she embodied feminism 's dichotomy ; the desire for freedom and the desire for a relationship . 
We followed the Walden Ponders trying to fix her up with the Rev , the self-styled `` fighting priest who can really talk to the young '' , who had n't had a date since before the Selma march -LRB- `` I 've been busy '' -RRB- , then with Andy Lippincott , perhaps the first ever cartoon character to come out of the closet , mid-frame . 
But the strip 's ambitions ranged beyond the living room at Walden Pond . 
Joanie went to law school at Berkeley . 
She got a job working for a woman senator and married Rick Redfern , the investigative reporter . 
Joanie took us to Washington and the strip took us to Vietnam itself , to meet Phred the Vietcong fighter , later bringing him back to America to testify at a Senate sub-committee on the fate of Cambodian refugees , feted at the kind of radical-chic dinners that Tom Wolfe might have satirised -LRB- `` Can I have your roll ? '' -RRB- . 
The 70s turned into the 80s , into Reagan 's America , and still no one at Walden had graduated . 
We knew Doonesbury was stuck in a timewarp , but it was still a shock when Trudeau took a year off to re-think his characters ' lives . 
His brilliance was to decide to confront us with the choices we were making in our own lives , to turn a political satire into a social one , a critique of what the baby-boom generation was making of its own adulthood . 
Joanie 's boss got Alzheimer 's . 
Mark was the second character to come out as gay and confounded us with sex 's reckless , ruthless political incorrectness , falling in love with a Republican . 
Meanwhile , Mike went to work in advertising and had to represent the tobacco industry : enter a new character , Buttsy , a talking cigarette . 
Mike moved out to Seattle at the time of the dotcom boom to launch the software for a search engine and got eaten alive by Microsoft . 
His wife JJ , Joanie 's daughter , ran off to find herself as a performance artist . 
When the strip returned to Vietnam , Phred was running a resort hotel and acting as a consultant for Nike . 
We went on reading Doonesbury , not just because of the politics , which were as sharp as ever with Reagan in the Oval Office , but because it was the lifelong soap opera of ourselves . 
You could dismiss it as the Archers for ageing hippies , but Trudeau is smart enough to continually update not only the politics , but the characters , introducing the next generation : Joanie and Rick 's son , Alex , now at Walden College , has shamed his parents by joining the CIA as a summer intern , and managing to accidentally launch a Hellfire missile from a Predator drone , taking out an al-Qaida ammo dump . 
Mike 's second wife , Kim Rosenthal , the orphaned Vietnamese-Jewish-Southern-Californian American , entered the strip as a Generation X hacker . 
Trudeau seems to understand contemporary America from top to bottom , from President King , the administrative head of Walden College who is engaged in a losing fight against grade inflation , down to Elmont , a mover and shaker in the Washington , DC homeless community who blew a fortune in day trading . 
And if the strip is always making us laugh and making us angry , it also has the power to move us on many levels . 
The sun coming out over the White House as the Vietnam war ends . 
Andy Lippincott dying of Aids , passing over into death listening to the Beach Boys ' Pet Sounds . 
And this year , the shock of perennial football player and resident Republican BD going to Iraq with his National Guard unit and losing his leg . 
A comic strip that deals with denial , depression , post-operative therapy ? 
But that 's Doonesbury - it just keeps on taking risks with the format . 
There were times , of course , when for a British audience it became incomprehensible as it tackled domestic questions . 
I would ring an American friend to get a briefing on the US constitution , or just stop reading for a week or so , checking in each day to see if he had moved on to something I could once again understand . 
But the strip , which had started out of my fascination with America , has remained the place where you can still understand what America is up to , an invaluable adjunct to its over-reverent journalism . 
As an American friend and long-term reader of the strip told me , and perhaps he was only half-joking : `` The only coverage I read of the Iraq war was in Doonesbury . '' 
Since 1970 , Garry Trudeau has rarely given interviews to the press . 
On Thursday night , Trudeau and I had an email exchange . 
For me , the most fascinating aspect of the cartoon was its narrative character , as if it were a serialised 19th-century novel . 
So when Trudeau took that year off , to reinvent his characters , had he had a long-term plan for each of them ? 
`` No , it was more a matter of setting them on individual paths out into the real world , '' he replied . 
`` When the strip returned , all the characters had moved forward in real time - back stories included graduation , a wedding , new jobs etc - but there was no plan beyond the new setups . 
I 've always thought of the strip as more journal than novel . 
It 's true that comics often use novelistic conventions - such as routinely tossing the characters into a great thicket of Dickensian coincidence - but mostly Doonesbury is put together on the fly , as running dispatches , so fleetingly observed that I ca n't even remember writing whole sequences . '' 
Was he pissed off at the Guardian 's decision to erase him ? 
`` Are you allowed to say ` piss off ' in British newspapers ? 
Writing for the Guardian must be fun . 
I 've certainly enjoyed appearing there . 
If memory serves , the paper signed up for Doonesbury nearly 25 years ago , just before I took a long sabbatical from the strip . 
We withdrew the feature from all 600 or so client papers , save one - the Guardian . 
We had been so delighted by the placement - and were so concerned that , once left in the lurch , the paper would never come back - that we decided to provide the Guardian with repeat episodes -LRB- it helped that we had 10 years ' worth of strips in the archives that the British public had n't seen -RRB- . 
As to the recent cancellation , I knew nothing of the decision prior to the strip being reinstated , so there was no opportunity to work myself up into a righteous snit , which was a disappointment . '' 
Doonesbury must seem to many Americans the only place in the country where dissent is still possible , and where its presidents are routinely exposed and satirised in a way that its supine press has failed to emulate . 
I asked him if he felt that his comic strip was doing a better job than the newspapers they are printed in , in sustaining a climate of political dissent in contemporary America ? 
`` Well , that 's not really for me to judge , '' he replied . 
`` I will say there 's no shortage of dissent in America - it 's just that it 's largely impotent . 
Challenges to the White House narrative continue to be reframed as unpatriotic . 
And fear-mongering has disabled civil public discourse . 
Before the last election , our friends abroad could say the problem was Bush , not the American people . 
Perhaps Doonesbury flatters us . 
It reminds us of who we once were , of our values . 
I prefer to think that it keeps us honest , because those values do not seem to have abandoned Trudeau himself . 
The counter-culture sold out , its idealism failed , we had to compromise : with being adults , holding down jobs , being parents . 
Would he go on drawing it to his dying day , or might there be a final strip , a final frame , The End ? 
`` As to when it all ends , '' he said , `` there are so many unforeseeable factors ; health , energy , interest - it 's impossible to know . '' 
But when the last Doonesbury cartoon appears , it will be the one of the great social and political records of the 20th and 21st centuries . 
A daily dose of satire and humanity , stretched across a whole lifetime Cartoons GB Trudeau . 
Reprinted with permission of Universal Press Syndicate . 
New readers start here : six characters at the heart of Doonesbury Confusingly , the title character does n't actually appear that often anymore . 
He is a former ad man who spent the 80s trying to sell Ronald Reagan and tobacco in the unlikely form of Mr Butts , a talking cigarette . 
After divorcing Joanie 's daughter JJ in 1989 , Mike now runs a dotcom company with his second wife , Kim , and daughter , Alex. Following an underwhelming career in Hollywood as a body double and a spell modelling bikinis , ditzy actress Barbara Ann Boopstein has moved back to Walden with her childhood sweetheart BD . 
She is very in touch with her emotional side , having served on the California State Task Force to Promote Self-esteem . 
Zonker Harris , Californian hippy-turnednanny , who acted as spin doctor on Duke 's unsuccessful 2000 presidential bid but is now surfing again - although he gave up his suntan after a brush with skin cancer . 
He used part of a $ 23m lottery win to buy a British title but has mislaid the rest of the money . 
Is now in charge of BD and Boopsie 's daughter , Samantha . 
Also serving in Iraq , until one of his legs was shot off , has been BD -LRB- Brian Dowling -RRB- , the all-round American hero and male chauvinist who has served in every major war from Vietnam to Iraq . 
Losing his leg led to BD being seen without his helmet for the first time , an event so momentous it was reported around the world . 
BD is back at home with his wife Boopsie . 
Uncle Duke is a mainstay , based on Hunter S Thompson and once described as `` Forrest Gump 's evil twin '' . 
His gonzo career has taken him from China -LRB- as ambassador -RRB- to American Samoa -LRB- he was governor -RRB- and the 2000 presidential election -LRB- he ran -RRB- . 
Recently he has been in Iraq , where he became mayor of Al Amok , a town he made sure lived up to its name . 
After a painful divorce and a succession of illadvised liaisons , ex-women 's libber Joanie found love with reporter Rick Redfern , became a district attorney and moaned about her work-life balance . 
Now an empty nester , she fears she will never have the financial wherewithal to retire . 
1970 The first ever Doonesbury : BD meets Mike 1975 The Vietnam war is over 1973 Mark the DJ tackles Watergate 1976 Andy Lippincott comes out 1980 Reagan heads for the White House 1990 BD goes to war in the Gulf 1990 Andy dies of Aids 2004 BD loses his leg in Iraq Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article appeared on p8 of the G2 section of the Guardian on 15.16 BST on Monday 19 September 2005 
