Timothy Geithner and his predecessor Henry Paulson have been the public faces of the U.S. government 's battle against the global economic crisis . 
But even as the secretaries of the Treasury have garnered the headlines -- as well as popular anger surrounding bank bailouts and corporate bonuses -- another official has quickly amassed great influence by committing trillions of dollars to keep markets afloat , radically redefining his institution and taking on serious risks as he seeks to rescue the American economy . 
Without a doubt , this crisis is now Ben Bernanke 's war . 
Bernanke has become the country 's economist in chief , the banker for the United States and perhaps the world , and has employed every weapon in the Federal Reserve 's arsenal . 
He has overseen the broadest use of the Fed 's powers since World War II , and the regulation proposals working their way through Congress seem likely to empower the institution even further . 
Although his actions may be justified under today 's circumstances , Bernanke 's willingness to pump money into the economy risks unleashing the most serious bout of U.S. inflation since the early 1980s , in a nation already battered by rising unemployment and negative growth . 
If he succeeds in restarting growth while avoiding high inflation , Bernanke may well become the most revered economist in modern history . 
But for the moment , he is operating in uncharted territory . 
When he first joined the Federal Reserve 's Board of Governors in 2002 , and later when he became chairman in 2006 , there was little reason to expect Bernanke to revolutionize central banking . 
After all , it was the Age of Greenspan the Triumphant . 
Almost two decades of sustained growth and low inflation had created the illusion of central banking as a precise science , with the Fed simply reading economic statistics and nudging short-term interest rates up or down to keep the American economy humming and inflation low . 
Shortly after succeeding Alan Greenspan as Fed chairman , Bernanke credited his predecessor 's monetary policy with helping to reduce wide swings in U.S. economic performance -- the so-called `` Great Moderation '' -- and revive the productivity of American workers . 
This apparent success also lent staying power to some of Greenspan 's conviction that the Fed should regulate the banking system with a light touch , relying on the free market and private-sector incentives . 
Bernanke initially maintained Greenspan 's hands-off approach to the emerging housing bubble . 
As the financial crisis deepened in late 2007 and early 2008 , however , the Fed began expanding its lending efforts to financial institutions that could n't raise money in private markets . 
This was Bernanke 's first departure from the Greenspan school , in which tweaking interest rates was the instrument that mattered . 
Then , in 2008 , Bernanke became sucked into the firestorms that threatened to engulf the financial sector : Bear Stearns , AIG , the money markets and Citigroup , among others . 
In these interventions , the Fed brought the money . 
It extended loans to newly created entities and accepted dodgy collateral in return ; lent money directly to non-financial institutions ; or guaranteed the value of toxic assets -- a series of reactive , chaotic and non-transparent transactions that seem to have enriched Wall Street and have attracted congressional concern . 
The theory at the time was that the financial sector was facing a liquidity crisis , with banks unable to raise enough money to pay off their short-term debts . 
In response , the Fed would provide enough cash for banks to `` deleverage in a more orderly manner , '' as Bernanke explained last August . 
By late 2008 , the Fed was providing $ 1.5 trillion of liquidity to the economy through these programs -- an amount roughly equal to half of the 2008 federal budget -- prompting John Cassidy of the New Yorker , in a perceptive essay , to note that Bernanke had begun to `` intervene on Wall Street in ways never before contemplated by the Fed . '' 
Since late last year , however , Bernanke has signaled that even these efforts are not enough . 
In a January speech , Bernanke acknowledged the limits of liquidity and outlined a broader strategy in which the Fed would do everything in its power to increase credit . 
And last month , in an extraordinary interview on `` 60 Minutes , '' Bernanke conveyed a powerful message with his words about the Fed `` printing money '' and with his body language , as he toured his home town in South Carolina and declared that he cares about Wall Street only because it affects Main Street -- in part attempting to defuse criticism that the Fed lending was mainly benefiting bankers . 
Clearly , the Fed chairman recognizes the severity of the problem and has decided to do whatever it takes to prevent anything like the Great Depression from happening again . 
Given where we are today , that means printing money , even if that runs the risk of creating a serious inflation problem . 
Shortly after joining the Fed in 2002 , Bernanke gave a speech describing how the Fed could prevent deflation , i.e. , a general decline in prices . 
The key theme was that , in a pinch , the Fed could simply print more dollars -- for example , by buying long-term bonds on the market -- which reduces the value of each dollar in circulation and therefore raises the dollar price of goods and services . 
`` Under a paper-money system , '' Bernanke explained , `` a determined government can always generate higher spending and hence positive inflation . '' 
In a time of economic overconfidence , the discussion seemed largely academic . 
But it is now clear that Bernanke intends to follow through on it . 
After the double-digit inflation of the 1970s and early 1980s , why would anyone want to create inflation ? 
Households and companies alike are trying to `` deleverage , '' or pay down their debts . 
But deflation makes it harder to pay down debts , because debts are fixed in dollars and those dollars are becoming worth more and more . 
Moderate inflation in the neighborhood of 4 percent , by contrast , makes it easier for borrowers to manage their debt loads , and stimulates the economy . 
