Hampshire rescue team 's Haiti earthquake mission Teams from around the UK were part of the international rescue mission Hampshire members of the UK search and rescue team have now returned from Haiti . 
They have been talking about their 11-day mission to rescue people from buildings which collapsed after the earthquake . 
UK 's rapid response team swung into action when the 7.0 magnitude quake struck Haiti on Tuesday , 12 January . 
They were involved in painstaking operations in extraordinarily difficult circumstances . 
Nick Maskery is a consultant in emergency medicine at Southampton General Hospital as well as being a BASICS -LRB- British Association for Immediate Care -RRB- doctor with more intensive training in dealing with emergencies outside hospital . 
The BASICS doctors are affiliated to UK International Search and Rescue -LRB- UKISAR -RRB- and train with them to support the firefighters and deal with those pulled out of the rubble before they are taken to hospital . 
Nick Maskery is trained as a BASICS doctor Nick said : `` It was something you never experience anywhere else - the destruction , the sights , sounds , the mass of humanity on the streets wandering around looking for help , the conditions we were working in - I 've never , never seen anything like it . '' 
Nick and his two GP colleagues found themselves treating wounded and ill patients outside hospital and med-evacuating them , when it was possible , to field hospitals . 
He was involved in helping one women , Sonia , who 's rescue was captured by TV crews . 
She had survived in a collapsed building although her 19-year-old daughter was lying dead beside her . 
Nick said : `` She 's very lucky - the space she was trapped in allowed her to breathe lying flat on her back . 
It just was fate that some people had enough air to survive , other people did n't and died . '' 
The death toll following the earthquake is estimated at 150,000 John Taylor was part of Hampshire Fire and Rescue 's medical support team and is also a part-time retained firefighter . 
He explained : `` My role was providing medical care for casualties - there is a long period while the digging is going on and that can be quite frustrating . 
`` I did go underground during one rescue and that was pretty claustrophobic and pretty unpleasant inside the building - but once you get them out , it is hugely rewarding . 
But then we had to struggle to find somewhere to treat them when there were no hospitals in the first few days , but we did manage it . '' 
Medical workers faced a range of injuries to deal with , from dehydration to broken bones - with overwhelming numbers of people needing help . 
John said : `` You ca n't ignore people you come across . 
It is difficult - there are people everywhere with injuries or in desperate need . 
You 've only got what you can carry so you have limited resources so you just do what you can - it 's difficult . '' 
The team have experience of dealing with the immediate aftermath of other disasters including the Pakistan earthquake of 2005 . 
On this occasion they were initially hampered by transport delays and the organisational difficulties in the chaos of the immediate aftermath of the quake . 
When they did arrive in Haiti they set up their organisational base in the relative security of the airport . 
Keith Bellamy set up the support facilities for the rescue teams Hampshire Search and Rescue 's Keith Bellamy was in charge of setting up the logistics to support the 64-strong team of UK firefighters , providing them with food , drinking water , power and fuel to operate effectively . 
He explained : `` There was a lot of devastation and confusion initially when we first arrived , but when we find out what 's happened we bring our own controlled procedures into play . 
`` Our equipment was delayed by 24 hours , that did n't stop the teams going out searching . '' 
The Hampshire staff had to co-ordinate the work of colleagues from other UK fire brigades but also work with other international rescue teams , United Nations , military and civilian aid agencies on the ground in Haiti . 
The 11-day mission , co-ordinated from Hampshire 's Fire and Rescue 's Headquarters in Eastleigh was the UK team 's longest overseas deployment with a record number of rescues . 
Peter Crook , the national co-ordinator for UKISAR paid tribute to how the team reacted to the difficulties : `` They are some of the best firefighters in the world , they 're extremely resourceful . 
Things never go completely right , the team are fantastic at getting round things - they 'll find solutions . '' 
