North Staffordshire 's favorite son , Robbie Williams , took a lead in raising money to ease the disaster situation in Haiti . 
Closer to home , there have been a number of music and arts events where money raised from ticket sales has been passed on to the appeal . 
Tens of millions of pounds have already been raised in the UK to help victims of the earthquake . 
The fund-raising goes on however , as the rainy season cuts in . 
It is believed the catastrophe on 12 January 2010 killed as many as 200,000 people . 
The 7.0 magnitude quake is one of the worst disasters in recent history . 
As well as the numbers of dead , an estimated 1.5 million people have been left homeless - and a possible half-million people are now permanently disabled . 
Weeks after the earthquake , the coming rainy season presents another major challenge to aid agencies . 
The rainy season is threatening to cause landslides and health problems in the makeshift camps where more than half a million people are still living . 
In Staffordshire , the fund-raising goes on . 
If you know of a Staffordshire project to help the Haiti Disaster victims , please let us know too . 
On Saturday March 6 , The Cobridge Community Multi-Cultural Association -LRB- CCMA -RRB- is having a Family Fun Day to raise funds for the victims of the Haiti Earthquake , with an evening of entertainment -LRB- from 7pm 'til late -RRB- to follow , featuring live music , DJs and Caribbean food . 
Entrance to the Fun Day is # 4 , children free . 
Entrance to the Party Night is also # 4 or free if attending the Fun Day . 
It all takes place at CCMA 's place in Cobridge Rd , Stoke-on-Trent . 
If you can help , or need details , contact Midlands Jamaica Aid or Sid , the CCMA Chairman , both on 01782 262609 . 
Nationwide , we 'll see a Cakes For Haiti Day on March 26 . 
Janet Mohapi-Banks , a cake designer , says that we can all bake or buy a cake -LRB- and everyone can eat them ! -RRB- . 
Local boy Robbie readily agreed to take part in The Sun newspaper 's project for a charity recording of REM 's Everybody Hurts in February . 
With his help it became the fastest-selling charity record of the 21st century in the UK . 
Christian artists such as Kev Whitmore , Blush , The Abundant Life Worship Team -LRB- from one of the UK 's largest churches -RRB- and the Yfriday worship band stepped forward to offer their services free on the night . 
The appeal will benefit the Compassion Project which works in the Haitian capital Port-Au-Prince . 
People from the arts world in the county have been doing their bit too . 
On Saturday , Jan 30 there was an all-day music event with a dozen local bands lining up to do their bit . 
The Love & Haiti day took place at the The Voodoo Lounge in Hanley - with trade stalls too with Greenpeace and Fairtrade . 
The Arts East Staffs team -LRB- based at Burton 's Brewhouse Arts Centre -RRB- , held a charity event on Monday , February 1 with an auction of work from nearly twenty local artists - including the likes of Vitor Azevedo and David Webb - all during an evening of live music and performance . 
And , the East Staffordshire digger manufacturer JCB did it once again , as it often does for disasters , donating equipment worth nearly # 100,000 to assist the relief effort . 
To make a donation yourself , the D.E.C. Haiti Earthquake Appeal has outlined the process on the DEC website . 
You can also call 0370 60 60 900 , donate over the counter at any post office or high street bank , or send a cheque made payable to ` DEC Haiti Earthquake Appeal ' to ` PO Box 999 , London , EC3A 3AA ' . 
Anyone wanting to stay up to date with developments in Haiti , the emergency response , and the fundraising efforts , can follow DEC on twitter - or become a fan of ` Disasters-Emergency-Committee-DEC ' on Facebook . 
