Mariah Carey joins line-up for Haiti charity single Mariah Carey is the latest star to be added to the bill Mariah Carey is the latest performer to join an all-star charity single for the victims of the Haiti earthquake . 
She will appear alongside Robbie Williams , Kylie Minogue , Take That , Cheryl Cole and JLS on the track , which is a cover of REM 's Everybody Hurts . 
Several artists are recording their parts on Tuesday at a studio in West London . 
All are working for free . 
Simon Cowell , who is organising the charity effort , is hoping to complete the single by 7 February . 
Mika , who has already laid his vocals down , said it was a `` real honor '' to be taking part and was pleased with the part he had been asked to sing . 
`` I found out which bit I was going to be doing as I walked into the studio . 
I 'm really happy that I have a good line that does n't go too high because I hate singing too high , '' he told Radio 1 's Natalie Jamieson . 
The star added he felt compelled to take part because he has close friends who are Haitian . 
Mika , James Morrison and Rod Stewart explain why they wanted to be part of the charity single `` They have been affected themselves , along with a lot of other people , so this has a personal meaning as well . 
It 's for a very good cause and it 's great that we can raise some money and raise some awareness . '' 
Artists such as James Morrison and Alexandra Burke have been singing their lines at Trevor Horn 's Sarm Studios in Notting Hill - where the original Band Aid single was recorded in 1984 . 
Williams is expected to record his parts in Los Angeles along with his former Take That bandmates . 
He said : `` I 'm very honored to be asked to contribute to the single . 
`` We can all do something to help the people of Haiti and I urge everyone to do what they can . '' 
Minogue will add her voice from a `` secret '' location where she is recording her new album . 
Minogue and Williams previously duetted on the single Kids in 2000 The vocals will be pieced together by producer Steve Robson , who has previously worked with Take That , Westlife and Busted . 
Half of the single 's proceeds will go to the Sun 's Helping Haiti fund and the rest will be donated to the Disasters Emergency Committee . 
Meanwhile , Radiohead have raised more than $ 500,000 -LRB- # 308,192 -RRB- for the appeal with a special gig in Los Angeles . 
Radiohead performed for more than two hours on Sunday at the Henry Fonda Theatre . 
Stars such as Justin Timberlake , Jessica Biel , Charlize Theron , Anna Paquin and Daniel Craig were in the crowd . 
Fans had bid for tickets in an online auction , with proceeds going to Oxfam International . 
And George Clooney 's global telethon has so far raised $ 61m -LRB- # 37.6 m -RRB- . 
It is believed the 7.0 magnitude quake on 12 January killed as many as 200,000 people . 
An estimated 1.5 million people have been left homeless . 
Some of the world 's most famous celebrities , including Madonna , Jay Z , Rihanna and Mary J Blige participated in Clooney 's Hope for Haiti Now telethon , which took place on Friday . 
It was shown on all major US TV channels , YouTube , MySpace and on MTV in the UK . 
The Sun Sun Haiti song at Brit Awards - 4 hrs ago The Scotsman SuBo joins Kylie and Take That on Haiti single - 10 hrs ago Times Online Stellar line-up for Haiti charity single - 14 hrs ago The Independent Robbie Williams and Take That teaming up for Haiti single - 23 hrs ago ITN Robbie to reunite with Take That on Haiti record ? 
