Christian Fraser describes the situation at Haiti 's heavily-damaged port Haiti 's government can lead efforts to rebuild the country in the wake of its devastating earthquake , Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive has said . 
But Mr Bellerive told a meeting of world officials in the Canadian city of Montreal that `` massive support '' from the international community was needed . 
The Montreal meeting was held to assess the aid effort and plan the next steps . 
The delegates agreed to hold an international donors ' conference at the UN headquarters in New York in March . 
But Canadian Prime Stephen Harper warned that it would take a decade to rebuild Haiti . 
`` It was not an exaggeration to say that at least 10 years of hard work awaits the world in Haiti , '' Mr Harper said . 
It is believed the 7.0 magnitude quake on 12 January killed as many as 200,000 people . 
An estimated 1.5 million people have been left homeless . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is attending the conference along with delegates from 20 countries and representatives from the UN and the World Bank . 
`` The Haitian government is working in precarious conditions but it can provide the leadership that people expect , '' Mr Bellerive said . 
`` The top priority right now is to satisfy the vital needs of victims , like food and water , shelter and health care . '' 
Broadcasting on FM radio daily in Haitian Creole at 0910 local time -LRB- 1410 GMT -RRB- , for 20 minutes Giving up-to-date information about where to get basic services and aid Also available on satellite and online , and via social media He added : `` Haiti needs the massive support of its partners in the international community in the medium and long term . 
The extent of the task requires that we do more , that we do better and , without a doubt , that we work differently . '' 
Canadian Foreign Minister Lawrence Cannon welcomed the US offer to host an international donors ' conference in March . 
`` We now have the beginnings of a road map toward Haiti 's long-term reconstruction and a clear and sustained commitment to follow through , '' Mr Cannon was quoted as saying by French news agency AFP . 
Mr Cannon said one goal was to `` physically get the Haitian government back on its feet '' . 
The quake destroyed key government buildings , including the National Palace . 
UK-based charity Oxfam has urged the international community to get Haiti 's foreign debts canceled . 
It said about $ 900m -LRB- # 557m -RRB- owed to donor countries and institutions should be written off . 
Many operations are still taking place in makeshift outdoor theaters The World Bank has already announced that it is waiving Haiti 's debt payments for the next five years . 
And the Paris Club of creditor governments - including the US , UK , France and Germany - has called on other nations to follow its lead in canceling debts to Haiti . 
Venezuela and Taiwan are the other biggest creditors . 
Although aid continues to flow into Haiti , the head of Italy 's civil protection service has strongly criticised the relief effort and the role of thousands of US troops sent there . 
Guido Bertolaso described the international aid operation as `` a terrible situation that could have been managed much better '' . 
`` When there is an emergency , it triggers a vanity parade . 
Lots of people go there anxious to show that their country is big and important , showing solidarity , '' he said on Sunday . 
Mr Bertolaso , an Italian government minister , said it was `` commendable '' for the US to lead relief efforts , but `` too many officers '' meant they had not been able to find a capable leader . 
Christian Fraser describes the situation at Haiti 's heavily-damaged port Aid workers have also criticised Haitian government plans to relocate hundreds of thousands of people from the capital , Port-au-Prince , to large camps outside the city . 
Caroline Gluck , from Oxfam , told the BBC the move could be dangerous for the survivors . 
`` In the past , experience has told us establishing some huge camps can cause all kinds of security problems , for example , robberies , rapes and kind of gang activities if the camps are kept too big , '' she said . 
Oxfam was pressing for the camps to be smaller , she added . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external internet sites Reuters UK Haiti seeks years of aid ; donors to meet in March - 7 hrs ago IAfrica.com Haiti begs for more aid - 11 hrs ago Telegraph West urged to write off Haiti 's $ 1bn debt - 17 hrs ago The Scotsman Haiti : Half-million head for tent villages - 18 hrs ago Guardian . 
