In a tense corner of a dangerous place , we heard voices rising in song - this was the congregation of Saint Temple of Olivier - a church buried deep in the heart of Cite Soleil . 
Orla Guerin reports on violence in Haiti 's slums We followed the sound down a warren of narrow alleyways and found a group of women holding an open-air service outside their damaged church . 
They have been here continuously since the earthquake struck , hoping their voices will make enough noise to keep the much-feared local gangs at bay . 
`` There is no water , no food , nothing , '' said Madame Elote Pierre , the pastor 's wife . 
`` When it 's night time , it 's even more scary . 
We have to band together for safety . 
We stay together , praying . 
We do n't sleep . '' 
Some of the congregation have lost their homes , others are too afraid to return to theirs - they fear being raped , if they are found alone . 
Madame Pierre has lived in Cite Soleil since 1969 , and says things have never been worse . 
The quake damaged many of the homes of those who live in Cite Soleil `` The situation has never been easy for us , '' she said . 
`` But this is the most difficult moment , and the most dangerous . 
We have had no aid from anyone , and there 's no-one to protect us . 
Our only protection is from God , '' she said , raising her arms to the sky . 
Since the earthquake there are new dangers in Haiti 's most notorious slum . 
The earthquake has created a security vacuum across the capital . 
And more than 4,000 prisoners escaped from the ruins of the capital 's main jail . 
They have come back home to Cite Soleil , according to the dapper local prosecutor , Evens Leveque - a man who often travels with armed guards . 
We found him rushing to a meeting with the Cite Soleil police chief , to discuss a shoot-out the night before . 
There is no death penalty in Haiti . 
When citizens catch one of those bandits they are supposed to hold them and call the police , not lynch them . 
As a judge I know it is unjust and illegal `` The situation is disastrous , '' he said . 
`` The prisoners came back here with guns in their hands to terrorise the population . 
But we , as the local authorities , are not going to let that happen . '' 
Having put the gangs behind bars once , he intends to do it again . 
`` We have received orders , '' he says . 
`` And we 'll do it , whether it takes one or two months , or one or two years , unless they have run off somewhere else , or escaped to the countryside . '' 
In the meantime , he says , some of the local population have taken matters into their own hands , lynching gang members in the streets . 
`` There is no death penalty in Haiti . 
When citizens catch one of those bandits they are supposed to hold them and call the police , not lynch them . 
As a judge I know it is unjust and illegal . '' 
But he also knows that many in the slum have lost faith in Haitian justice . 
`` When people are arrested , sometimes they are free weeks afterwards because the judicial system in Haiti is weak , and our prisons are not adequate , '' he says . 
Lying in his bed in a nearby hospital , Brine Cedernier knows only too well about the gun law on the streets . 
Half his stomach is covered by dressings applied to his bullet wounds . 
His nephew , Rony , sits by his bedside , gently wiped the perspiration from his brow . 
Until two days ago , Brine supported them both , by providing lifts on his motorbike . 
Then he was attacked in the neighbouring slum . 
`` I was on my motorbike and three guys came , '' he says . 
`` They told me to kneel down . 
They took the bike and shot me - twice . 
Since the earthquake , the gangs are stealing and looting and killing people . '' 
Eighteen-year-old Rony looks away , with tears streaming down his face . 
Having already lost his father in the earthquake , he can not bear the thought of losing his uncle . 
On the streets of the seaside slum , gun law is the only law `` He 's the only one I have left who loves me , '' he said . 
`` He 's all I have . '' 
Brine is being treated by staff from Medecins Sans Frontieres . 
They have returned to the local hospital in Cite Soleil , where they have been based in previous crises . 
MSF veterans here say they are not hearing as much gunfire as they did in the past . 
But they are treating two to three shooting victims a day , and they have been busy with births , amputations , and some machete wounds from looting . 
Some food aid is getting through to the slum . 
We saw people waiting patiently for aid in long orderly queues , under the watchful eye of United Nations troops . 
But we saw no sign of the police during our visit - except in the courtyard of their headquarters . 
Just across the road , there is a bullet-riddled ruin - a symbol of the slum . 
Back outside the Church of Saint Temple of Olivier , the faithful say they will continue their vigil . 
`` We have to stay here together , and keep praying , '' said Madame Pierre . 
`` We ca n't risk separating . 
We pray to God to see the next day , and we pray not to be a victim . '' 
