United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon -LRB- R -RRB- listens to WHO Director-General Margaret Chan -LRB- C -RRB- during a visit to the Strategic Health Operations Centre -LRB- SHOC -RRB- room at the World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- headquarters in Geneva , May 19 , 2009 . 
GENEVA | Tue May 19 , 2009 2:36 pm EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Vaccine makers could produce 4.9 billion pandemic flu shots per year in the best-case scenario , the head of the World Health Organization said on Tuesday , as rich and poor countries grappled over limited supplies . 
WHO Director-General Margaret Chan told reporters after her meeting with 30 pharmaceutical companies that `` there are a lot of unanswered questions '' about how many vaccines could be made to protect vulnerable people from the new H1N1 virus . 
`` That is a very optimistic maximum capacity , '' she said of the 4.9 billion estimate , which would be significantly lower if people need more than one injection to gain immunity against the strain or if seasonal flu vaccine-making continues . 
Bringing a new pandemic vaccine to market -- if it goes ahead -- is expected to take 4-6 months , according to the WHO . 
It must be tested first on ferrets and then on humans in clinical trials before regulatory authorities can approve it . 
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon told the news briefing that while the newly-discovered virus strain now appears mild , it needs to be closely watched as it spreads around the world and starts to afflict impoverished countries . 
`` We may be in a grace period with H1N1 but we are still in the danger zone , '' Ban said . 
Earlier on Tuesday , the United Nations chief said it was essential for drugmakers to work with governments to avert the worst potential impacts of the flu , which has killed 79 people and infected nearly 10,000 . 
`` Partnerships with the private sector are absolutely vital , '' he told representatives of the WHO 's 193 member governments gathered in Geneva , urging them to think beyond their borders in their response to the H1N1 strain . 
Though most people infected so far have experienced mild symptoms similar to the common flu , pregnant women and people with HIV\/AIDS , diabetes and other health problems appear to be vulnerable to more severe effects like pneumonia . 
Health experts have said weather could affect the continued spread of the virus , with more cases expected as countries in the southern hemisphere move into winter . 
Flu viruses typically thrive in cold and dry environments . 
Pharmaceutical executives taking part in Tuesday 's vaccines meeting at the WHO 's Geneva headquarters said they were primed to ramp up production of H1N1 vaccines if needed , and would await more directions about how to balance their output . 
`` Our companies stand ready to produce H1N1 vaccines when the recommendation comes from the WHO , '' the International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations said . 
Six companies have pledged to make 10 percent of the vaccine they produce available for distribution to poor countries , and eight are in talks about donations , said Gelmer Leibbrandt , general manager of Schering-Plough 's Nobilon . 
Chan said that vaccine makers have shown `` a very serious commitment '' to help the international community prepare for a pandemic of flu , which could be mild in its effects to start and become more severe as it circles the globe . 
Questions remain about whether an H1N1-only vaccine is needed in the near-term -- especially if its production cuts the world 's supply of injections for seasonal flu , which kills up to 500,000 people a year and causes severe illness in millions . 
U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said pharmaceutical companies should ramp up their production of seasonal flu shots and then later switch to pandemic injection making `` if that is necessary . '' 
`` There is still so much uncertainty about this virus that it is really premature for us to even make a determination about how many people would appropriately be vaccinated , in what order , how many doses will be required , at what point . 
All those discussions are still very much underway , '' Sebelius said . 
Ban , in his remarks to the World Health Assembly , called on wealthy nations to help support poorer states fight the flu . 
But one international official said he expected battles ahead as governments try to secure finite supplies of antiviral drugs and vaccines to protect their populations . 
`` Enabling poor countries to be able to access the various medical supplies they need is going to be a critical political and technical issue , '' he said . 
`` This issue will require political attention . '' 
The WHO has said the world is on the brink of pandemic from the H1N1 virus , which has been most prevalent in North America and begun to infect large numbers in Japan , Britain and Spain . 
