-LRB- Recasts ; adds quotes and byline -RRB- MEXICO CITY May 19 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Mexico 's economy will likely be in a clear recovery from recession at the start of 2010 , though Mexican industry will report steep falls in output for several more months this year , Finance Minister Agustin Carstens said on Tuesday . 
Mexico is sinking deeper into recession due to plunging demand for its exports from the United States and many analysts expect the economy will contract about 6 percent this year . 
`` It is a very deep crisis , '' Carstens said , referring to the global recession , which weighs especially heavily on exporting powerhouses like Mexico . 
Mexico reported on Monday that industrial output fell 6.7 percent in March , in the eighth straight month of contraction . 
Industrial production accounts for about 40 percent of the economy . 
`` These are readings that we will continue to see for some more months , '' said Carstens , speaking at an insurance conference . 
At the same time , economists in the United States , where Mexico sends about 80 percent of its exports , have increasingly pointed to signs that the U.S. recession is moderating . 
`` The sharp economic contraction and the sensation that demand is in freefall are abating , '' Carstens said . 
`` It is likely that we will start 2010 in a clear recovery , '' he said . 
A rally in Mexico 's peso currency and in global equity markets are signs that investors are betting on recovery , he said . 
The peso MXN = MEX01 rose to its strongest level against the U.S. dollar since November on Tuesday and the local stock market . 
MXX hit its highest level since early October on optimism that the U.S. banking sector may be in recovery . 
The outbreak in April of the H1N1 influenza virus that forced the temporary shutdown of parts of Mexico 's economy is expected to further compound the economic problems . 
Carstens reiterated his forecast that the flu outbreak would shave 0.3 percentage point off gross domestic product . 
Central bank Governor Guillermo Ortiz said on Monday the flu would likely cost 0.5 percent of GDP . 
