Helicopter crashes into crane on London tower , kills two . 
Full Article Mask-wearing de rigeur as flu spreads in Japan TOKYO | Tue May 19 , 2009 10:10 am IST TOKYO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - It was everywhere in western Japan on Tuesday and is showing signs of spreading to heavily populated Tokyo -- not the new H1N1 flu virus , but the wearing of surgical face masks . 
Disposable masks are recommended by the government for those who suspect they have been infected with the new strain of flu . 
But many members of the public are wearing them in an effort to avoid getting infected themselves , though experts say cheap masks , as opposed to virus-proof types , offer little protection . 
Senior Liberal Democratic Party official Hiroyuki Hosoda appeared at a news conference in a mask but peeled it off before speaking to reporters . 
Domestic media showed students on a guided tour of parliament wearing white masks and customers lining up outside stores to stock up on them . 
Long popular with Japanese who want to avoid passing on a cold or breathing in allergenic pollen , masks have become an essential accessory in the western areas of Osaka and Hyogo prefecture , where more than 150 people have been infected . 
Some businesses are ordering their employees , especially those who deal face-to-face with clients , to wear masks . 
`` I pick up passengers from the station , '' one taxi driver told broadcaster TBS . 
`` It 's a bit frightening in this enclosed space -- they might be infected without having developed a fever yet . '' 
Another woman told broadcaster NHK she felt safer in a mask . 
`` A lot of people are wearing them . 
I think it 's best to have one on as a means of prevention , '' she said . 
The government is recommending people use masks as a way of reducing the spread of infection via droplets from coughs and sneezes , but puts the onus on those who are already infected . 
`` If you start to cough or sneeze , please use a mask , '' reads an advice section on the Health Ministry 's website . 
`` If someone in your family or at your workplace is coughing without a mask on , please urge them to wear one . '' 
An official at the ministry emphasised the government was only recommending those with symptoms wear masks . 
`` Unless you are in a very crowded place , masks are not going to help much with prevention , '' he said . 
`` We are not saying that people should always wear a mask when you go out , although it might help to wear one on a rush-hour train . '' 
`` We are certainly not saying that you 'll be safe if you just put on a mask . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
