LONDON | Tue May 19 , 2009 7:24 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Deadly pneumonia caused by so-called superbugs are spreading outside hospitals and represent a growing threat to the public , U.S. researchers warned on Wednesday . 
Making the problem more worrying is the recent H1N1 flu outbreak because the `` super-bug '' pneumonia most commonly appears following an influenza-like illness , Alicia Hidron of the Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta reported . 
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus -LRB- MRSA -RRB- infections can range from boils to more severe infections of the blood , lungs and the sites of surgery . 
Such infections can often be treated only with expensive intravenous antibiotics . 
Most cases are associated with hospitals , nursing homes or other health care facilities but infections acquired in the wider community are increasing , the researcher noted . 
`` Community-acquired MRSA infections are no longer restricted to certain risk groups or to the geographic areas where outbreaks first occurred , '' they wrote in the journal Lancet Infectious Diseases . 
`` They now occur widely both in the community as well as health care facilities and have been reported on every continent . '' 
As these superbugs spread in communities , more pneumonia cases are likely -- and the researchers said these may have mortality rates of more than 50 percent . 
`` However , the overall incidence of community-acquired MRSA pneumonia remains unknown , '' the researchers wrote . 
In their analysis , Hidron and colleagues looked at two U.S. cases caused by a specific MRSA strain that is a culprit behind many superbug infections in the United States . 
They reported the pneumonia usually features high fever and low blood pressure with rapid progression to septic shock -- a widespread infection that sends the whole body into a tailspin -- and an urgent need for mechanical ventilation . 
The researchers said they do not know why community-acquired MRSA pneumonia appears so lethal but noted the bacteria that cause it are more susceptible to antibiotics than hospital-acquired infections . 
`` The best treatment of this ... disease has not been defined , '' they wrote . 
-LRB- Reporting by Michael Kahn ; Editing by Maggie Fox and Jon Hemming -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
