News coverage is a daily activity for me , and however I get involved in a story it s not just a job ; it 's also what I enjoy doing . 
Sometimes I m just an observer behind a camera , but other times I also end up being affected personally . 
When the new H1N1 flu virus broke out in Mexico there was an additional factor for me ; it was impossible not to suffer the first days of the epidemic as the head of a family . 
I thought of the photos that I wanted to take , but I couldn t help thinking of my daughter , my wife and my mother . 
As Colombians living in Mexico City we were all exposed to the unknown virus . 
Fear and uncertainty dominated my family , friends and the millions of people with whom I share the streets of this metropolis . 
Very early on Friday , April 24 , I put on rubber gloves and a facemask that I bought from the corner pharmacy . 
The masks were still easy to find , but a day later their scarcity would become a problem . 
My daughter celebrated along with countless others of her age the sudden onset of vacation , not yet understanding that the break from school would become a virtual quarantine . 
It was recommended that children not leave their homes during the emergency . 
In the early days of the outbreak , the government said that the majority of the victims were young adults , but in normal flu outbreaks children and the elderly are always the most vulnerable . 
Limited knowledge about the disease and the recommended precautions caused Mexico City residents to avoid physical contact , even between people who a day earlier would greet each other with two kisses , as is the custom in Mexico . 
Friends and colleagues began to stand at a distance in hopes of preventing the spread of something that we knew little about . 
But we were learning more about it minute by minute . 
Early news about dying victims was disconcerting . 
Before the government declared that the current flu vaccine was useless for this strain , I went to a vaccination clinic where people were begging for the shot . 
I had hoped to get one for myself to be safe while covering the story , but I was denied as everyone else . 
People left the clinic with fear in their faces and voices when they asked each other , What do we do now ? 
Fearful of catching the flu , I climbed into a taxi to continue covering the outbreak . 
There were fewer people , fewer cars in the city 's normally congested streets . 
The human landscape changed to one of blue-masked pedestrians . 
By the end of the first weekend the population was better informed . 
Most were less frightened in spite of the fact that the virus was among us and spreading . 
Monday was the beginning of the first full week with the virus in Mexico . 
The day was hot and strange , without traffic . 
Then , a few minutes before noon , the earth shook . 
My taxi tilted from left to right . 
Electric cables swung back and forth . 
I grabbed my camera and yelled to the driver , Stop ! 
I jumped out and the near-empty street was still trembling . 
I walked to the corner and saw people rushing out from buildings and houses all around me . 
I could see the fear in their eyes . 
In front of Aragon Hospital the street filled with doctors and patients . 
Some couldn t take the crisis and fainted . 
Dozens of people muttered , ... just what we needed ... At that moment I remembered that my family was alone in our fifth floor apartment . 
I called my wife but she didn t answer . 
I called my daughter s cell phone but again , no answer . 
I kept taking pictures with one hand while calling with the other , and hoping that everything was alright . 
In the end I confirmed that my family was fine and I felt momentary relief , but then I remembered my mother who had died just two days earlier . 
Just one day into the flu coverage , Saturday at 5 a.m. , my mother , who also lived with us in Mexico City , passed away for reasons unrelated to the epidemic . 
In that difficult moment I had called my editors to tell them that I couldn t continue with the coverage plan that day , and I was told to take all the time I needed . 
I had the choice of not working due to my family emergency amidst the sudden appearance of the new flu virus . 
But then I realized that the best therapy for me and the best tribute to my mother would be to go out and report the news . 
Even in the most difficult moments I couldn t stop observing the world and my own life through photography . 
Muchisimas gracias por tu historia . 
No solo eres un fotografo de primera sino una persona de una gran calidad humana -LRB- eso lo debes haber heredado de tu madre -RRB- . 
Solo algunos fotografos tienen el privilegio de ver su vida a traves de la fotografia ... y tu eres uno de ellos ! 
Thank you very much for your story . 
You are not only a great photographer , you are a great person -LRB- inherited from your mother for sure -RRB- . 
Only a few photographers have the privilege of seeing their life through photography ... and you 're one of them ! 
This swine flu pandemic is getting out of hand in my area . 
People are n't talking about anything other than the swine flu . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
