From Michael Holmes and Kareem Khadder , CNN A rocket was fired Saturday toward Gadhafi forces outside Bir Al-Ghanam . 
NEW : At least eight rebels are killed in the fighting , medical sources say An hourslong battle breaks out in the western Libyan town of Bir Al-Ghanam Rebels are moving toward the capital , Tripoli Opposition members have been seeking the ouster of Moammar Gadhafi for months Near Bir Al-Ghanam , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libyan rebel forces gained ground against ruler Moammar Gadhafi 's forces Saturday after a massive offensive in the western town of Bir Al-Ghanam . 
Rebel commanders said 1,500 opposition members joined in the battle , which lasted five hours . 
Rockets and gunfire were exchanged from both sides , and rebels took on Gadhafi fighters from three fronts . 
At least eight rebels were killed and dozens more wounded , according to medical sources . 
Casualties inflicted on Gadhafi forces were not immediately known . 
Rebel fighters said Gadhafi 's forces had retreated from Bir Al-Ghanam and claimed victory over the town . 
The offensive began at dawn as hundreds of rebels swept in from the west off the Nafusa mountains and into the plains below . 
The fighters in Saturday 's attack are part of what some have dubbed a Mad Max army -- a fleet of pickup trucks modified to take heavy weapons speeding across the desert . 
Most of the men were civilians before the fighting broke out . 
Bir Al-Ghanam is about 85 kilometers -LRB- 53 miles -RRB- from the capital city of Tripoli . 
Capturing the town is significant because not much else stands in the way between Bir Al-Ghanam and the Libyan coastline -- where Tripoli is situated . 
`` It was very , very fierce , '' one rebel fighter told CNN after the offensive was over . 
`` But there is no time to rest . 
The next step , Tripoli . '' 
For months , rebel fighters -- who have controlled the eastern city of Benghazi and other areas -- have been trying to move closer toward Tripoli , in the west . 
They are seeking the ouster of Gadhafi , who has ruled Libya for 42 years . 
CNN 's Kareem Khadder contributed to this report . 
