An adult American white pelican is rinsed by volunteers . 
Photograph : Reuters The gusher in the Gulf of Mexico returned to full force yesterday after BP had to remove a cap that had been containing some of the oil spewing out of its ruptured wellhead . 
The coast guard said an underwater robot had accidentally bumped into the `` top hat '' device and damaged one of the vents . 
Its failure represents a major setback in efforts to control the spill . 
Underwater video showed crude and gas billowing from the ocean floor unchecked for the first time in three weeks yesterday . 
BP said last night it was trying to reinstall the cap . 
The beaches of Florida also saw their worst day since the Deepwater Horizon went down 65 days ago , with a thick soup of oil coming ashore in the beach resort town of Pensacola . 
Fish and wildlife officials reported three beached dolphins washed up on shore . 
`` It 's pretty ugly , there 's no question about it , '' Florida 's governor , Charlie Crist , told reporters . 
The Associated Press said the beach looked as if it had been paved with a six-foot-wide ribbon of asphalt . 
Only minutes earlier , Ken Salazar , the US interior secretary , had told a congressional committee the top hat device had achieved a new milestone , collecting 27,900 barrels -LRB- 4.4 m litres -RRB- of oil in the previous 24 hours still less than half the oil fouling the Gulf each day . 
Salazar also reaffirmed the administration would seek a new , more limited ban on offshore drilling after a judge in New Orleans overturned a six-month pause on Tuesday . 
The judge , Martin Feldman , was severely criticised by environmental groups yesterday for failing to recuse himself from the case after revealing investment in Transocean , Halliburton , and other firms involved in offshore drilling in financial disclosure forms . 
The interior secretary was appearing before the committee to introduce the Obama administration 's new head of offshore drilling regulation , Michael Bromwich , and announce a new `` zero tolerance '' regime for corrupt or lax government safety inspectors . 
Thad Allen , the coast guard admiral who is leading the administration 's response to the spill , told reporters that workers had detected a possible gas leak in the line that was running warm water into the collection device . 
The waterline is used to prevent the buildup of hydrate crystals around the collection device . 
Initial reports also suggested that the robot may have inadvertently shut down one of the vents on the collection device , raising the pressure within and forcing gas into the warm waterline . 
Allen said workers would have to determine whether the device was compromised by the formation of crystals . 
If so , a new pipe may be needed before they can begin collecting oil again . 
The removal of the top hat underlined the enormous challenges of containing America 's biggest environmental disaster , just as the Obama administration was hoping to persuade the public it was adopting new safety protocols that would ensure such a spill never happened again . 
In his public debut , Bromwich , the new head of a reconfigured agency overseeing the offshore oil and gas industry , told the Senate appropriations subcommittee he was launching an investigative unit to root out corrupt government regulators . 
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management is to replace the Minerals Management Service -LRB- MMS -RRB- , which has been accused of being in the pocket of the oil industry . 
Bromwich promised a new FBI-style team would conduct internal investigations of the associations between government regulators and industry . 
`` There will be little tolerance for corruption and cosiness , '' he said . 
`` There will be zero tolerance for whatever was tolerated in the past . '' 
The former prosecutor said his team would encourage whistleblowers and act quickly to root out corruption or complacency among agency officials or the companies they were supposed to regulate . 
Even before the Deepwater Horizon rig went down , the MMS was notorious for cocaine-fuelled sex romps between government officials and oil industry executives . 
In the Gulf , government inspectors were plied with free football tickets or offered jobs by the very same companies they were supposed to monitor . 
But Salazar also argued that the MMS had never had the resources it needed to manage Big Oil . 
He told senators he needs more inspectors to have proper oversight of offshore drilling safety . 
At present , the agency has 62 inspectors who are supposed to visit 4,000 production wells . 
Senators delivered a withering review of its performance . 
`` There was a shameful culture of corruption , '' said Byron Dorgan , a Democrat from North Dakota . 
