The moment when the UN approved the resolution The Arab-backed initiative , which also calls on President Bashar al-Assad to resign , is the latest of several attempts to bring an end to the crisis . 
Syria said the move would only worsen the crisis and encourage `` terrorists '' . 
Earlier , China said it was sending a senior envoy to Damascus to negotiate a `` peaceful and proper '' solution . 
The non-binding resolution adopted by the General Assembly backs an Arab League plan aimed at stopping the killings . 
It was modelled on an earlier resolution in the Security Council that was vetoed by Russia and China . 
Barbara Plett BBC News , United Nations The General Assembly was very much a Plan B - the Arab sponsors of the resolution and their Western allies had wanted the legal weight of the Security Council backing their political plan to end Syria 's crisis . 
But with the Council blocked by Russian and Chinese vetoes , they turned to what is in effect the `` world 's parliament , '' hoping that a non-binding endorsement from the 193-member body would lend moral and political clout to their initiative . 
They hailed the strong majority vote as a clear message of international support to the Syrian people and a demonstration that Bashar al-Assad had never been more isolated . 
But there was no disguising that the major powers are as deeply divided as ever . 
Russia continued to argue that the text was unbalanced , because it made no specific demands of the armed opposition and attempted to sideline the Syrian leadership . 
Even some countries which voted yes said Russia had a point -LRB- these issues will have to be addressed sooner or later , said Serbia ; India said much the same -RRB- . 
But in the meantime the impasse continues , which suggests diplomacy will increasingly look elsewhere for a solution , and the violence in Syria will probably get worse . 
Unlike its precursor , the resolution endorsed by the assembly has no legal authority , but the BBC 's Barbara Plett , at the UN , said its backers hope it would increase political pressure on Damascus to end the violence . 
Egypt introduced the resolution to the chamber and urged delegates to reach a consensus which would send a strong message to the Syrian authorities . 
`` We demand that the Syrian government heed the demands of the Arab and Syrian people and staunch the bloodshed , '' said deputy ambassador Osama Abdelkhalek . 
But Syria 's ambassador Bashar Jaafari said a yes vote would only be a message of support to the `` extremists and terrorists '' Damascus declares it is fighting . 
Mr Jaafari said the resolution `` would only lead to a tightening of the crisis , and more violence in the region as a whole '' . 
As expected , China and Russia again voted against the measure . 
Both have firmly opposed what they see as forced regime change and have raised concerns about the possibility of international military involvement . 
Before the vote , Russia 's Deputy Foreign Minister Gennady Gatilov said the resolution was `` unbalanced '' so Moscow would not back it . 
`` It directs all the demands at the government , and says nothing about the opposition , '' Russian media quoted him as saying . 
Venezuela , which also voted no , said the motion denied Syria its sovereignty and was being used by some parties to `` promote a civil war on a large scale '' . 
The resolution was approved by 137 votes to 12 against , with 17 abstentions . 
Vetoes are not allowed in the assembly . 
Three countries said technical problems prevented them from voting . 
The US voted in favor , with ambassador Susan Rice saying it `` sent a clear message to the people of Syria - the world is with you '' . 
`` An overwhelming majority of UN member states have backed the plan put forward by the Arab League to end the suffering of Syrians , '' she said . 
`` Bashar al-Assad has never been more isolated . '' 
Earlier in the day , UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon had called on Syrian authorities to stop killing civilians , and said crimes against humanity might be taking place in the country . 
Syria 's ambassador Bashar Jaafari said the vote would make the violence worse `` We see neighborhoods shelled indiscriminately , hospitals used as torture centres , children as young as 10 years old killed and abused . 
We see almost certain crimes against humanity , '' he said . 
Mr Ban said the previous vetoes were `` regrettable '' , but that the lack of agreement `` does not give the government licence to continue this assault on its own people '' . 
Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Zhai Jun , who will go to Damascus on Friday , condemned violence against civilians and called for the government to respect the people 's `` legitimate '' desire for reform . 
But in the interview , posted on the Chinese foreign ministry website , he also said sanctions or the threat of sanctions were `` not conducive to the appropriate resolution of this issue '' . 
A Chinese foreign ministry spokesman would not say if Mr Zhai would also meet Syrian opposition representatives during the two-day visit . 
Last week , Mr Zhai met a Syrian opposition delegation in Beijing . 
In Syria itself , at least 40 people were killed on Thursday , activists said . 
Government forces are reported to have launched a new attack on the town of Deraa in the south of the country , where the rebellion first began . 
The London-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said there were fears of a massacre in the Deraa province village of Sahm al-Julan , where dozens of civilians had disappeared . 
`` Witnesses said security forces shot at the civilians and then piled them onto pick-up trucks . 
Their fate is unknown , '' the group said in a statement . 
There are also reports of violence on the eastern border with Iraq , and in Kfar Nabuda in the central Hama province , where a number of rebel soldiers are reported to have been killed , along with several civilians . 
Shelling by government forces was reported in Homs , which has along with Hama been hit by major government offensives . 
There were also reports that prominent pro-democracy blogger Razan Ghazzawi had been arrested , along with Mazen Darwish , head of the Syrian Centre for Media and Freedom Of Expression , and a dozen other people . 
Restrictions on journalists mean such reports are difficult to verify . 
Human rights groups say 7,000 civilians have been killed in Syria since the uprising against Mr Assad began last March . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
