BP boss expects new year dividend The incoming chief executive of BP , Bob Dudley , on his new job BP may resume paying a dividend to shareholders in the new year , incoming chief executive Bob Dudley has said . 
In an exclusive interview with the BBC , he said BP 's board would meet to discuss restoring the dividend in the coming months . 
BP stopped paying out money to shareholders following the oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Mr Dudley will formally take over from Tony Hayward as BP 's chief executive on Friday . 
`` The board will get together and talk before the end of the year about restoring a dividend in some form in the first quarter , '' he told the BBC 's business editor , Robert Peston . 
`` Its obviously for the board to decide , -LRB- but -RRB- from what I see happening in the performances of the businesses , i believe we will get there . '' 
His plans for restoring the dividend will be encouraging news for shareholders . 
Last year , BP paid out about # 7bn in dividends , making it the single biggest dividend payer in the FTSE 100 list of leading companies . 
Mr Dudley also pledged to make BP `` a good compelling investment for shareholders '' . 
It 's a new safety-first era for BP , under its quietly spoken new American boss '' Despite the damage to the company 's reputation caused by the oil disaster , Mr Dudley said the company was fully committed to doing business in the US . 
But he acknowledged that the accident had been `` a wake up call '' to the entire oil and gas industry , and BP would have to demonstrate it had `` learned its lessons '' . 
`` If we meet our obligations , like we have been , then over time people will say - this was a good corporate citizen to respond to an accident that has been a wake up call to the entire oil and gas industry . 
`` If we share our learnings to ensure this does n't happen again then maybe we can restore our reputation in the US , '' he said . 
`` The US uses a lot of energy , and we are the biggest energy producer in the US , so it 's an important part of our portfolio globally . '' 
Mr Dudley also defended outgoing chief executive Tony Hayward , who was widely criticised for his handling of the oil spill , saying he had done `` a great job '' . 
The incoming chief executive of BP , Bob Dudley , on his new job The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
