LONDON | Thu Oct 7 , 2010 7:41 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - U.S. oil explorers are talking about forming a new insurance fund that would cover the costs of any future oil spill , to avoid a scenario where smaller companies are unable to drill offshore , a senior industry executive said on Thursday . 
BP 's oil spill is expected to rack up an over $ 30 billion bill for shutting the leak , cleaning up the oil and compensating those affected . 
This has prompted concerns about what would have happened if a company without BP 's massive resources had been operating the blown-out well . 
Jim Farnsworth , Chief Executive of Cobalt International , a small explorer focused on the deepwater of the Gulf of Mexico , said his company was in talks on a solution to avert such fears . 
`` It is likely and probably desirable for a combination of us to come together and insure against these types of accidents , '' he told the Finding Petroleum conference in London . 
`` Cobalt is actively in discussions along those lines , '' he added . 
Some analysts have predicted that the oil spill could cause a shakeout with smaller companies being forced to sell up because new regulations force them to seek insurance cover which may be either unobtainable or unaffordable . 
In the wake of Exxon 's Valdez oil spill , companies formed a $ 1 billion fund to pay for future oil spills . 
Farnsworth , a former BP executive , said he expected the new fund to be bigger . 
Cobalt 's market capitalization has dropped by $ 1.5 billion , or 30 percent , since the oil spill began , Farnsworth said . 
The CEO added that he expected it would take a long time for drilling to resume in the Gulf of Mexico even if a drilling moratorium , installed in the wake of the oil spill , is lifted in November , as expected . 
`` The real moratorium ends when they start issuing permits again and that could take a long time , '' he said . 
Some analysts predict permitting may remain paralyzed until late 2011 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Bergin ; Editing by Hans Peters -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
In very simple term , the proposition of building up new Insurance Fund is definitely a good and welcoming step for any exigencies that may arise during the operation of drilling . 
It must be ensured that the in the process of doing it small oil companies are not put out of business . 
The smaller oil companies if need be may raise insurance fund within its capacity without winding up the business . 
If required merge with as many small companies as possible to form a bigger oil company . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
