Foxhunting has been banned , but Stephen Moss enjoys Michael Clayton 's anecdotal history of the hunt , Endangered Species , and Baily 's Hunting Directory Endangered Species : Foxhunting - The History , the Passion and the Fight for Survival by Michael Clayton -LRB- 316pp , Swan Hill Press , # 25 -RRB- Baily 's Hunting Directory 2004-2005 -LRB- 514pp , Pearson Publishing , # 39.95 -RRB- Michael Clayton , in his anecdotal history of foxhunting in the 20th century , tells us that the recent Hunting Act consumed 120 hours of parliamentary debating time ; the Iraq war got 11 . 
The inference is clear : in parliament 's view , the lives of the 15,000 foxes killed annually by hounds are worth more than unnumbered thousands of Iraqis . 
They are counted more carefully , too . 
It is further grist to the mill of those who argue that the attempt -LRB- apparently successful -RRB- to ban hunting with hounds - which came into force this week - has received an absurd amount of attention since Labor was elected in 1997 . 
The argument is , however , fallacious , because the parliamentary wrangling has always been underpinned by a far bigger question : when can the majority legitimately impose its will on a minority ? 
Moreover , the struggle is the culmination of a century-long set of conflicts : left v right , communitarian v individualist , urban v rural , rationalist v romantic . 
Viewed in that context , the battle is a fascinating one , fully deserving its 120 hours . 
-LRB- Which is not to say that the Iraq adventure merited only 11 . -RRB- 
Hunts , of which there are more than 300 in the UK , talk of their `` countries '' - the precisely defined area in which they are allowed to operate . 
The map that comes with Baily 's Hunting Directory shows this alternative Britain , divided by hunting country - from historic names such as the Duke of Beaufort 's and the Quorn to more homely ones such as the Saltersgate Farmers and the Banwen Miners . 
It is like one of Iain Sinclair 's alternatively patterned worlds : a set of grid references of huge significance to the hunters ; meaningless to anyone else . 
It helps to explain why hunt supporters are so obsessive : in their eyes , what is under attack is not just a way of life but a way of ordering the world . 
Clayton is uniquely qualified to write about hunting : he has hunted for 50 years ; he was editor of leading equestrian magazine Horse and Hound for a quarter of a century ; and before he joined H&H was a war correspondent for the BBC - a useful background , since the hunting imbroglio has come to resemble a war zone . 
He has hunted with more than 200 packs of hounds in the UK and abroad -LRB- surely a record -RRB- and , at the age of 70 , still hunts regularly in his beloved Leicestershire , prime hunting country . 
As the title of his book suggests , he is unashamedly parti pris : the book is less a thoroughgoing history than a love letter to the `` sport '' and the people with whom he has hunted . 
For the most part , the book presents huntsmen as grand , if often unpredictable , figures ; saboteurs as ignorant troublemakers with rings through their noses . 
Clayton claims to love the fox , and refuses to accept the surely incontestable fact that hunting involves some element of cruelty . 
`` In the hunting field I see a beautiful wild mammal , '' he writes , `` conducting himself with an amazing confidence and sang froid . 
I have seen a fox in woodland where hounds are hunting pause to engage in catching a small rabbit which ran across his path . '' 
A lovely image , though highly romanticised . 
We agnostics see only a fox running in terror for its life . 
To the non-believer , the pleasures of Clayton 's book are incidental , not least the portraits of the glorious eccentrics who people hunting - figures such as the `` redoubtable '' -LRB- for which read terrifying -RRB- Daphne Moore , spinster , authority on hound pedigrees and author of The Book of the Foxhound , who used to follow the Beaufort on `` a large black ladies ' bicycle of ancient vintage '' . 
There are also occasional startling facts . 
Did you know that Soho is named after a Norman hunting cry -LRB- `` So Ho '' -RRB- ? 
Clayton is also interesting on hunting dress . 
The author photograph on the flap shows him wearing the traditional top hat to hunt , but in the text he admits to having swapped it for a hard hat that offers more protection . 
Traditionalists still swear by toppers , even though they are hopeless if you fall . 
-LRB- The class warriors have never grasped that hunting performs the invaluable service of thinning out the ranks of the upper class . -RRB- 
Riding macs are also frowned on , hunters preferring to be tastefully soaked rather than dourly -LRB- but pragmatically -RRB- clad . 
It is surely significant that Baily 's -LRB- the annual `` hunting bible '' -RRB- begins each of its entries on individual hunts with a description of their uniform : `` Dress : red , light blue facings , hunt buttons '' for the Quorn ; `` Blue coat , blue collar , buff facings '' for the Beaufort , which also specifies that hunt servants ' livery should be green . 
I have only hunted once -LRB- entirely for journalistic purposes -RRB- and went out with the Beaufort wearing a padded green jacket and jockey 's hat . 
Exactly what he expected someone from the Guardian to be wearing , remarked the philosopher , hunting devotee and Beaufort subscriber Roger Scruton sardonically . 
Baily 's is in its 98th year . 
Presumably , it will make 100 , but how many of the packs of foxhounds , harriers , beagles , basset hounds , mink hounds , staghounds and bloodhounds will still exist in two years ? 
Simon Hart , chief executive of the Countryside Alliance , who contributes an article to Baily 's on the way ahead , makes no predictions about hunting 's survival . 
Instead , he argues that the debate , by becoming enmeshed in a grander `` whose country ? '' 
narrative , has ceased to be about the specifics of hunting . 
`` To some backbenchers it is ` payback time for the miners ' , '' he complains , `` for others a matter of warped parliamentary principle or priority , and to some simply an issue about managing the Labor party . '' 
Clayton refuses to accept that 2005 will mark the end of the activity to which he has devoted a large part of his life , yet he offers no coherent picture of how it will endure . 
Will hunts break the law , try to tie it in knots , or bed down and hope that one day the Tories return to power with sufficient numbers - and sufficient will - to reverse the ban ? 
The dogs are going to need more than doggerel . 
