Author of `` Male Menopause '' and `` The Irritable Male Syndrome , '' psychotherapist Jed Diamond has made a name for himself by focusing on the angst of the modern male . 
His Web site , Menalive.com , and online counseling business have recently seen a surge in users . 
Freelance writer Sindya N. Bhanoo asked Diamond whether the country 's sagging economy is taking a greater toll on men than on women -- and if so , why . 
Excerpts of their conversation follow : Q So , what is male menopause ? 
Does it really exist ? 
A Male menopause is a change of life for men that has a hormonal basis but -LRB- also -RRB- has psychological , interpersonal , social and spiritual aspects to it . 
Another way to think of it is to think of puberty , but -LRB- this is -RRB- a transition between first adulthood and second adulthood . 
So it 's similar to female menopause ? 
Many of the symptoms are the same , or similar , particularly the emotional ups and downs . 
Although hot flashes and night sweats are less common in men than in women , they are present . 
The -LRB- symptoms -RRB- that are the most common include loss of sexual functioning , erectile dysfunction and loss of libido . 
Irritability and anger and loss of energy are also common . 
And what about male irritability syndrome ? 
When does that occur ? 
Well , we looked at irritability , anger and depression in men . 
There were two main times when it was most common , between -LRB- the ages of -RRB- 15 and 25 and then again when men were between 40 and 55 . 
The four main causes are stress , hormonal shifts and changes in brain chemistry , and changes in male identity and male roles . 
The unemployment rate is 7.6 percent ; could this be worsening the symptoms of male menopause and prompting irritable male syndrome ? 
The core of male menopause is that it is a change of life . 
If there is good support and understanding , men learn that it is not the beginning of the end , as many fear , but rather the end of the beginning . 
First adulthood is coming to an end , and we are moving into second adulthood . 
If a man gets the proper support , this can be the most passionate , productive and powerful time of a man 's life . 
However , stresses , including severe economic dislocation , can cause a man to lose faith in his abilities and prospects . 
A whole lot of a man 's sense of a male 's identity is wrapped up in how well he provides . 
And it 's about how well he symbolizes that outwardly , in a nice car , a nice house . 
This is an international monetary crisis , and it 's also an international psychological crisis . 
I just talked to a client today from Turkey and another from Switzerland . 
The one in Switzerland is concerned about the man in her life . 
The loss of jobs , economic situations crashing -- it affects men in a profound way . 
The chaos is affecting men in very , very powerful and negative ways . 
My Web site was getting 200 or 300 visits a day , now we get double in terms of people who are coming for counseling . 
And I have almost a doubling in client intake . 
So women do n't struggle with stress ? 
I do n't want to at all suggest that women do n't feel stress or are n't impacted by the economy . 
Many women are the sole providers for their family . 
But men seem to have a less resilient emotional system ; women 's brains are more networked from left to right . 
They are balanced socially . 
Men tend to be more isolated . 
Their -LRB- wives -RRB- may be their only friend . 
If things are stressful , they do n't have as much social support . 
How do you counsel clients who are facing financial strain and job loss ? 
This might be a time to think about starting -LRB- your -RRB- own business . 
It 's about finding a way that we may be able to get through this financial crisis that makes money sense and emotional sense . 
Rather than being so dependent on national and international economy , we can network with other people , and invest locally in the local economy . 
What are some steps someone can take who is going through male menopause or thinks they have irritable male syndrome ? 
They are similar steps . 
They would include a whole range of things , such as stress-reduction techniques , hormone restoration , anger management and exercise . 
This Week in Health & Science 
