Syria faces outcry at U.N. rights body as toll rises GENEVA | Mon Aug 22 , 2011 2:32 pm EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Syria faced a chorus of Western and Arab condemnation on Monday for its crackdown on anti-government protesters , in which the United Nations said more than 2,200 people have been killed . 
China , Cuba and Russia were among the few delegations to speak in support of Syria at the U.N. Human Rights Council , rejecting what they called any interference with its sovereignty or territorial integrity . 
But the United States and the European Union , as well as regional powers Egypt , Israel and Saudi Arabia , accused the government of President Bashar al-Assad of waging an unacceptable assault on unarmed civilians . 
More than 2,200 people have been killed in the five-month-old crackdown by Syrian forces , U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay said in a speech . 
`` The military and security forces continue to employ excessive force , including heavy artillery , to quell peaceful demonstrations and regain control over the residents of various cities , '' she told the 47-member forum whose session continues on Tuesday . 
Pillay , a former U.N. war crimes judge , called for the government to halt its repression of peaceful protests and release all people detained for participating in them . 
U.S. envoy Eileen Chamberlain Donahoe said the urgent session , the second on Syria this year , underscored the growing international isolation of Assad . 
Syria 's ambassador Faysal Khabbaz Hamoui rejected U.N. allegations that Syrian forces had committed crimes against humanity and accused `` large states '' of carrying out a misleading campaign to weaken his government . 
Syria was carrying out political reforms including the start of a national dialogue , he said . 
More than 600 members of the armed forces had been killed in the unrest so far , he said . 
Russia backed its ally . 
`` These are not just peaceful demonstrators . 
They are refusing to engage in dialogue and insist on the overthrow of authorities and frequently use weapons , '' Russia 's envoy Valery Loshchinin told the talks . 
Khabbaz Hamoui said Damascus was willing to allow U.N. investigators into the country as soon as a Syrian judicial commission had completed its work . 
`` It is the first we have heard of this offer , '' U.N. human rights spokesman Rupert Colville told Reuters . 
Russia 's Loshchinin welcomed Syria 's offer as reflecting a `` constructive attitude '' and openness to international dialogue . 
The United States , the European Union and Arab nations want to set up an international inquiry into atrocities by Syrian government forces . 
An initial United Nations investigation , whose results were issued last week , said the government 's crackdown on opposition demonstrators -- marked by killings , disappearances and torture -- might amount to crimes against humanity . 
`` The United States deplores Assad 's campaign of ever-increasing brutality and terror against unarmed innocents , which may amount to crimes against humanity , '' U.S. ambassador Eileen Chamberlain Donahoe told the Council . 
Assad 's forces shot dead three people in Homs on Monday as crowds welcomed a U.N. humanitarian team , activists there said . 
`` Security forces continue to arbitrarily detain peaceful protesters and human rights defenders , holding them incommunicado and subjecting many to torture , '' said Julie de Rivero of the New York-based group Human Rights Watch . 
A draft resolution presented by some 25 council members , including all four Arab members -LRB- Jordan , Kuwait , Qatar and Saudi Arabia -RRB- as well as non-member Tunisia , would set up an international commission of inquiry . 
It would report back by the end of November and its findings would be sent to the U.N. Secretary-General and `` relevant bodies . '' 
Activists want prosecutions by the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- and hope the Human Rights Council will recommend the court 's involvement to the U.N. Security Council . 
The Rights Council can not itself authorize ICC involvement . 
Investigators from the office of Pillay say that they have drawn up a confidential list of 50 alleged perpetrators . 
`` It is high time that this Council responds decisively to the growing number of crimes against humanity and sends a clear signal to perpetrators that they will be held accountable individually for such crimes , '' Peter Splinter of Amnesty International said . 
China , Cuba and Russia want to remove the reference to crimes against humanity from the resolution , in exchange for joining a consensus , according to Radwan Ziadeh , an exiled Syrian activist who heads the Washington-based Damascus Center for Human Rights Studies and is attending the Geneva session . 
-LRB- Reporting by Stephanie Nebehay ; editing by Andrew Roche and Elizabeth Fullerton -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
