LONDON | Mon Aug 22 , 2011 3:39 pm BST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Bank of England policymaker Ben Broadbent has softened his hawkish stance on inflation because of concerns over economic weakness , he said in an interview on Monday , his first since joining the rate-setting Monetary Policy Committee . 
The former Goldman Sachs economist succeeded arch-hawk Andrew Sentance on the Bank 's nine-man rate-setting body , but has not copied Sentance 's stance , voting to leave monetary policy unchanged in June , July and August . 
The UK economy is squeezed between high inflation -- more than double the Bank 's two percent target -- and low growth , and a Reuters poll consensus last week was for interest rates to be kept at record lows at least until next October . 
`` It 's clear that the outlook has softened since earlier this year , and the latest forecasts both internationally and for the domestic economy are for continued growth but at a rate lower than people expected some months ago and certainly lower than one would expect in a , quote , normal economic recovery , '' Broadbent told BBC Radio 4 . 
`` I was probably on that -LRB- hawkish -RRB- side of the debate when I arrived at the Bank earlier this year ... I was concerned that a long period of above-target inflation might dislodge medium-term expectations of future inflation and find their way into other prices and wages , '' he added . 
`` That has n't happened and , as I say , the outlook for growth domestically as well as globally has weakened in the last three or four months , so I would describe myself now as much more in the middle of the debate . '' 
Broadbent said the MPC 's assumption was that there had been a permanent loss of output in Britain and appeared to hint at a scenario in which more quantitative easing would be considered . 
`` I still believe there 's significant spare capacity in the economy , and that means that interest rates are low , '' he said . 
`` If that outlook changed in a way which would lower the prospects for inflation over the medium term , maybe more could be done . '' 
The Bank last week inched closer to launching a second round of quantitative easing after two policymakers unexpectedly dropped their call for higher interest rates . 
Only long-standing dove Adam Posen called for more QE this month but other policymakers considered it . 
The Bank has held rates at a record low of 0.5 percent since March 2009 and purchased 200 billion pounds of financial assets , mostly gilts , with newly-created money between then and January 2010 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Keith Weir and Olesya Dmitracova ; editing by Stephen Nisbet -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
