President Assad has not been seen on Syrian television for more than two weeks Iran 's security chief has told President Bashar al-Assad that Syria is part of a vital regional alliance that Tehran will not allow to be broken . 
During talks in Damascus , Saeed Jalili said Syria was an essential part of an `` axis of resistance '' . 
The statement came a day after Syrian Prime Minister Riad Hijab defected to the opposition . 
Syrian TV showed President Assad greeting Mr Jalili , his first TV appearance in two weeks . 
President Assad was last seen on state TV on 22 July - four days after a bomb killed four security chiefs in Damascus - leading to speculation about his health and whereabouts . 
State television said Mr Assad had told Mr Jalili of `` the determination of the people and government of Syria to cleanse the country from the terrorists and fight against terrorism unreservedly '' . 
He said Syria would `` continue on the path of national dialogue '' and that it was `` capable of thwarting the foreign conspiracies '' . 
Mr Jalili was quoted as saying : `` Iran will not allow the axis of resistance , of which it considers Syria to be an essential part , to be broken in any way . '' 
Jonathan Marcus BBC Diplomatic Correspondent Syria is one of Iran 's most important allies - a pro-Iranian foothold in the Arab Middle East and an important conduit for contacts between Tehran and Hezbollah in Lebanon , and Hamas in the Gaza Strip . 
Reports that members of Iran 's Revolutionary Guards may be active in Syria is one reason why 48 Iranians were seized by Syrian opposition fighters . 
The exact status of those kidnapped remains unclear , but the fears for their safety are real enough . 
But it is regional political considerations as much as their fate that is driving this burst of Iranian diplomacy . 
Iran sees Turkey as a competitor for regional influence . 
Tehran is alarmed at renewed ties between Egypt and Saudi Arabia which constitute , at least in part , a thinly-veiled alliance of `` moderate Sunni Islam '' against Shia Iran . 
The ultimate fall of the Assad regime could leave Iran dangerously isolated . 
Its diplomatic activism is an effort to underscore that whatever happens it remains an essential regional player . 
Correspondents say `` axis of resistance '' refers to Iran , Syria , Hezbollah in Lebanon and the Palestinian Islamist group Hamas in Gaza . 
Iran has accused Turkey and some Gulf states of arming the Syrian rebels , in collusion with Israel and the US . 
Tehran says it is planning an international meeting on Syria on Thursday . 
It is also trying to secure the release of a group of Iranians abducted by rebels from a bus in Damascus on Saturday . 
As well as Mr Jalili 's visit to Damascus , Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi has been holding talks in the Turkish capital , Ankara . 
In a letter made public late on Tuesday , Mr Salehi asked the UN for help in freeing the hostages . 
An unconfirmed report from the rebels has suggested that three of the 48 hostages they are holding have been killed by army shelling . 
Mr Jalili , who heads Iran 's supreme national security council and is considered a senior aide to Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei , told reporters that `` kidnapping innocent people is not acceptable anywhere '' , Iran 's official news agency Irna reported . 
Iran 's Deputy Foreign Minister Hossein Amir Abdollahian has said it holds the US responsible for the hostages ' safety . 
He said the US was supporting `` terrorist groups '' and despatching weapons to Syria , and was therefore responsible for the lives of those abducted . 
Rebels say the group are members of Iran 's Revolutionary Guard . 
Tehran says they are pilgrims who had been heading for a Shia religious site . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir , in neighbouring Lebanon , said Syrian state media were giving the impression of it being business as usual in Damascus , despite Monday 's defection . 
Syria 's information minister played down the significance of Mr Hijab 's departure . 
Syria was a state of institutions , Omran al-Zoubi said , and the flight of some of its individuals would not affect the state , however prominent they were . 
But reports of defections have continued , with Turkey 's foreign ministry announcing on Twitter that a general was among more than 1,300 refugees who fled across the border overnight . 
The number of Syrians who have crossed into Turkey has risen to 47,500 , Ankara says . 
Civilians have become caught up in further clashes in the northern city of Aleppo The UK said on Tuesday it was quadrupling its aid for refugees fleeing fighting in Syria . 
Riad Hijab , appointed as prime minister less than two months ago , is the most prominent Syrian figure to defect so far . 
Although his whereabouts are unclear , his spokesman appeared on al-Jazeera TV in neighbouring Jordan saying that the prime minister had fled Syria with his family and was in `` a safe location '' . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on Tuesday that the international community had to plan for the fall of the Syrian regime . 
Speaking in South Africa , she said : `` The intensity of the fighting in Aleppo , the defections , really point out how imperative it is that we come together and work toward a good transition plan . '' 
On the ground in Syria , clashes have been reported in Aleppo and the army is said to have stepped up its bombardment of the northern city . 
Government forces are trying to dislodge rebel fighters who say they control up to half of Aleppo . 
Opposition activists report intense attacks on rebel-held areas on the north-east and south-west sides of the city . 
State media said troops had clashed with `` terrorists '' in several places inflicting heavy losses . 
Further deaths were reported in Damascus on Tuesday . 
State news agency Sana said a `` terrorist hideout '' had been stormed by security forces . 
British-based activist group Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said 270 people were killed across Syria on Monday . 
It said 61 civilians died in Aleppo province alone . 
Activists estimate more than 20,000 people have died since the uprising against President Assad began in March last year . 
Reports of casualties often can not be independently verified . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
7th August 2012 - 15:54 Quite sad what is happening in Syria . 
Both sides screaming Allahu ak bar and killing each other : Syrians against Syrian ... But history would not be any kind to Assad , he is the president of the country and hence should had stepped down when the support was no longer given . 
The era of ruling people by force is long gone !! 7th August 2012 - 15:52 It 's very easy for us all to sit here and comment on the dreadful situation in Syria . 
Does any one who is n't actually there fully understand the true extent of what 's happening or who 's to blame ? 
al - Assad can not destroy his own people and get away with it , yet the rebels are murdering loyalist to Asaad , what 's the difference ? 
7th August 2012 - 15:46 Assad 's Syria was not some kind of `` secular paradise '' . 
It was a brutal security state run by one clan and their cronies . 
Assad 's father flattened an entire town , killing 20,000 people to keep power . 
It is true that jihadists have infiltrated the rebels , but that does n't make all of the rebels `` terrorists '' . 
Those here equating the rebels to the likes of bin Laden should be ashamed of themselves . 
7th August 2012 - 12:45 Over all political and religious considerations over Syria comes Assad 's fear of losing power , just ask Putin about what lengths a man will go to to stay in control . 
These ` dicators ' are fearful , selfish men who are more than willing to bring a whole country crashing down around them just so they can stay in power . 
History repeats and they never learn . 
7th August 2012 - 10:52 I have defected from the terrorist , murderous regime and -LRB- am -RRB- joining the holy revolution , '' ran Mr Hijab 's statement read by his spokesman , Asaad should learn from Ben Ali of Tunisia , syrians need freedom he should step down because syria is not his family property . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
