Syria crisis : Tracking the Assad defectors Syrian Prime Minister Riad Hijab is the latest significant figure to defect from Bashar al-Assad 's embattled regime . 
Mr Hijab 's departure follows the defection of a number of diplomatic staff , notably Syria 's ambassador to Iraq , and other military figures . 
Four top-level military advisers were also killed in a bomb attack on the National Security Headquarters in Damascus in July . 
We examine the effects these defections and deaths may have on President Assad . 
Commander in the elite Republican Guard The son of Syria 's longest serving defense minister , Mustafa Tlas , he attended military training with President Assad . 
He and his wife were prominent figures in the Damascus social scene . 
A Sunni Muslim , whereas most of Syria 's leaders are Alawite . 
Manaf Tlass was a close friend of President Assad , so his defection will have been keenly felt in Damascus . 
The most significant political desertion from the government . 
He was considered a staunch Assad loyalist and was a key member of the Baath party . 
Came from the eastern city of Deir al-Zour and was made agriculture minister shortly after the uprising began . 
Although his was a mainly symbolic role , the flight of President Assad 's most prominent cabinet minister was evidence , according to the opposition , of the regime `` disintegrating '' . 
Given the task of repairing relations with Baghdad in 2008 , he was a member of Syria 's Sunni Muslim elite . 
He had been prominent in the ruling Baath party and the security services and had served as governor of several provinces . 
Chief of the Uqaydat tribe close to Syria 's eastern border with Iraq . 
His defection in July was seen as a potential tipping point , coming days after Brig Gen Tlass 's decision to abandon the regime . 
Lamia al-Hariri and husband Abdelatif al-Dabbagh Syrian ambassadors to Cyprus and UAE The couple reportedly fled to Qatar in late July 2012 They defected at the same time as Nawaf Fares and created a sense that diplomats were abandoning President Assad Syria 's Charge d'Affaires in the UK A relatively junior diplomat whose predecessor was expelled from London in May 2012 , he condemned the Syrian government 's `` violent and oppressive acts '' . 
Not a high-ranking diplomat , but his departure would have been difficult for the president whose wife is London-born and he himself is a London-trained eye doctor . 
Air force colonel , now commander of the Free Syrian Army , made up of army deserters Claims to have 40,000 men under his command . 
Thirty generals are already said to have fled Syria across the border with Turkey . 
Aleppo MP defected in July 2012 to Turkey A mother of six , she said she was defecting in protest at the `` violence against the people '' as the Syrian army prepared to attack rebel-held areas of Aleppo . 
Syria 's first man in space . 
A military aviator who joined a Soviet crew on the Mir space station in 1987 . 
Largely symbolic , defected in August 2012 The president 's brother-in-law , married to Bashar al-Assad 's sister Bushra , was among four top-ranking security officials killed by an 18 July bomb at the headquarters of the National Security Bureau in Damascus . 
He was replaced as head of military intelligence in 2010 . 
Reputedly among the most notorious security figures in the Assad elite . 
He was believed to have been close to Bashar al-Assad and his death would have been a personal blow . 
Head of the National Security Bureau , Gen Ikhtiar co-ordinated the work of all Syria 's intelligence agencies . 
Reportedly put in charge of quelling the response to pro-democracy protests in Deraa . 
His death was a major prize for the rebels . 
Head of Assad crisis management office A former defense minister and assistant to the vice president , he was a career soldier who was made general in the 1980s and later military chief of staff . 
In charge of the president 's response to the uprising , his death would have been a considerable loss Promoted to general in 2005 , he was chief of staff of the armed forces for seven years . 
