Oil spill approaches Gulf coast , threatening economy and environment Coastal towns sit and wait as the oil spill from Deepwater Horizon creeps inexorably towards Louisiana . 
Ed Pilkington in Empire , Louisiana reports Oil spill now threatening wildlife along Louisiana 's fragile islands and barrier marshes . 
Photograph : AP When Tom Reddoch was growing up in southern Louisiana , on a pencil-thin strip of land flanked on one side by the Mississippi and on the other by a marshy inland waterway , he and his friends used to brag to each other that this was the greatest place on Earth . 
Children had different expectations back in the 1950s : what they meant was that they would never go hungry . 
`` The one thing we could be certain of is that we would never starve down here . 
In those days , this was one great protein factory . '' 
Fishing and oyster harvesting was easy , as the nutrient-rich swirl of the freshwater Mississippi and the sea spawned wildlife in endless abundance . 
But over the course of his lifetime , Reddoch has seen about 70 % of that extraordinary biodiversity fade away through the combined onslaught of overfishing , the laying of oil pipelines and man-made diversions to the Mississippi . 
Now the region which includes nearly half of America 's wetlands faces its greatest threat of all , one which , Reddoch fears , could kill off what little environmental riches are left . 
`` This could be the coup de grace . 
It could be the last blow , '' he says . 
All along this levee-lined spit of land that stretches from just south of New Orleans down to Venice a fishing and oil town which , as the name implies , stands on the seafront people are bracing themselves for the arrival of what could become the worst environmental disaster the US has ever seen . 
About 50 miles offshore from Venice is the site of Deepwater Horizon , the oil drilling rig operated by BP that exploded on 20 April , leading to the disappearance and presumed death of 11 workers and the spewing of up to 5,000 barrels of oil a day into the sea . 
Unless BP succeeds in plugging three leaks some 5,000 ft -LRB- 1,500 metres -RRB- undersea , the disaster will within a matter of weeks exceed even the 1989 Exxon Valdez catastrophe off the coast of Alaska . 
With the oil being pushed into fragile marshland around Venice by strong winds this morning , Louisiana declared a state of emergency and the Obama administration declared it a spill of `` national significance '' . 
For the residents of Empire , a small fishing town about two-thirds of the way down the spit , this is a spill of personal significance . 
`` I 'll show you what this means for us , '' says Clark Fontaine , the owner of a wooden seafood shack on the side of the main road that has a dilapidated hoarding outside advertising `` L VE CRAWF H '' . 
`` Look at these guys ! '' 
He holds up a handful of plump shrimp , about four inches in length . 
The creatures are gray in color , and several have an orange stripe along their backs . 
`` That 's the eggs they will lay in the marshes that will produce our next crop in August . 
If we lose these shrimp , then we lose our living for the rest of the year . '' 
Mark Franobich has already lost his main income . 
He works as a diver mechanic in the oilfields in the Gulf of Mexico , and has just been told that all operations have been shut down until further notice in the wake of the Deepwater Horizon explosion . 
He now relies on selling timber for firewood from his backyard . 
`` It was just a matter of time before something like this happened . 
Everyone around here is dependent on fishing : generations upon generations of them . 
It 's all they know . '' 
Nobody knows precisely when the oil slick will strike them hard . 
Surface deposits have already been spotted being driven into the grassy marshes along the coast , but how quickly it will move up the Mississippi and spread through the inland waterway is unclear . 
In the docks at Empire a row of oyster boats sit idle , unable to go to sea because of the high winds that are whipping up 8ft waves , thus hampering the oil clean-up . 
A Mexican crew is doing odd jobs on board the Lady Marija . 
`` We do n't know when the oil is going to arrive , '' says Silvestre Frias , speaking in Spanish . 
`` What we do know is that when it does , it will shut down everything . '' 
The Lady Marija brings in about $ 10,000 -LRB- # 6,500 -RRB- worth of oysters a week , supporting the five crew and the ship 's owner . 
`` Yes , we 're scared . 
There will be no work for any of us , '' he says . 
Reddoch estimates the oil will reach disaster levels as far up the spit as Empire by Sunday at the latest . 
And that , he says , will have huge consequences for himself and the wider community . 
Reddoch 's small business , Down South Services , has two main contracts . 
The first is to do maintenance work on a nearby fish factory called Menhadden Fisheries , where he employs about 50 workers through the summer . 
The factory processes small sardines known locally as Menhadden , which produce some of the highest-grade fish oil in the world . 
The oil finds its way into Omega-3 vitamin supplements , paint , cosmetics , and even lubricant for the space shuttle . 
The plant opened its doors just last week for the 2010 season , and receives up to eight boats a day , each laden with sardine catches worth up to $ 1m . 
`` Think about that for a second when it 's cooking , that 's a lot of business ; and all of that will be lost , '' Reddoch says . 
Down South Services ' other main contract is , fortuitously enough , to provide labor in cases of oil spillages . 
He is laying on men to work the booms that are being used to try to prevent the oil coming on land , and once it does his employees will be cleaning up the beaches , marshes and ships . 
So what he 's lost with one hand , he 's gained with the other . 
`` That 's what you call diversification , '' he says , adding that it gives him no pleasure to make money out of the final destruction of his childhood paradise . 
A version appeared on p2 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 22.31 BST on Friday 30 April 2010 Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
