Oil spill is BP 's wake-up call As more oil drifts towards the Mississippi delta , we must hope that BP questions its future dependence on fossil fuels Oil from the Deepwater Horizon rig explosion has reached the US coast . 
Photograph : Liz Condo\/AP Soon after taking over in 2007 , BP 's newly appointed chief executive told an audience of business students at Stanford University that he thought too many people at the company were `` trying to save the world '' . 
Tony Hayward 's comments were intended to set the tone for his tenure at the helm of Britain 's third largest company , but those words have returned to haunt him this week as BP struggles to contain one of the darkest chapters in its history . 
His speech went down well . 
Hayward 's focus on core values on oil and gas as the only credible source of long-term profit was a welcome relief to industry observers . 
His predecessor had made worrying statements about BP becoming an `` energy company '' , able to exploit the anticipated growth in clean technology to deliver a business model suited to a carbon-constrained world . 
An attractive green logo had been unveiled , the words `` Beyond petroleum '' inserted elegantly beneath . 
Fast forward to 2010 , and BP 's alternative energy division has been left to wither on the vine . 
The solar business is a distant memory and this year the company has allocated less than a billion dollars to its entire low carbon portfolio , now mainly comprised of biofuels . 
In contrast , the company is planning to spend 20 times this amount extracting oil and gas from increasingly unconventional sources including the tar sands of Canada . 
The success of this strategy relies on acquiescence by political leaders in the countries in which BP operates . 
Under George Bush the need for lobbying muscle was minimal , but since the arrival of a new president in the White House , BP has poured millions into Washington , mainly through third-party lobby groups . 
Organisations such as the American Petroleum Institute , funded in part by BP , have done the company 's dirty work for them . 
Supposedly spontaneous citizen demonstrations against climate legislation have sprung up around the US , before journalists revealed they were actually populated by employees of the oil companies themselves . 
The climate bill that had , until recently , a sliver of Republican support paid a heavy price for this cross-party endorsement in terms of funding for a series of environmentally dubious projects . 
The most controversial concession now looks almost certain to be reconsidered the opening up of America 's coastal waters to offshore drilling . 
As officials in Louisiana begin to face the reality of the spill that has now reached their fragile coastline , many will be asking if BP did everything in its power to prevent this kind of accident . 
Reports this week suggest that last year a senior BP executive lobbied against mandatory safety codes for offshore drilling , arguing that the regulation would be too onerous and would slow down the construction of new rigs . 
Industry pressure had the desired effect , but it will be up to accident investigators to decide if a code could have helped avoid the initial explosion last week . 
What BP will never admit , among their glossy corporate brochures and extensive environmental assessments , is that its entire business model is predicated on an ever increasing demand for oil , decades into the future . 
These growth predictions rely on a world in which there is no collective action to tackle global emissions , no concerted effort to transfer clean technology to the developing world , and almost no chance of maintaining anything like a stable climate . 
As more oil drifts towards the critical wetlands of the Mississippi delta , we must hope that the more thoughtful members of BP 's board will now feel obliged to question the wisdom of a strategy that is , at its core , unchanged since the opening decades of the 20th century . 
Time for a ban . 
