There are now more than 44,000 people working on the operation The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico has so far cost BP a total of $ 3.12 bn -LRB- # 2bn -RRB- , the company has said . 
The total includes the cost of containing the spill and cleaning up the oil , and the cost of drilling relief wells . 
It also includes the $ 147m paid out in compensation to some of those affected by the spill . 
But BP again warned that the total cost of the spill is likely to be much higher . 
The cost is already significantly higher than the $ 2.65 bn cost reported a week ago . 
BP said there were now 44,500 people working on the spill response - nearly 5,000 more than a week ago . 
But the company also confirmed that efforts to collect oil from the surface of the water had been temporarily placed on hold due to Hurricane Alex , which is currently passing through the region . 
Oil is continuing to leak into the Gulf of Mexico following the explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in April . 
BP said two relief wells being drilled to stop the leak are still on course for completion by August . 
Shares in BP rose more than 2 % at the beginning of trading in London . 
They remain at around half their value before the disaster , however . 
Investors remain uncertain over the eventual financial impact of the oil disaster , with estimates from analysts putting the final bill in the tens of billions . 
Meanwhile the collapse in the share price has lead to speculation that BP may become a takeover target . 
Last week investment bank JP Morgan Cazenove suggested oil giant Exxon Mobil as a possible buyer , while Anglo-Dutch oil giant Shell has also been mentioned . 
But analysts also suggest a potential role for state-backed oil companies such as China 's PetroChina or Kuwait Oil . 
Media reports in the United Arab Emirates also indicate that Middle Eastern investors are considering buying stakes in BP . 
The National newspaper , which is owned by the Abu Dhabi government , cited `` informed sources '' saying that `` BP knows there is potential support from the Middle East '' . 
A BP spokeswoman refused to comment directly on the reports . 
`` We welcome new shareholders and existing shareholders increasing their holding , but there are no current plans to issue new equity , '' she said . 
co. uk BP shares rise on hopes of international rescue - 57 mins ago Yahoo ! 
UK and Ireland Tar balls hit Texas as BP oil spill cost soars - 1 hr ago Business Report BP shares rise as company says no plan to issue stock - 1 hr ago New Statesman \* Cost of oil spill response hits $ 3.12 bn to date - 2 hrs ago IAfrica.com Gulf spill hits Texas - 4 hrs ago The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
