Handling a crisis on the scale of Haiti Many people are hungry and thirsty . 
Supplies of food and water have been slow getting on to the streets of Port-au-Prince Troops , doctors and aid workers are flowing into Haiti , while nations pledge millions of dollars in aid . 
But how do you handle a crisis of this magnitude ? 
Richard Gordon and Mike Evans of the Bournemouth University Disaster Management Centre , outline the planning and potential pitfalls of such an operation . 
A fundamental principle of disaster management and international assistance is that it is the stricken country 's responsibility to take the lead in inviting in international assistance -LRB- via the UN resident representative -RRB- , and then co-ordinating that assistance to best effect . 
In most cases , however , the host government to a greater or lesser extent , will have been incapacitated by the natural disaster , so the UN sends in Disaster and Assessment Coordination teams -LRB- UNDACS -RRB- to provide initial coordination of international assistance . 
UNDAC teams tend to deploy for no more than three weeks and then like to hand over once again to the host government . 
But this may not be long enough for the Haitian government to resume control of its own affairs . 
The request for international assistance for Haiti will have been speeded up by the presence of UN troops and other agencies already on the ground . 
The US has offered its assistance , in addition to the UN 's in-country co-ordination teams . 
This will provide a significant logistical and command and control element . 
However , there are likely to be incidents of disagreement between US military and international governments and aid agencies on the ground , as priorities and objectives are set and implemented on Haiti 's behalf . 
International assistance is co-ordinated in `` cluster groups '' to ensure that essential aspects of the disaster response are properly co-ordinated and monitored . 
In the past , there have been issues of who co-ordinates whom . 
The US is generally suspicious of UN personnel , and NGOs do n't generally like to be co-ordinated by military - or by other NGOs for that matter . 
The US lead will need to be sensitive in how it deals with these groups and , in particular , how it allows the dissemination of information between agencies . 
Too often , the military tendency to designate vital information as `` restricted '' or higher makes it impossible for troops and officers on the ground to share this information with local responders and aid agencies . 
Mobile communication is hampered by lack of signal and electricity A fundamental principle of disaster management is that communications -LRB- telephones , mobiles -RRB- will fail and , therefore , a back-up needs to be planned . 
This is very seldom carried out in practice , and in the case of Haiti will have been impossible . 
Aid agencies will come with their own satellite phones and internet uplinks ; the military will have their own comms . 
For Haiti 's people , there will be very little to use to communicate with one another -LRB- lack of electricity , land lines , mobiles systems -RRB- and their vital need to talk to each other to confirm who is alive or dead will be frustrated . 
Organisations such as Telephones without Frontiers will make a vital contribution in providing a limited access for users . 
According to Ian Hanson , Bournemouth University Centre for Forensics , a vital component of disaster management is identification of the dead and injured . 
There is a danger that with the use of mass graves to remove rotting corpses , many people will never be identified . 
On top of this , a significant number of people will never be found . 
Middle and long term psychological stress disorders will be prevalent . 
Governments will be demanding that their ambassadors in Haiti get out to find out where their own citizens are , says Mr Hanson . 
Disaster Victim Identification -LRB- DVI -RRB- requires the careful collection of post-mortem data from a body and then matching it to existing ante-mortem data . 
In the case of international citizens in Haiti such ante-mortem data will include dental records , X-rays , fingerprints , and possibly facial recognition . 
DVI activity after the Indonesian tsunami in 2005 revealed that some 80 % of positive IDs were from finger prints or odontology or a combination of the two . 
Kenyon International and other established organizations are deploying to Haiti to assist in this . 
A body lies among the debris For Haitians , there is likely to be an almost total lack of ante-mortem data because standard dental or fingerprint records may not exist . 
Visual records and identification will be their best chance , however this will become impossible if bodies are left too long before being recovered . 
The cost of excavating collapsed buildings for the Haitians with limited equipment is also prohibitive in the recovery of bodies , as is the cost of putting a body through an identification process . 
Many Haitians may never be identified but memorialised in some way . 
This is part of the reflection of the cost , political will , resources and technical skills available for poorer nations versus rich nations . 
As with other areas of disaster preparedness and response , there is a gap between who gets identified , if they can be , and where they are from . 
Security is always a big issue in managing disasters . 
The maintenance of public order is a national responsibility . 
If , or when , the problems exceed the police capacity to handle them - which is probably already the case in Haiti - then the military are normally called in . 
The Haitian police and military will both have suffered significant casualties - as has the already weak government . 
There is a very high risk that , unless aid gets through much faster to the needy , there will probably be a major breakdown in law and order . 
This could raise very serious issues with foreign national forces - the US in particular - who are armed and who may be forced to use arms to protect themselves . 
UN soldiers patrol the ruined streets of Port-au-Prince Security of routes is essential , as it is roads that become the essential lifelines for logistical support and the movement of essential relief to where it is needed . 
Roads are being blocked at present and it appears that the police are unable to deploy in sufficient strength to maintain route security . 
As a result , the development of a co-ordinated security plan that uses local police as well as US military and UN troops will need careful co-ordination and agreed rules of engagement for outbreaks of public disorder . 
Supply trucks from the Dominican Republic arrive in Haiti Haiti has a land border with the Dominican Republic . 
Disaster management planning includes the prior agreement of cross-border co-operation protocols to ensure that assistance is not stockpiled at the border unable to cross over owing to import\/export regulations which have not been previously sorted . 
Two key lessons will apply - among others , but these are the two most important : Survivors want to stay close to where they lived - to be moved into camps is not a favored option for survivors but it is often the selected option for governments because control is much easier . 
A very difficult decision will be reached in the next few days - when to stop trying to find live bodies and to bring in heavy machinery to clear rubble . 
Trapped victims dehydrate and die after about four-to-seven days , sooner if seriously injured . 
Possibly also worth noting that studies into previous earthquakes indicate that epidemics are not the great threat that media often make them out to be . 
Good quality water is a key . 
