In earthquake-hit Haiti , the dead are being hastily buried in mass graves , amid fears their bodies spread disease . 
But is that true ? 
Trying to disguise the smell of decay On the streets of Haiti , the living face a desperate struggle , for food , water , medicine and shelter . 
But the dead present a problem of their own . 
Estimates of the number killed in last Tuesday 's earthquake vary from 50,000 to at least 200,000 . 
Dead bodies are being left by roadsides , trapped under rubble , or cleared into pits . 
The underlying fear is that the bodies could spread disease and infection . 
But is that assumption correct ? 
`` There is this myth that bodies have to be disposed of incredibly quickly , which often leads to bodies being shoved into pits without any form of identification , '' Sir Nicholas Young , British Red Cross chief executive and a trustee of the main fundraising group , the Disasters Emergency Committee , told the BBC . '' 
-LRB- This makes it -RRB- impossible for the relatives to grieve . 
Impossible to know how many people died and impossible for people to identify their relatives . 
This is a terrible shame . 
No , bodies of people who died healthy do not spread disease People handling bodies run a slight risk , which can be reduced with basic hygiene `` The risk is absolutely minimal , unless there is disease in the population . 
This is a mistake and a waste of resources . '' 
The charity has its own guidelines on cadaver management for disaster zones and signs up to 2009 advice from the Pan American branch of the World Health Organisations - Management of Dead Bodies After Disasters : A Field Manual for First Responders . 
The guide was compiled after numerous disasters - the 2004 Asian Tsunami , Haiti 's 2004 floods , Hurricanes Katrina and Stan and the Northern Pakistan and Indian earthquakes - highlighted an absence of advice on what to do and why . 
It came after research by Oliver Morgan , at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine , that found dead bodies in natural disasters do not pose a public health threat . 
The guide sets out how ordinary people helping on the ground can manage the recovery , identification , storage and disposal of the dead . 
And how to help families come to terms with it . 
If necessary , temporary burial is recommended , but the caustic chemicals used to try to `` disinfect '' bodies are not - they have no effect and make identification harder . 
Bodies pile up in the streets Indeed , the guide says it is the `` surviving population '' that is `` much more likely '' to be a source of infection than the dead . 
But care does need to be taken in handling dead bodies , says Dr Egbert Sondorp , senior lecturer in public health and humanitarian aid at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine . 
`` At the time of their death , people are likely to be healthy . 
You need to take care in handling them , precautions , as you do n't know . 
But they are not in themselves a risk . '' 
Those clearing dead bodies have to take basic safeguards like wearing gloves and hand-washing . 
These help protect against a range of diseases which can linger in the dead for two days - tuberculosis , Hepatitis B and C , diarrhoeal diseases . 
And HIV , which can last for six . 
There are also risks in drinking water contaminated with faeces from the living and the dead . 
A regular part of the BBC News Magazine , Who , What , Why ? 
aims to answer some of the questions behind the headlines So why are people buried so quickly , if the official guidance suggests they should not be ? 
One reason is the smell , says Dr Sondorp . 
`` A body which is decaying smells . 
In most communities you try to get that away , as psychologically it 's awful to have them around . 
You want to stop dogs -LRB- and vermin -RRB- eating them , as that too is psychologically awful . '' 
Also , there has been no-one on the ground in Haiti to say otherwise . 
Governmental and non-governmental organization has been absent . 
Tradition also plays a part - religions including Islam and Judaism like to see their dead buried within 24 hours . 
The deep-seated fear of disease emanating from dead bodies could also stem from epidemics of the past , where people died in their droves from cholera . 
And mass burial plots are dug outside graveyards But earthquakes , floods and fires involve deaths from drowning , injury and burns , not disease . 
Despite the human instinct to get rid of the bodies quickly , a more considered approach can have long-term benefits for the mental health of the bereaved , says Ute Hofmeister , forensic adviser at the International Committee of the Red Cross . 
`` In all disasters , that 's the human instinct , because the bodies start to smell really bad , look bad and it 's not very dignified having them hanging around in the street . 
`` But experience shows for people , even in natural disasters , it 's important to know what 's happened to their dead . 
It helps them very much to know where they 're buried . '' 
There are also practical implications . 
Correct identification of the dead has legal significance for inheritance and insurance that can affect families for many years . 
