The US military has begun airdropping food and water supplies into earthquake-hit Haiti . 
Some 14,000 ready-to-eat meals and 15,000 litres of water were dropped north-east of the capital , Port-au-Prince , the US said . 
It had earlier said airdrops were too risky but congestion at the airport has hampered aid distribution . 
The US is now considering airdrops across Haiti . 
More than 2,000 US Marines are set to join 1,000 US troops on the ground . 
Equipped with heavy-lifting and earth-moving equipment , a dozen helicopters and medical support facilities , they were waiting off shore after arriving by ship on Monday . 
US Navy helicopters touched down in the grounds of the presidential palace on Tuesday , dropping off troops and equipment . 
The climate is mild , there are significant air pockets . 
The problem is dehydration but for the moment there is still a chance -LRB- of finding survivors -RRB- However , UN and US officials have downplayed the threat of violence . 
Aid workers are starting to expand their efforts to earthquake-affected areas outside the capital , including Leogane , Gressier , Petit-Goave and the coastal town of Jacmel . 
The US Air Force C-17 dropped the relief supplies on Monday into a secured area five miles -LRB- 8km -RRB- north-east of Port-au-Prince , US Army spokeswoman Maj Tanya Bradsher was quoted as saying by the Associated Press . 
Haitians flock under a US helicopter delivering aid supplies in Port-au-Prince She said the aircraft had flown out of Pope Air Force Base in North Carolina . 
Last week , US Defense Secretary Robert Gates said airdrops had been ruled out because they might do more harm than good . 
Mr Gates warned that they could trigger riots if there was no proper structure on the ground to distribute supplies . 
Adam Mynott , BBC News , Haiti The director of the main port in Haiti says the bulk of the aid should be arriving by sea but the earthquake devastated the harbor . 
It is an extraordinary sight - large sections of the main wharf have toppled into the sea . 
The whole length of the wharf is littered with 40ft steel containers leaning at angles . 
The access road is rent with 6in gaps and the main crane has toppled forward , leaning at a drunken angle , half submerged in the water . 
The director says it may take months , but they will get the port open again . 
However , it has become another symbol of an aid operation that has failed to deliver supplies quickly or to where they are needed . 
The BBC 's Nick Davies in Port-au-Prince says that with the delays in getting aid out from the airport , the US military are now securing the areas before the pallets of food and water are parachuted in . 
Meanwhile , thousands of extra UN police and peacekeepers are due to be deployed as a way of increasing security to stop the looting from spreading , our correspondent says . 
The Security Council is expected to vote later on a recommendation by Secretary General Ban Ki-moon to boost UN troop numbers in Haiti by 2,000 for six months , and UN police numbers by 1,500 . 
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said on Tuesday that Haiti remained a major test for the international community . 
`` It is a test of our compassion . 
It is a test of our resolve . 
And it is also a test of our ability to co-ordinate our actions together . '' 
France 's co-operation minister , Alain Joyandet , had suggested on Monday that the US was `` occupying '' Haiti and urged the UN to `` clarify '' the US role . 
However , a statement from President Nicolas Sarkozy on Tuesday said France was `` very satisfied '' with the co-operation and praised the US for its `` exceptional mobilisation '' . 
As well as problems at the airport , there were also major problems at Port-au-Prince 's main seaport , which was badly damaged by last week 's earthquake . 
The port 's director told the BBC it could be months before it is fully operational , although one large shallow-draught US barge has been unloaded . 
On Tuesday , UN spokeswoman Elisabeth Byrs said 90 people had been pulled out alive since the earthquake and rescue efforts were now concentrated outside of the capital . 
EU - $ 604m -LRB- 420m euros ; # 371m -RRB- US - $ 100m pledged in immediate aid , with promise of more later She insisted there was still hope for survivors . 
`` The climate is mild , there are significant air pockets . 
The problem is dehydration but for the moment there is still a chance , '' she said . 
At least 70,000 people who died in the earthquake have already been buried . 
On Tuesday , the Paris Club of creditor governments , including the US , UK , France and Germany , called on other nations to follow its lead in canceling debts to Haiti . 
Venezuela and Taiwan are the biggest other creditors . 
Meanwhile , the bodies of eight Chinese nationals killed in the quake have arrived back in Beijing in a high-profile ceremony attended by relatives and top officials . 
The Independent Black Hawks bring relief from above for desperate Haitians - 8 hrs ago The Scotsman US troops land on president 's lawn as Haiti aid row cools - 9 hrs ago Sky News Haiti : US Troops Pour In To Ramp Up Quake Aid - 13 hrs ago TheStar.com . 
