Thousands of people lost their homes in the Haiti quake The EU should consider forming a rapid reaction force to deal with future emergencies like the Haiti earthquake , the EU 's new president says . 
`` We have to reflect about a better instrument for reaction , '' said the President of the European Council , Herman Van Rompuy . 
After providing emergency aid to Haiti the EU should consider a `` humanitarian rapid reaction force '' , he said . 
He was speaking after talks in London with UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown . 
Mr Van Rompuy , who now chairs meetings of EU leaders , said an international conference on rebuilding stricken Haiti would be necessary . 
On Monday the EU pledged more than 400m euros -LRB- # 354m -RRB- in emergency aid for Haiti , where severe infrastructure damage is hampering international efforts to help survivors . 
The EU may be most effective at coordinating medium and long-term development The European Commission - the EU 's executive arm - will provide 137m euros for short-term needs and at least 200m euros for the medium and longer term . 
The EU member states will provide an additional 92m euros , officials said after emergency talks in Brussels . 
EU aid to Haiti is channelled through the UN , which is co-ordinating the relief effort on the ground . 
The man who managed the EU 's response to the 2004 Asian tsunami , Euro MP Louis Michel , earlier said he was `` very sceptical '' about creating a special EU fast intervention corps . 
`` We do n't want the actors stepping on each other 's toes and all the world 's well-intentioned volunteers crowding the disaster scene , '' he told the European Parliament 's news service . 
Mr Michel , a Belgian like Mr Van Rompuy , was previously EU commissioner for development and humanitarian aid . 
Many thousands of survivors are fending for themselves in Haiti 's ruined capital Port-au-Prince and stricken areas nearby . 
The UN has launched an appeal for # 346m intended to help three million people for six months , most of whom are thought to need emergency relief . 
The British government is to triple its aid to Haiti to # 20m . 
