World Vision treating victims of the earthquake in Port-au_Prince As the situation in Haiti deteriorates in the aftermath of the massive earthquake , Milton Keynes-based charity World Vision is working hard to get aid through to the victims . 
Initial attempts , however , are being hampered because local World Vision staff have been caught up in the tragedy as well . 
`` World Vision has around 800 staff in Haiti , 90 of which were based in Port-au-Prince , '' said Kate Nicholas , Associate Director of World Vision . 
Thousands have been made homeless by the earthquake The charity 's workers are having to work from the office car park since their building was severely damaged in the earthquake . 
One of their workers still remains unaccounted for . 
The situation has not stopped the charity distributing emergency survival kits including food , water , blankets and tents as well as medical supplies to local hospitals and providing emergency health services to the injured . 
The charity 's director told the BBC : `` We are getting very distressing reports from our staff on the ground - this really is a heartbreaking situation . '' 
The agency 's staff in Haiti are increasingly concerned about the safety of children as they find more and more children separated from their parents . 
`` When this disaster happened , many children were separated from their parents because it was the end of the working day . 
So we now have a situation where there are children wandering the city streets , scared and alone , and very much in need . 
`` We 've found that many have actually walked to the border with the Dominican Republic and World Vision is now working with Unicef to help these children , '' said Kate . 
`` The key concerns for children are of course health and basic needs ; there is a great danger of epidemics developing now and children will of course be very vulnerable . 
But we also need to create safe places for them , because there is a real risk of child trafficking and this is something we are working with Unicef . '' 
Logistics experts from World Vision 's Global Rapid Response team have now arrived in the country and relief efforts are continuing with the airdropping of further emergency supplies . 
Families have been separated during the disaster `` All the DC Agencies are currently working together to deliver aid and medical supplies in a co-ordinated and controlled way . 
You just ca n't drop aid into a situation like this . 
`` The need for help is so great that there undoubtedly tensions there , so we need to ensure that aid reaches the most affected and the most vulnerable victims and that it is distributed in a controlled and impartial way . 
`` Long term , there are going to be significant psychological traumas that we are going to help the Haitians deal with , '' explained Kate . 
Anyone wishing to donate to the Haiti Earthquake Appeal , can visit the World Vision website to find out more . 
