The BBC 's Christian Fraser is traveling from Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic to neighbouring Haiti , where people are struggling in the aftermath of a devastating earthquake . 
Here he keeps a diary of his journey along the road to Port-au-Prince . 
19 JANUARY , 2200 GMT , PORT-AU-PRINCE We have finally arrived at the airport in Port-au-Prince , after 10 hours on the road . 
Among the biggest obstacles to the flow of aid from the Dominican Republic are the fears over security ; legitimate concerns given the desperation that is growing along the route . 
For the moment only two major convoys are leaving the border each day , always under military escort and never after dark . 
The plan is that over the next week the UN , with the help of the US military , will secure a humanitarian corridor from the border in preparation for stage two of the aid operation . 
And it will be needed . 
The markets en route to Port-au-Prince did have food , fruit and water , but supplies are precariously low and basic commodities are getting ever more expensive . 
A volunteer from the Red Cross , whom we met on our arrival at the airport , says its operation is growing by the day but the logistical problems should not be underestimated - it could get worse here , he says , before it begins to get better . 
19 JANUARY , 1815 GMT , ENTERING HAITI Finally we 're in Haiti . 
Lined up along the road into Haiti are the diggers and the heavy-lifting equipment that were so badly needed in Port-au-Prince in the first 48 hours after the quake . 
At this stage , it is more likely they will be employed in clearing vital supply routes than in search and rescue . 
Travelling in the same direction is a bus full of worried relatives ; many of them have still not had any contact from loved ones . 
Motorbikes on Haiti 's roads are heavily laden and fuel is scarce in the capital `` We do n't know what we are going to find there , '' said Fernando , who flew into Santo Domingo on Tuesday from Miami . 
`` We are worried sick . 
I have been calling my mother for days . 
I came as soon as I found the money to travel . 
I just pray she is still alive . '' 
There are very few refugees coming from Port-au-Prince . 
Aid workers returning say there is no fuel in the capital and very few have the means to travel . 
Every motorbike that crosses into the Dominican Republic is loaded with jerry cans and suitcases . 
The border guards tell us this has been the quietest day so far . 
After the initial flow of aid , the bigger aid agencies are waiting until the logistics are in place to send more supplies overland . 
This is hugely frustrating for the workers of smaller agencies who say they are more mobile yet under-utilised . 
`` The corporate donors have to trust us , '' said one . 
`` We have the means and the intelligence on the ground to do more . '' 
19 JANUARY , 1300 GMT , THREE HOURS FROM SANTO DOMINGO Three hours into our journey , the road to the border is practically deserted . 
The long aid convoys we had expected to meet are nowhere to be seen . 
19 JANUARY , 1130 GMT , BANI At a service station in Bani , there are vehicles loaded with supplies and relief workers refuelling for the long journey ahead . 
Roberto Ronza is leading an Italian team of doctors from the region of Lombardy . 
The Italians are supporting two medical non-governmental organizations and 70 volunteers who are fast running out of medical supplies . 
Mr Ronza says they are sending scouts to assess what is needed along with 1.8 tonnes of desperately needed drugs and medical equipment . 
The delivery came into Santo Domingo on holiday charter flights . 
`` We ran out of patience today . 
The airport is full , we ca n't wait any longer , we 're heading into Haiti by road , '' he says . 
Is he worried about security ? 
`` We 're told it 's safe , we 're told it has been secured by the UN . 
People are getting desperate . '' 
18 JANUARY , 2200 GMT , SANTO DOMINGO AIRPORT Even the most stoic Haitians are getting angry and impatient at the slow delivery of essential food and medicine , but some 500km -LRB- 300 miles -RRB- away in the neighbouring Dominican Republic , things are finally beginning to take shape . 
The apron at Santo Domingo airport is filled with aircraft from around the world . 
A search-and-rescue plane from South Africa made six refuelling stops just to get here . 
The UN reception center is crammed with teams of impatient volunteers , all of them waiting for relief flights into Haiti . 
Some , including a Swiss mountain rescue team , have been waiting since the weekend . 
In the cargo bay , the food , water and medicine is starting to arrive . 
They know they are working against the clock . 
Tonight they are loading 48 pallets of ready meals to send to the border . 
The road to Port-au-Prince is dangerous and there are growing fears over security . 
In the coming days , the UN is hoping that the military can secure a relief corridor to Port-au-Prince that will help speed up the process . 
Chris Weeks , a logistics officer for DHL , has requisitioned the only available warehouse at the airport in preparation for the biggest deliveries . 
The warehouse has no electricity and no key to open the main doors . 
They will sort it out , but it is a reminder that while the neighbouring Dominican Republic is a different world to Haiti , wealthy by comparison , it has limited infrastructure to help with this enormous relief effort that is gathering pace . 
