Millions need food , shelter and medical supplies The coming days will `` test '' whether international organizations can live up to the compassion ordinary people have shown Haiti , Gordon Brown has said . 
The prime minister said rescue efforts must continue and work should begin to rebuild the country after last week 's devastating earthquake . 
Foreign Secretary David Miliband said he was looking at `` any way '' to help and working to ensure aid got through . 
One UK rescue team found five survivors on Monday and hopes for more successes . 
Team co-ordinator Neil Fritzsche , of Lincolnshire Fire and Rescue , said his team used heavy machinery to pull away a slab from a collapsed building on Monday to find `` a lady waving at the rescuers '' . 
`` We will keep going out until there is absolutely no chance of us being able to recover any live people from the buildings , '' he told the BBC . 
The Disasters Emergency Committee is co-ordinating an appeal to help the people of Haiti There are 13 charities involved including the British Red Cross , Islamic Relief and World Vision Donate via the DEC website or by telephoning 0370 60 60 900 The British public has so far donated # 25m via the appeal launched by the Disasters Emergency Committee , an umbrella group of 13 British-based charities . 
It said that throughout Tuesday Red Cross workers have been distributing thousands of tents and tarpaulin , while Christian Aid workers were setting up tent hospitals . 
Save the Children have been establishing safe play areas and ActionAid are providing 2,000 people in the capital , Port-au-Prince , with emergency food supplies , including flour and oil . 
Separately , the UK government has set aside # 20m to help provide food , shelter , health and relief work . 
Two Oxfam members of staff were killed when the quake struck and I lost my own mother - but we are still here working There are an estimated three million people in Haiti in need of aid , according to the UN , but it has been slow to arrive due to supply bottlenecks , looting and violence amid increasing desperation . 
Now , however , the US has begun airdrops of relief goods and further aid is starting to flow into the airports . 
Oxfam said responding to the Haiti earthquake has been `` one of the toughest challenges ever '' . 
The charity 's country director , Yolette Etienne , said : `` Many of my staff here have lost their homes , and some have had family losses . 
`` Two Oxfam members of staff were killed when the quake struck and I lost my own mother . 
But we are still here working . 
`` I told my staff that we have no choice , no other option but to work and to work harder since we have the privilege of still being here and we can help people to overcome their desperation . '' 
Speaking at a press conference at Downing Street , Mr Brown said : `` This is now a test of the international community . 
`` It is a test of our compassion . 
It is a test of our resolve . 
And it is also a test of our ability to co-ordinate our actions together . 
`` It must not be beyond our ability , working together , to make sure we can rescue as many people as possible , bring services back to the people of Haiti and begin the reconstruction of a country that for too long has been immersed in poverty and now in tragedy . 
It is a human tragedy of enormous proportions `` We will do everything we can to ensure that the compassion that has been shown by British people and people all over the world is matched by a coordinated international effort to help the people of Haiti . '' 
Later David Miliband said the UK was working with international partners to ensure aid was being delivered effectively to survivors . 
During Commons question time , he said : `` No-one in this House can fail to be moved by the plight of the Haitian people today . 
`` It is a human tragedy of enormous proportions . '' 
Conservative MP Tobias Ellwood asked why a frigate , HMS Iron Duke , in the Caribbean had not been deployed to help and military stabilisation and security teams had not yet been told whether they were needed . 
Mr Miliband replied : `` It 's certainly the case that the Ministry of Defense have looked at the use of all of their assets as part of the international effort under UN leadership . 
`` We will continue to look at any way we can make a difference in Haiti . '' 
