Police insist they have the numbers to tackle looters The police in Haiti look more like soldiers , issued with gray urban camouflage fatigues and body armor along with the high-powered weaponry - it makes them look like they 're going to war . 
As the sun goes down they jump in the back of pick-up trucks , filling up the rear of the vehicle and preparing to take to the streets of their capital , aware that looting and violence are a growing threat . 
Clercine Tabarre police station is in the north of the city in a safe area , but drive a few kilometres down the road and things are far more dangerous . 
`` In the downtown , yes things are a lot worse but there 's a lot of police , a lot of cops , a lot of safety : the police take care of them , '' said one officer wearing a face mask to protect him from the dust . 
The `` them '' he means are the looters who are starting to attack businesses in the city , not just for food and water but for anything they can get their hands on . 
In some cases the looters get looted , as the goods they 've stolen get taken from them . 
As days go by , there are fears unrest may become widespread The security forces have started firing on them and one person has been killed , but these incidents have been isolated so far . 
But as the days go by and food and water remain in short supply , the country is at a stage where unrest could become widespread . 
At one point on Monday , UN police fired baton rounds to force a crowd back from the gates of the airport , where international aid is arriving . 
Trucks delivering aid are being given military escorts . 
American defense officials say some 10,000 American military personnel could be in Haiti within a few days but the question is : will it work or will things get worse ? 
`` When you think about people who lost everything , except what they 're carrying on their backs , who have n't not only eaten , probably have n't slept in four days ... and when the sun goes down , it 's totally dark and they spend all night lying , wandering around tripping over bodies living and dead - I think they 've behaved quite well . '' 
So said former US President , Bill Clinton , special UN envoy to the Caribbean nation . 
The international airport in Port-au-Prince already looks like it has been turned into an American military base , with GIs armed with automatic weapons at the entrance to arrivals , and servicemen and women unloading water and supplies . 
However , outside the airport they can barely be seen apart from the occasional Humvee caught in traffic near the runway gates . 
The UN 's white vehicles and blue helmets should be more easy to spot but despite the numbers on the ground they too seem barely visible . 
