Thousands of survivors are fending for themselves Nearly a week after the Haiti earthquake struck , tens of thousands of victims are still waiting for aid , despite huge international efforts . 
Aid workers involved in the operation have been sharing their accounts with the BBC News website . 
Today we opened up our hospital in Cap Haitian , to admit the first patients for treatment from Port-au-Prince . 
We know the next days will bring many more and we are aware that this will create a new crisis . 
None of the aid agencies are distributing medical supplies to the north of Haiti and this is now urgent . 
We need antibiotics , anti-inflammatories , analgesics , IV fluids , antibiotics , casts , crutches ... plus volunteer doctors . 
We urge all agencies to be aware of this growing situation . 
We do n't want to see another crisis develop over refugees in the north . 
We can cope , provided we get the aid that everyone thinks they have given directed here , now . 
There have to be aid supplies right across Haiti . 
There were never any reserves in the hospitals before the earthquake . 
And there is nothing now . 
Sarah Gillam : `` People are selling fruit , clothes and shoes on the street '' People are still texting from under the rubble but there is little organised help to reach them . 
The US army believes there are 200,000 dead in the city and you can smell the stench as you pass the city cemeteries . 
I spoke to many families - all had lost someone and were living out in the open on the streets . 
All needed food , shelter , clothes , and chlorine to purify stream water . 
All had only the clothes they stood up in and spoke of having had lucky escapes . 
One of my colleagues , Mario Diaz , visited two large refugee camps in Mariani finding babies , children and pregnant women in improvised conditions , many with nothing to protect them from the blazing sun . 
Many were injured and there were still a lot of dead bodies rotting in the open air . 
The water nearby is contaminated with dead animals and there were no toilets . 
Food is a real problem with very few people able to afford the rising prices and many having no money at all . 
Several of the banks are now rubble . 
People are selling fruit , clothes and shoes on the street . 
Today in Mariani we are distributing 17 cases of reinforced protein peanut butter giving a meal to at least 2,550 people together with vital medicines . 
Our staff are caught up in this too . 
Jean Claude Fignole , our Haitian country director , is sleeping in a tent with his wife and small children as his house was damaged by the quake . 
Our finance manager Jude Jean Baptiste spent seven hours getting his wife out of the rubble and has thrown open his house for ActionAid to use as an office . 
The program manager has lost her brother in law . 
Looking to the future , when the hurricane season hits in May , if people are still living like this , the outcome will be catastrophic . 
This morning our team left the airport and headed to the soccer stadium but were stopped by a road block of tree branches manned by Haitians desperate for food . 
Our interpreter explained we had only medical supplies and the branches were pulled back and we were allowed to proceed . 
David Darg -LRB- left -RRB- with Eric Lotz from Operation Blessing Port-au-Prince 's maze of narrow streets made for difficult driving before the quake - now they are strewn with the wreckage of crushed cars and collapsed buildings . 
When we did stop crowds gathered around us . 
Some were banging on the window and gesturing they were hungry - a few tried to grab at the doctors ' clothing through the window . 
As we set up our clinic at the stadium , people began to bring injured relatives and friends and lay them on the ground in front of us . 
Our Israeli paramedics kicked into emergency mode and began to treat trauma cases immediately . 
Children with gaping head wounds lay screaming and confused . 
We were shocked that so few had received any kind of treatment . 
So many wounds had started to turn septic and the doctors had to create a section for people who needed emergency operations and amputations . 
Several men came running into the stadium carrying a teenage girl they had just pulled from the rubble . 
At first , we all thought she was dead but one of the doctors detected a pulse and we saw her take a few shallow gasps of air . 
She reeked of death having been buried next to other bodies that were killed instantly in the quake . 
We rushed her to the hospital where she underwent surgery and now she is in a stable condition . 
Seeing this miraculous recovery before my eyes was one of the most profound moments I have ever experienced . 
Just this one life saved has made all the lost sleep , the sweat , the struggle to get here and any other adversity seem more than worthwhile . 
