People collecting food at a UN distribution point in Haiti Every so often a natural disaster occurs that makes us feel absolutely powerless in the face of the facts . 
The earthquake that has wrought such devastation in Haiti is one such . 
The human suffering is unimaginable . 
What needs to be done , and done quickly , apparently almost impossible . 
And if you have a belief in an all powerful , all loving God , such disasters immediately raise the question of why He allows such things to happen . 
How is it possible to believe in a God of Love in the face of such devastating suffering ? 
This is a huge question . 
I spoke to the Revd . 
Chris Oxley of St. Anne 's , St. Paul 's and St. Augustine 's in Leicester . 
He said that this was not an armchair debating point , that it represented a real challenge to how we understand God . 
Creation involving stuff carries with it fragility and the potential for chaos `` Part of the challenge is to say that we are trying to avoid the idea of an all-powerful God who is a kind of Father Christmas who sits there waiting for our requests to come in and then acting or not . '' 
Chris 's main point was that God was there in the suffering - a real presence . 
`` When you talk to people in the front line -LRB- aid workers and so on -RRB- they often say that they are aware of the presence of God in the midst of all this brokenness and in this mess and chaos . 
`` Rather than being a remote being , He 's there with us ? 
God is in the pain and the brokenness . '' 
I asked Chris why creation is apparently imperfect , allowing disasters , like the earthquake to happen . 
Chris said , `` I 'm not a scientist but as I understand it , if there is to be a physical world with carbon and organic life forms , that world carries with it fire , earthquake , wind and viruses . 
`` It 's the only world that can exist . 
Creation involving stuff carries with it fragility and the potential for chaos . '' 
Interestingly , Chris said that in the face of such events only a silence , a prayerful silence , is the authentic response . 
Bishop Tim has asked churches in the diocese to use the prayer below for Haiti . 
we hold before you the nation and people of Haiti , and pray for healing in the midst of tragedy and devastation . 
Give comfort to the homeless , the bereaved and the suffering , wisdom to those who seek to help , and light to all who live in the shadow of death . 
This we ask in the name of Jesus Christ , our rock and our salvation . 
