At the core of the financial crisis is a simple problem : Banks do n't fully trust each other . 
So they hoard cash and only lend to each other if the borrowing bank pays enough to justify the risk . 
The best indicator of the simmering interbank distrust is an obscure-sounding interest rate known as Libor , which is flashing red . 
Libor , or the London interbank offered rate , is the rate that banks worldwide charge each other for short-term loans . 
Yesterday , the annualized rate for those overnight loans spiked by more than four percentage points , to 6.9 percent , its highest level ever . 
Normally , Libor on dollar loans is not much higher than what it costs the U.S. government to borrow short-term money , which yesterday was nearly zero . 
That tells experts that banks around the world are basically unwilling to lend to each other at any price . 
It means that cash is not flowing to places that need it . 
And , if sustained , would ultimately lead to higher borrowing costs for ordinary U.S. households and businesses . 
`` The interbank markets are a fundamental part of the plumbing of the financial world , '' Dennis Lockhart , president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta , said in a speech yesterday . 
Many variable-rate mortgages , corporate loans , and other forms of debt adjust relative to Libor . 
`` This contraction in availability and rise of the cost of credit have worsened ... for corporate and business borrowers , '' Lockhart said . 
`` We 've heard anecdotes confirming this from contacts throughout the Southeast . 
In short , Main Street is being affected . '' 
When the Federal Reserve lowers the interest rate it directly controls , it helps stimulate the economy . 
But the rise in Libor , economists say , is likely to have the opposite effect , slowing the economy at the worst possible time . 
The high lending rate reflects banks ' fears : They have no confidence that the other guy will be able to pay the money back , even when the loan is only for a single day . 
`` There 's just an environment of distrust right now , and that 's the core of this entire crisis , '' said Ward McCarthy , managing director of Stone & McCarthy Research Associates . 
`` These anxieties have to be relieved and a level of confidence has to return for us to get out of this . '' 
The difficulties in the lending market between banks both result from , and can exaggerate , the crisis . 
The banks from which people are withdrawing money have the greatest need to borrow cash from other firms , yet the breakdown in that lending market makes it all the more likely that they wo n't be able to get such loans , and thus increase the chances that they fail . 
The problem appears to be most severe among European banks . 
In the United States , bank regulators have been aggressive about engineering buyouts of troubled banks -- most notably Washington Mutual and Wachovia -- without wiping out their lenders . 
Meanwhile , the Federal Reserve has taken aggressive steps to try to flood U.S. banks with cash . 
Last Wednesday , the Fed had $ 189 billion in loans out to banks for that purpose , and Monday it announced an expansion of those efforts . 
`` On the domestic side , the Fed has absolutely opened the floodgates , '' McCarthy said . 
But the market for cash among banks is global , and in Europe , government interventions have been unpredictable , with different countries taking different tacks to try to prevent a spiraling crisis in the financial system . 
Ireland yesterday , for example , effectively put a government guarantee behind its biggest banks for the next two years , while authorities in France , Belgium and Luxembourg injected $ 9.4 billion into Dexia , a bank that operates in the three nations . 
`` Does an Italian bank trust a Spanish bank ? '' 
asked Albert Kyle , a finance professor at the University of Maryland . 
`` Not as much as a U.S. bank trusts another U.S. bank . '' 
The Fed has also taken novel steps to try to inject dollars into foreign banks , though so far it apparently has n't been enough to settle the lending environment among them . 
Monday , it said it would expand those steps , such that foreign central banks will have access to $ 620 billion to try to inject dollars into the banks in their respective countries . '' 
