'' This Story : Read + | Watch + | Talk + | DUBAI : A sea port of the United Arab Emirates , Dubai is the scene of a $ 60 billion building frenzy . 
Here , a Pakistani worker passes in front of the Burj Dubai tower , the world 's tallest free-standing structure . 
-LRB- By Kamran Jebreili -- Associated Press -RRB- SHANGHAI : At 101 stories , the World Financial Center is China 's tallest building and a symbol of the country 's go-go economy . 
-LRB- By Eugene Hoshiko -- Associated Press -RRB- SHANGHAI -- Looking down from his building 's 87th floor at the glittering signs of multinational banks along the river here , Fan Dizhao declared confidently that Wall Street 's reign as the world 's No. 1 financial hub is coming to an end . 
The United States may be grappling with its worst economic crisis since the Great Depression , but these are go-go days in China . 
Venture capital , private equity and foreign direct investment are at all-time highs . 
Although Shanghai 's stock exchange has lost close to two-thirds of its value this year , China 's big banks have escaped the credit catastrophe largely unscathed , and the economy continues to expand briskly . 
Fan , an investment manager at Guotai Asset Management , which oversees funds valued at about $ 5.1 billion , said that despite the country 's inexperience in the financial sector , China has a rare trump card : mountains of cash . 
`` It is inevitable , '' he said , `` that we will take the U.S. 's place as the world leader . '' 
But Shanghai is just one of several cities harboring ambitious -- and to some analysts , fanciful -- aspirations while the global finance industry is reshuffled . 
Tokyo has lifted some regulations on banks and insurance groups and has begun to do something it resisted for a long time : print securities documents in English . 
The Singapore government , which through its massive sovereign wealth funds has increased its private equity and other financial holdings in recent years , has said it is looking to invest in more distressed assets in the United States . 
And Dubai , riding the Middle East 's oil-fired boom , has declared itself the center of Islamic finance and says it aims , in the words of Dubai 's government , to `` develop the same stature as New York . '' 
With U.S. investment houses tumbling into bankruptcy , consolidating operations or transforming themselves into more closely regulated commercial banks , Wall Street 's reputation as the prime address to raise capital , seek investment advice or trade securities is no longer rock-solid . 
The flow of capital had already begun moving away from the United States this summer . 
A survey released last week about the competitiveness of world financial centers found that New York and London , often neck-and-neck in such rankings , were still at the top . 
But the survey also found that the two cities ' lead over their rivals shrank after February because of the credit crisis and the collapse of U.S. securities firms . 
Frankfurt , Germany , and Paris also lost ground . 
Cities in Asia and the Middle East , meanwhile , were deemed most likely to gain in importance . 
`` Dubai , Singapore , Shanghai and Mumbai -- they are the probable leaders , '' said Michael Mainelli , executive chairman of Z\/Yen group , which carried out the survey . 
Researchers looked at factors including infrastructure , foreign direct investment , cost of living and the presence of a fair and just business environment . 
