In the race to control and kill the leaking oil well in the Gulf of Mexico before a tropical storm halts operations , BP is gambling that it can perform several complex technical maneuvers simultaneously . 
The company plans to change caps on the gusher , a tricky task that could greatly improve the ability to capture the oil or perhaps even shut down the well -- but that would permit oil to flow unabated during the switch . 
The company had planned to change the cap only after first connecting the well to a new ship at the site , the Helix Producer , which can siphon up to 25,000 barrels of oil a day . 
But with a window of calm weather forecast for the next week or so , BP has accelerated its plans , administration officials said Thursday . 
This burst of activity comes as a relief well is nearing the blown-out borehole . 
BP and administration officials say that if the weather holds and all the technology works as planned , they could begin the process of permanently plugging the well within two weeks . 
With so much about to happen at the blowout site , the Obama administration on Thursday gave BP officials 24 hours to provide a detailed description of what they will do in the weeks ahead and how they will do it . 
In a letter to BP , National Incident Commander Thad Allen also asked for a series of backup plans to be put into effect if events took unpredicted turns . 
`` They have said to our people this is how they 'd like to proceed . 
We have questions about that , so we 're asking a series of questions , making sure that everything has been carefully thought through before we move into agreeing to sort of a simultaneous process , '' said a senior administration official . 
On another front , the administration was dealt a setback when an appeals court rejected its request to reinstate its moratorium on deep-water drilling . 
With the break in the weather , BP and the administration appeared to be projecting conflicting views on how quickly the leak might finally be killed . 
In interviews on Wednesday , BP 's managing director , Bob Dudley , raised the possibility of success before the end of July . 
`` In a perfect world with no interruptions , it 's possible to be ready to stop the well between July 20 and July 27 , '' Dudley told the Wall Street Journal . 
But he also said that perfect case was `` unlikely '' because of the threat of hurricanes . 
On Thursday , Allen pointedly stuck to the official government estimate that the leak will be plugged by mid-August . 
If the effort succeeded earlier , Allen said , `` we 'd all jump for joy . '' 
He cautioned , however , that the oil could be flowing up several different pathways inside the 10-inch steel casing , which has a seven-inch pipe inside it . 
It is unknown whether the oil and gas are flowing inside those structures , in the space between them or both . 
Consequently , the relief well will succeed only when its drill penetrates the right layer or layers . 
`` We ca n't bet on getting it the first time , '' he said . 
Allen said the relief-well drill will be in place to penetrate the leaking borehole in seven to 10 days -- a time frame more precise than any given before . 
The process of filling the hole with mud and then plugging it with concrete will take seven to 10 more days and , he said , might have to be done a number of times , depending on where in the well the oil and gas are flowing . 
