In France , Social Programs Shield Many From Economic Downturn MENTON , France -- In recent years , Jean Beaufranqui and his wife have spent most of their time in Menton , enjoying the sunshine and gentle Mediterranean breezes that have made this little town into a retirement haven , France 's version of Miami Beach . 
And now , even as the world reels from its most painful economic crisis since the 1930s , Beaufranqui 's thoughts have turned not to budget cuts but to buying an apartment here and settling in full time . 
As a retiree -- he stopped working almost 19 years ago , at the standard age of 60 -- the former metallurgist has sailed smoothly through the economic storm as the French government regularly deposited his monthly pension payments . 
`` Not really , '' he responded when asked whether the financial crisis had affected his standard of living , a question that seemed to interest him less than the petanque bowling tournament he was watching from a park bench beside the beach . 
For Beaufranqui and millions of other French people dependent on tax-financed largess , this country 's cozy social protections , vast numbers of bureaucrats and unhesitating government intervention have proved to be a shelter from want in these hard economic times . 
Denounced for decades as a millstone preventing growth and competitiveness , particularly by free-market advocates in the United States , the French government 's dominant role in economic activity has suddenly found new favor at home and grudging respect abroad . 
The crisis has landed hard in France , just as it has elsewhere . 
European Union specialists estimated last week that the number of unemployed is likely to rise to more than 3 million by next year as factories close . 
But the French economy is expected to shrink by just 3 percent , markedly less than in Britain or Italy , largely because of the country 's traditionally high level of government spending , they added . 
More significant in human terms , broad sectors of the population -- bureaucrats , retirees , teachers and the millions of others whose livelihood depends directly or indirectly on public outlays -- find themselves surrounded by a government cushion . 
The effects are easy to see : As the crisis grew and began to obsess French officialdom in Paris , for instance , Alpine ski resorts reported full bookings for the winter and spring seasons . 
Perhaps nowhere has the buffer effect been more evident than in Menton , a Riviera town where a third of the population is retired and the largest employers -- City Hall , the hospital and a municipal casino just off the beach -- are government-run . 
Mayor Jean-Claude Guibal , who also represents Menton in the National Assembly , said the city has suffered no large layoffs in the economic crisis for the simple reason that it has no factories to lose ; service jobs catering to retired people have endured . 
`` The retired people constitute an element of stability , '' Guibal said in an interview in City Hall , at the top of a square sloping toward the sea , shaded by palm trees and ringed by cafe terraces under stucco arcades . 
The crisis has been felt here , of course . 
Fabrice Massiere , a cheese merchant at the Menton Market , said his business was off sharply because the number of visitors has declined . 
Guibal said income from the casino and tax revenue on real estate transactions have sunk , forcing him to raise property taxes for the first time in 13 years . 
But the heavy dependence on government subsidies or official salaries , he added , has put an economic fence around a large part of the Menton region 's 66,000 inhabitants . 
`` This makes us less sensitive to the fluctuations of the world economy , '' said Guibal , who described himself as a free-market advocate and a member of President Nicolas Sarkozy 's pro-business coalition . 
Sarkozy , a free-market champion who was elected in 2007 on a pledge to help France `` work more and earn more , '' has insisted the crisis will not deter him from trying to reduce the government 's involvement in the economy . 
A senior aide , Henri Guaino , said in a television interview this month , for instance , that Sarkozy will continue to replace only half of the bureaucrats who retire from ministries and other government agencies . 
Multimedia reports on the struggle for equality around the globe . 
