The spill is believed to be the worst US environmental disaster A top US Coast Guard official has said that BP 's plans to contain oil gushing into the Gulf of Mexico from a blown-out well do not go far enough . 
Rear Adm James Watson gave the oil firm 48 hours to identify `` additional leak containment capacity '' . 
The warning follows new US government data suggesting the flow of oil could be double previous estimates . 
Speaking to UK PM David Cameron by phone , President Barack Obama said his criticism of BP was not anti-British . 
In a letter to the oil firm , Rear Adm Watson said : `` Because those estimates have now been revised and estimate a substantially higher flow of oil from the Macado 252 well , it is clear that additional capacity is urgently needed . '' 
The letter was dated 11 June and released on Saturday . 
`` BP must identify in the next 48 hours additional leak containment capacity that could be operationalised and expedited , '' he said . 
The president -LRB- Barack Obama -RRB- made it clear that he had no interest in undermining BP 's value '' End Quote Statement from UK PM 's office `` I am concerned that your current plans do not provide for maximum mobilisation of resources to provide the needed collection capacity consistent with revised flow estimates . '' 
The letter was a response to BP plans to contain the spill in a multi-phase operation taking a number of weeks . 
Oil has been leaking into the Gulf since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on 20 April and sank off the coast of the US state of Louisiana , killing 11 workers . 
A team of scientists put together by the US government and co-ordinated by the US Geological Survey has estimated that 20-40 ,000 barrels of oil a day were leaking into the Gulf of Mexico before a containment cap was placed on 3 June . 
BP has said the device was collecting about 15,000 barrels of oil a day last week . 
Last month , BP was estimating the leak to be the equivalent of just over 5,000 barrels per day . 
BP 's chairman has been asked to meet Barack Obama next week , amid assurances from the UK and US that bilateral ties will not be affected by the crisis . 
In a telephone call with British Prime Minister David Cameron on Saturday , Mr Obama said criticism of BP over the oil spill has `` nothing to do with national identity '' . 
A statement from Mr Cameron 's office said : `` The president made it clear that he had no interest in undermining BP 's value . '' 
Mr Obama has referred to BP by its former name , British Petroleum . 
Some British businessmen have accused the US of `` anti-British '' language following Mr Obama 's blunt criticism of the firm . 
BBC business editor Robert Peston has said BP is likely to bow to US pressure and suspend dividends to shareholders . 
The oil giant has confirmed its directors will meet on Monday to discuss the possibility . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
