By Ross Hawkins Political correspondent , BBC News Mr Cameron spent 30 minutes on the phone to President Obama Government ministers have been careful not to get drawn into a debate about Barack Obama 's comments on BP . 
In the words of Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg - they did not want to allow the issue to spiral into a `` tit for tat political diplomatic spat '' . 
It is hardly surprising they saved the discussions for a weekend phone call between David Cameron and the president . 
The question is : what exactly was said in that call ? 
Different points were emphasised by different sources . 
Downing Street 's account had the president saying frustrations about the oil spill had nothing to do with national identity , and making clear he had no interest in undermining BP 's value . 
The White House version contained more detail about their views on the outcome of the England USA World Cup match than it did on BP . 
But a briefing from a senior administration official in Washington said while President Obama did say US frustration had nothing to do with national identity , he went on `` but has to do with ensuring that a large , wealthy company lives up to its obligations '' . 
The official added : `` He -LRB- President Obama -RRB- said BP must meet its obligations to those whose lives have been disrupted and we will insist everything be done to cap the well , capture the oil , and pay for the clean up , the environmental damage done and the tens of thousands of economic claims as a result of this disaster . '' 
The accounts do not conflict with each other , but they do cast the conversation in a differing light . 
While not wanting to create a diplomatic argument , Mr Cameron 's government has been keen not to appear disengaged . 
Both the prime minister and his Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne have spoken to BP chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg . 
But for BP , and its shareholders , the meeting that really matters takes place in the White House on Wednesday when Mr Svanberg meets President Obama . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
