Oil has been leaking into the Gulf since 20 April Barack Obama has told Prime Minister David Cameron that criticism of BP over the Gulf of Mexico oil spill has `` nothing to do with national identity '' . 
In a 30-minute phone call , the US president said he recognized BP was a multinational company and he had no interest in undermining its value . 
Mr Obama 's blunt criticism of BP over the spill has prompted accusations of `` anti-British '' language . 
Mr Cameron will visit the US as prime minister for the first time on 20 July . 
During the telephone conversation on Saturday , Mr Cameron expressed his sadness at the environmental damage from the oil leak that began on 20 April . 
A Downing Street statement said the leaders had `` agreed that BP should continue - as they have pledged - to work intensively to ensure that all sensible and reasonable steps are taken as rapidly as practicable to deal with the consequences of this catastrophe '' . 
It added : `` The prime minister stressed the economic importance of BP to the UK , US and other countries . 
The president made clear that he had no interest in undermining BP 's value . 
`` The president and prime minister reaffirmed their confidence in the unique strength of the US-UK relationship . '' 
A statement from the White House said : `` The president and the prime minister discussed the impact of the tragic oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico , reiterating that BP must do all it can to respond effectively to the situation . '' 
President Obama 's criticisms of BP - and in particular its chief executive Tony Hayward - have been consistently blunt . 
And some UK businessmen have accused the president 's team of using `` anti-British '' language when discussing the spill . 
The leaders also discussed the war in Afghanistan and Iran 's nuclear program during the phone call . 
No 10 said Mr Cameron and Mr Obama agreed the need for tough European Council measures to support the latest UN sanctions against Iran . 
Oil has been leaking into the Gulf since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on 20 April and sank off the coast of the US state of Louisiana , killing 11 workers . 
As much as 40,000 barrels -LRB- 1.7 m gallons -RRB- of oil a day may have been gushing from a blown-out well before a cap was put on it on 3 June , capturing some of the leak . 
In a letter to BP released on Saturday , the US Coast Guard expressed concern that the company 's plans to contain the leak were inadequate and called for them to be bolstered within 48 hours . 
`` BP must identify in the next 48 hours additional leak containment capacity that could be operationalised and expedited to avoid the continued discharge of oil , '' wrote Rear Adm James Watson . 
This demand comes after US Geological Survey research suggested up to 40,000 barrels -LRB- 1.7 million gallons -RRB- of oil a day may have been escaping before the cap was put on - doubling earlier estimates . 
BBC business editor Robert Peston earlier reported that BP was likely to bow to US pressure and suspend dividends to shareholders . 
The oil giant confirmed its directors would meet on Monday to discuss the possibility , but said no decision had yet been taken . 
Our correspondent said : `` It has taken a while for BP 's board to reach the decision that if President Obama wants them to stop paying dividends , perhaps it would be sensible to do so . 
`` It is looking more likely BP will cease paying the # 1.8 bn of dividends per quarter it 's been delivering to shareholders - until , that is it , can quantify the final bill for the oil debacle and prove it can afford those enormous costs . '' 
He added : `` Even if those costs exceed # 20bn , as analysts expect , BP feels it has the resources to cope . '' 
Mr Cameron and Chancellor George Osborne have already spoken to BP 's chairman , Carl-Henric Svanberg , about the crisis . 
A Downing Street spokesman said Mr Svanberg had told Mr Cameron that BP would `` continue to do all that it can to stop the oil spill , clean up the damage and meet all legitimate claims for compensation '' . 
Mr Svanberg is due to visit the White House next week . 
Conservative MP Richard Ottaway , who is chairman of the foreign affairs select committee , questioned whether the US president ought to `` interfere in the operations of an international overseas company '' . 
Mr Ottaway said : `` What he has to do is separate out the political and diplomatic situation on one hand and the commercial situation on the other hand . 
And I think what has happened is the two have got merged here . '' 
Shadow energy secretary and Labor leadership contender Ed Miliband said `` rather than pointing fingers '' , the best course of action was for a `` proper investigation '' to be held in order to `` establish the responsibilities of BP , the other private companies involved and the American regulatory authorities '' . 
BP employs 10,105 people in the UK and it is estimated that about 18 million people in the UK either own BP shares or pay into a pension fund that holds BP shares . 
The company 's shares finished up 7.2 % on the London Stock Exchange on Friday , recovering losses suffered on Thursday . 
Its share price has almost halved since the oil spill began . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
