Views Diverge on How To Recast Fannie , Freddie Rep. Barney Frank -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
said Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac 's `` public-private entanglement '' will likely be undone . 
-LRB- By Susan Walsh -- Associated Press -RRB- Policymakers are looking to revamp the nation 's home loan system next year after the collapse of U.S. housing and mortgage markets spurred the current economic crisis . 
Under one possible approach , Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac , the federally run companies that control half of the nation 's $ 11 trillion mortgage market , would disappear , leaving lending primarily to private banks . 
Taxpayers would no longer be on the line for subsidizing home loans . 
But analysts say it could become much harder to get a mortgage -- at least one with a relatively low interest rate and a 30-year term . 
Under another approach , Fannie and Freddie would remain . 
They could continue as private companies , trying to strike the difficult balance between the demands of profit-seeking shareholders and those of policy-oriented lawmakers . 
They could also be turned into government agencies . 
In either of these cases , taxpayers would remain potentially exposed to trillions of dollars in losses . 
The debate comes after the nation endured a bruising effort to promote homeownership in the past decade . 
Fannie and Freddie provided hundreds of billions of dollars in loans to people with blemished credit records or other financial limitations , which led to huge losses and the government seizing the firms in September as the financial crisis escalated . 
The government agreed to cover as much as $ 200 billion in losses . 
Now policymakers are looking at ways to prevent a relapse while maintaining Fannie and Freddie 's charge of supplying consistent funding for mortgages . 
Fannie , Freddie and government agencies are funding nearly all of the nation 's home loans ; private lenders have all but disappeared . 
`` If we want to divorce the federal government from the risks of the housing system , you would privatize it , '' said Howard Glaser , a housing consultant who has worked for Fannie and Freddie . 
`` The cost of that is you never know if you 'll have mortgage finance available . 
Case in point : today . '' 
Fannie and Freddie were chartered by Congress 40 years ago as private companies with a government mandate to buy mortgages from lenders , package them , guarantee them against default and sell them to investors around the world . 
As a result , borrowers in big cities or small towns could go to big banks or small thrifts and get a 30-year , fixed-rate loan at an affordable rate . 
But risks always loomed . 
Investors assumed that the government backed Fannie and Freddie , even if they did not have such support officially . 
As a result , the companies could borrow cheaply and grow big -- with as much outstanding debt as the U.S. government . 
But the housing crisis crippled the companies , prompting the Bush administration to take them over out of concern they 'd severely damage the world financial system . 
Some longtime supporters of Fannie and Freddie say they must change , but still see a need for the government to play a role . 
`` The Fannie and Freddie model has to be approached and the private-public entanglement , I think , will be undone , '' Rep. Barney Frank -LRB- D-Mass . -RRB- 
, chairman of the House Financial Services Committee , said in a recent interview . 
Frank said the reform of Fannie and Freddie is likely to include `` some subsidy for enhanced affordability and increasing the flow of mortgages . '' 
But there is little agreement about precisely how to restructure them . 
While Frank no longer thinks the hybrid model is viable , another influential lawmaker does . 
`` The hybrid is the best , '' said Sen. Charles E. Schumer -LRB- D-N.Y. -RRB- , who leads the Joint Economic Committee . 
`` The hybrid nature should remain . '' 
President-elect Barack Obama has said little on the topic . 
Obama 's chief economic adviser , former Treasury secretary Lawrence Summers , has long been a critic of the risks posed by Fannie and Freddie . 
In a Washington Post opinion piece this past summer , Summers wrote that the government should use Fannie and Freddie to support the housing market during the crisis and that the government should then `` divide their functions into government and private components , the latter of which would be sold off in multiple pieces . '' 
