Hague : `` Aid would include medical supplies , communications equipment and body armor '' Foreign Secretary William Hague says the UK 's commitment of an extra # 5m in non-lethal equipment to Syrian opposition groups is `` the right thing to do '' and will `` help save lives '' . 
The help for unarmed opposition members will include medical supplies and radio and satellite equipment . 
But it will not include weapons and is in addition to # 27.5 m humanitarian aid . 
The BBC 's James Robbins says the move is a significant shift in policy after frustration about Syria 's opposition . 
Aside from concerns about divisions within the opposition , there have also been complaints that it has failed to set out a clear program for good government , our correspondent added . 
Speaking at a press conference , Mr Hague said the funding would go to `` unarmed opposition groups , human rights activists and civilians '' and that Britain was speaking to people from the political arm of the Free Syrian Army , an armed rebel group which is opposed to President Bashar al-Assad . 
Attempts to oust President Assad have led to 17 months of unrest , during which activists claim more than 20,000 people have died . 
However , reports of casualties often can not be independently verified . 
The UK is also telling opposition forces they must observe human rights standards . 
Syrian people need `` urgent help '' and `` can not wait indefinitely '' for a peaceful resolution to the conflict , Mr Hague said , describing them as being at the `` mercy of a regime that is hunting down its opponents '' . 
The UN Security Council , which meets again at the end of this month , has a responsibility to `` stop the bloodshed '' , he said . 
More medical supplies and communications gear for the civilian opposition in Syria should help to save lives but may not significantly alter the course of the fighting . 
There will be body armor too for key activists . 
But William Hague underlined again that this would go to the civil opposition rather than military fighters . 
Such a distinction may not always be so easy to maintain . 
Britain has shifted its ground - it is now willing to talk to people close to the Free Syrian Army - a tacit admission that to have any influence you have to have lines of communication with the key players involved . 
A diplomatic solution to the crisis though is as distant as ever . 
There will be another UN Security Council meeting at the end of this month . 
And Britain 's stepped-up civil assistance is clearly a signal to Russia and China - who in Mr Hague 's view have blocked concerted UN action - that , as he put it , the world does not stand still . 
Mr Hague said the money `` will help people caught up in a terrible conflict . 
It will be delivered in co-ordination with other countries . 
It is the right thing to do , while not pausing for a second in our efforts to secure the united robust diplomatic action which this crisis demands . '' 
The money will be spent on medical supplies such as trauma kits , surgical equipment , medicines and water purification and to assist local doctors with the means to gather forensic evidence for any potential trials in future . 
The communications equipment includes mobile and satellite phones and radar equipment . 
The Foreign Office says it will help protect activists overcome the Syrian government 's jamming and blocking techniques . 
The foreign secretary added that body armor would be provided for civilians who were involved in the protection of others . 
Mr Hague , who has also described the Assad regime as `` doomed '' , said it remains British policy not to send arms to Syria . 
BBC security correspondent Frank Gardner says the UK has been quite vocal at the UN but reluctant to get involved on the ground in Syria . 
But the latest announcement is a realisation that the situation will continue to get worse if it does nothing , he added . 
Former British foreign secretary , Sir Malcolm Rifkind , says the government should be doing more in Syria . 
`` The way in which you have to act is to actually take the very difficult decision of providing military support to the insurgents , '' he said . 
`` That way you may enhance the conflict in the short term , in the longer term you 're more likely to save thousands of lives . '' 
The extra practical support for the opposition FSA will include more radio and satellite equipment The UK had previously made # 1.4 m available in `` non-lethal support to the political opposition '' in Syria which included training and assistance to human rights groups . 
The # 27.5 m in humanitarian aid is for food , medical care , water sanitation and shelter in Syria , as well as for Syrian refugees who have fled to neighbouring countries . 
International Development Secretary Andrew Mitchell had announced this week that the amount of assistance being given to the refugees was being quadrupled . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
10th August 2012 - 14:44 Something for those who think that we should be taking sides in Syria should ponder on . 
What is happening in Syria today is very like the situation in Germany in the early 1930s when the Nazis and the communists used violence to polarise society . 
Neither side then deserved our support , and neither side now deserves it . 
It 's the people caught in the middle of it that we must support and protect . 
10th August 2012 - 14:32 How can we send money to fund a war we 're not involved in ?! It 's small change but this has nothing to do with us . 
10th August 2012 - 13:06 As sad as it is to see the people of Syria being killed by their own , i just wish Britain would stay out of it , We get no thanks for the help we give and quite rightly none for the interfering we always seem to do , we cant afford to either . 
10th August 2012 - 11:55 Where does a country with billions in debt get an extra # 5 million to send abroad ? 
Working for the NHS , this would pay for a substantial number of nurses and doctors to look after those paying the tax to fund this handout . 
Instead we 're continually cutting costs to a bare minimum which will have an affect on patient care . 
10th August 2012 - 10:20 If we are to send anything at all , it should be in the form of what is desperately needed , such as medicines , bandages & medical equipment , food etc. , and definitely not cash . 
Will our governments never learn ? 
Whatever future regime runs Syria will probably be far more radically opposed to the UK than Assad 's dictatorship - with our help . 
All posts are reactively-moderated and must obey the house rules . 
