Page last updated at 15:03 GMT , Friday , 10 August 2012 16:03 UK The UK is to provide rebel fighters in Syria extra funding for communication equipment and medical supplies . 
The # 5m in support will be given to the largest rebel group , The Free Syrian Army . 
However , the assistance will not include any weapons . 
It marks a significant shift in policy by the British government . 
The violence started in the country in March 2011 . 
Below we explain the background to this conflict and why foreign military intervention is being avoided . 
Why is Syria in civil war ? 
A ceasefire to end the violence in Syria started in April after being arranged by former UN chief Kofi Annan . 
However , fighting continued despite the plan being agreed by both sides . 
Protests are taking place around the world against Syria 's government The International Committee of the Red Cross , which oversees the Geneva Conventions , said fighting had now spread beyond the three hot spots of Idlib , Homs and Hama . 
The organization said the situation in Syria was now regarded as a `` non-international armed conflict '' , a technical term for civil war . 
The UN says more than 16,000 people have been killed in the uprising against President Assad 's rule , which began more than a year ago . 
The Syrian government says 2,000 security personnel have been killed and blames the violence on `` armed gangs '' and `` terrorists '' . 
What do the protesters want ? 
Demonstrations began shortly after anti-government uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt in mid-March last year . 
A group of teenagers spray-painted a revolutionary slogan on a wall in the southern city of Deraa . 
They were arrested and soon the unrest spread to other areas . 
Protesters started by calling for democracy and freedom in what is one of the most repressive countries in the Arab world . 
For example , there are emergency laws which allow people to be arrested without warrants and imprisoned without trials . 
Syria 's president has promised some changes but protesters say the killing is continuing so they want him to step down . 
Mr Assad has described protesters as terrorists who need to be removed . 
Why is there no foreign military action as in Libya ? 
For decades Syria has been among the most stable countries in the Middle East . 
It is a major player in the region because of where it 's positioned , unlike Libya which is more isolated . 
President Assad has promised changes but protesters do n't believe him A military attack on Syria would cause knock-on effects in neighbouring countries . 
It may mobilise militant groups like Hezbollah in Lebanon , Hamas in the Gaza Strip and other more radical Palestinian groups opposed to peace with Israel . 
Syria is also strongly supported by Iran - a country considered hostile by the US , Israel and Saudi Arabia - which could potentially draw those powers into a dangerous Middle Eastern conflict . 
President Bashar al-Assad has warned any foreign military action will turn Syria `` into another Afghanistan '' . 
Is there any support for the president inside Syria ? 
Religion : Sunni Muslim 74 % , 16 % other Muslim -LRB- includes Alawite , Druze -RRB- , Christian , 10 % Syria is a mixed country of 21 million people with a large Sunni Muslim majority and minorities of Christians , Alawites and Jewish people . 
Mr Assad belongs to the Alawite sect . 
He 's supported by many people from the upper classes and minority groups . 
The protests against him have mainly been in Sunni populated areas . 
