Syrian unrest : Aleppo clashes spark rise in refugees Rebel fighters have vowed to retake territory in Aleppo after retreating on Thursday Syrian civilians are fleeing the city of Aleppo in increasing numbers , the UN says , amid a lull in fighting between rebels and government forces . 
The UN refugee agency says it has now registered almost 150,000 refugees in four neighbouring countries . 
It said 6,000 had crossed into Turkey in the past week , many of them from the Aleppo area . 
Earlier , the UK announced it was giving an extra # 5m -LRB- $ 7.8 m -RRB- in non-lethal equipment to the Free Syrian Army . 
Foreign Secretary William Hague said the support would include more radio and satellite equipment , as well as portable power generators . 
In another development on Friday , the US accused the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah of providing `` training , advice and extensive logistical support '' to the Syrian regime and added further sanctions against the group . 
Hezbollah is designated as a terrorist organization by the US and is already under heavy sanctions . 
The US state department also imposed sanctions on Syria 's state-run oil company , Sytrol , for conducting business with the Iranian energy sector . 
Adrian Edwards , spokesman for the UN refugee agency -LRB- UNHCR -RRB- , told reporters : `` There certainly in the past week has been a sharp increase in the numbers arriving in Turkey , and many of the people are coming from Aleppo and surrounding villages . 
`` If you look at other areas , I think that the situation is more of a steady and continued increase , but where fighting happens we tend to see the consequences , '' he said . 
The agency says there are now 50,227 refugees registered in Turkey ; 45,869 in Jordan ; 36,841 in Lebanon and 13,730 in Iraq . 
`` In several countries we know there to be substantial refugee numbers who have not yet registered , '' Mr Edwards said . 
In Aleppo , rebels vowed to fight back after being largely ousted from the strategic south-west district of Salah al-Din on Thursday . 
The Free Syrian Army withdrew after intense shelling by tanks and jet fighters . 
William Hague : `` Aid would include providing trauma and medical supplies , communications equipment and body armor '' `` We will not let Salah al-Din go , '' FSA commander Abu Mohammed told AFP by telephone . 
UK-based activist group , the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights , said government forces had also bombed Sakhur and Hananu in the east of the city . 
Journalists from Reuters news agency reported seeing residents streaming out of Aleppo with cars packed with possessions , taking advantage of the calm spell . 
AFP news agency reported that a bakery in the eastern Tariq al-Bab district had been hit by a shell , killing about 12 people and injuring at least 20 . 
State news agency Sana also reported that government forces had repelled a rebel attack on Aleppo 's international airport . 
The opposition Syrian National Council said part of Aleppo 's 13th-century citadel had been damaged by shelling . 
Activists also reported fighting in suburbs of the capital , Damascus . 
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is resisting international pressure to step down despite months of anti-government protests that have given way to civil war . 
He has faced a string of high-status defections , including his former Prime Minister Riad Hijab , who fled to Jordan earlier this week . 
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is due to arrive in Turkey later on Friday for talks over the weekend that are expected to be dominated by the Syrian crisis . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
