As casualties soar , America 's women face reality of front line Joanna Walters reports from New York on how Iraq is changing the face of warfare Sunday 1 May 2005 02.34 BST Facing the highest ever casualty rate for servicewomen in its history , America is considering making official what is already a reality - allowing women to fight on the front line in war . 
The ground war in Iraq has made the historical tradition of not having women in combat unworkable . 
A total of 35 US servicewomen have now died in Iraq and 271 have been injured . 
It is a small percentage of the 1,500 US service personnel fatalities and the 11,600 wounded , but these women are being killed and injured under enemy fire . 
Three days ago army private Sam Huff was buried with full military honors at Arlington National Cemetery . 
She was 18 and died on 18 April when her convoy was blown up by a roadside bomb . 
` Beneath that beautiful young lady was a backbone of steel , ' her sergeant , Sam Jones , wrote in a letter read aloud at her hometown funeral in Tucson , Arizona . 
Huff 's parents reluctantly let her join the army when she was 16 and she quickly gained a reputation for enthusiasm and grit . 
` She 's the bravest kid I 've ever known , ' said her father , Robert Huff . 
` She was up and down that damned road between Baghdad and the airport , which is notorious for improvised explosive devices . 
But she knew the risks and believed in the mission . ' 
Dawn Halfaker was arguably more fortunate than Huff . 
The 25-year-old Californian is home from Iraq now and has been spending time before attending post-graduate college snowboarding and playing basketball - with one arm . 
She had already been in firefights and had killed insurgents when she went on a routine reconnaissance patrol with her military police platoon in Baquoba one night last year . 
They were ambushed and a rocket-propelled grenade screamed into her armored vehicle . 
It tore off the arm of Sergeant Norberto Lara , sending the limb flying into the driver 's lap , then exploded at Halfaker 's shoulder , blasting her head and arm . 
Medics kept her alive until they reached a base , where her last words before passing out were : ` You bastards better not cut my arm off . ' 
She woke up an amputee , dreams of becoming a professional basketball player as shattered as her body . 
But she has no regrets about being a soldier in a modern war zone . 
` Woman in combat is not really an issue . 
It is happening , ' she said . 
Fighting insurgents across Iraq makes for a chaotic battlefield . 
` Everyone pretty much acknowledges there are no rear battle areas , no forward line of troops , ' said Halfaker . 
Four women died under enemy fire in the Gulf war , where female troops made headlines flying combat aircraft , driving supply trucks close to the front lines and being taken as prisoners of war . 
Eight servicewomen died during the Vietnam war - all nurses - and hundreds have died in previous conflicts , but as auxiliary troops or medics serving far to the rear , succumbing most often to disease and accidents . 
In 1994 Bill Clinton opened up 90 per cent of military jobs to women . 
But although that meant they could officially go into combat by air and by sea , they were and still are barred from units that go on the offensive on land , including the general infantry , the marines and the special forces , and from units that accompany those troops . 
Army documents have now surfaced , however , recommending a lifting of the ban on women in units serving alongside other units that primarily go into combat . 
Officials say it is no more than a discussion document at this stage , others say it is the first step towards sanctioning women in land combat . 
` The government will probably not deal with this until the Iraq conflict is over , otherwise , if it went the wrong way , they could face having to pull the women out of Iraq who are there now , who are de facto in combat , ' said Lory Manning , a retired navy captain and director of the Centre For Women in Uniform in Washington DC . 
Women are firing missiles from helicopters , but are not yet going on the offensive on the ground in Iraq , Manning said . 
But they are returning fire in ways never seen before . 
Paratrooper Kellie McCoy of St Louis , Missouri , has just returned to Iraq after a break following her award of a bronze star with a rare ` V ' for valor . 
McCoy , 29 , was only on her third day in Iraq last September when her convoy ran into an ambush during the attack on Falluja . 
She cranked out machine-gun rounds until she had killed enough of the enemy to break through and escape , rescuing others on the way . 
` Captain McCoy willingly and repeatedly took action to gather up her soldiers under enemy fire and direct fire at the enemy , ' her citation stated . 
` Her actions inspired her men to accomplish the mission and saved the lives of her fellow soldiers . ' 
Such tributes , and they are few but not isolated , rebuff the myth that men ca n't go to war with women because sexual tensions or their urge to protect them will sink morale . 
And the argument that the public would not stand for news of servicewomen coming home in coffins has not been borne out . 
Women are being awarded bronze stars and record numbers are receiving the booby prize of the wounded , the Purple Heart . 
One such is Major Ladda Duckworth , the most severely wounded of five female amputees in rehab at Walter Reed Army Hospital . 
The Black Hawk pilot lost both legs and a huge chunk of one arm when her helicopter was shot down . 
Staff were shocked when she was brought in . ' 
I think they had not seen a female that badly mutilated , ' said 37-year-old Duckworth , from Illinois . 
Now all she wants is to fly again and says she joined the ranks because ' I wanted to take the same risks as the guys . ' 
But Elaine Donnelly , president of the Centre for Military Readiness in Washington , still argues that : ` The concept of equality does not fit in combat environments . 
The nation has got used to the idea of women dying in combat , and I do n't think that 's a good thing . ' 
Manning points out that no one wants to see combat casualties of either gender and says none of the deaths in Iraq is justified - because the war itself is not . 
` But if you are going to fight wars , women have to be there , and they have shown how tough they can be when they need to be , ' she added . 
