BP oil spill : safety breaches revealed Federal hearings are told of alarm systems being switched off , computer crashes and concerns over the blowout preventer Eleven people died when the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP The testimony of Michael Williams , an electronics technician , that emergency alarms on board the Deepwater Horizon were disabled weeks before it exploded , killing 11 workers and spewing more than 4m barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico , is the most damning evidence yet of shoddy maintenance and compromised safety systems on board the oil rig . 
Hearings conducted by a federal panel of investigators from the US Coast Guard and the department of the interior have already uncovered several incidents of apparent safety irregularities that leave both BP , the oil giant that was working the Macondo well , and Transocean , the owner of the oil rig that was operating under contract to BP , with big questions to answer . 
Williams , a former Marine , managed to survive the explosion on 20 April by jumping from the burning rig . 
His evidence before the federal panel in Kenner , on the outskirts of New Orleans , suggested a litany of problems , from alarm systems that had been switched off to software that was so faulty the rig 's computer systems critical for the monitoring of key safety equipment regularly crashed . 
This week , the panel heard from Ronald Sepulvado , a BP manager who had been on board the rig until five days before the blast . 
He told investigators that three months before the disaster he had been warned by Halliburton , which was acting as a contractor on the well , that the rig 's blowout preventer could be faulty . 
Gas could be leaking out of the device , Halliburton reported , which would suggest that it was not fulfilling its role as the last line of defense against a possible blowout of oil or gas . 
Sepulvado said he informed his bosses at BP 's Houston headquarters , but they in turn appear not to have passed on the information , as they were obliged , to federal authorities . 
While BP is in the line of fire for failing to act on such apparently crucial warnings , Transocean , the Swiss-based company that owns a fleet of offshore oil rigs , also has to answer for serious anomalies . 
A report compiled at Transocean 's request by Lloyd 's Register Group shortly before the catastrophe found that crucial elements of the blowout preventer , including safety valves , had not been properly inspected for 10 years in violation of guidelines that the device is fully inspected every three to five years . 
The report , obtained by the New York Times , also listed 26 parts of the rig that were in `` bad '' or `` poor '' condition . 
Workers quoted in the Lloyd 's survey said that they were under the impression that Transocean considered keeping the drilling going a higher priority than maintaining the rig . 
So far in the three-month crisis , most attention has been placed on how BP has conducted itself before and after the explosion . 
Relatively little focus has been given to Transocean , which has been trying to limit its liabilities in the Gulf disaster by invoking an 1851 piece of legislation that sets a ceiling of $ 27m . 
On the other hand , the Obama administration has made clear that it is looking into the affairs of a number of companies , including BP and Transocean , as it considers whether to press criminal charges in the wake of the catastrophe , the worst environmental disaster in US history . 
In the long run , the federal authorities will have to consider whether a culture of compromised safety and corner cutting has spread across the business of offshore oil drilling . 
The Washington Post has scoured federal records and found that in numerous cases the operators of oil rigs have bypassed safety systems in order to press ahead with drilling . 
In similar terms , the energy and commerce committee of the US Congress has accused BP of scrimping on safety measures in order to meet tight drilling schedules . 
The committee 's chairman , Henry Waxman , said last month that `` time after time , it appears BP made decisions that increased the risk of a blowout to save the company time or expense '' . 
