BP oil spill : Transocean in spotlight US rig owner could be in the spotlight after damning testimony told of safety breaches The owner of the Deepwater Horizon , Transocean , is under increasing scrutiny after evidence of safety breaches Photograph : Ho\/Reuters The damning testimony yesterday from rig technicians working on the stricken Deepwater Horizon about safety alarms being routinely switched off on the Transocean rig could be a pivotal moment in the political blame game . 
The oil company that commissioned the fateful Macondo well , BP , has so far taken all the flak for the blowout which killed 11 men and triggered an environmental disaster . 
But that may be about to change . 
Transocean , which has had an easy ride so far , could find itself in the line of fire as a range of official investigations into what went wrong that fateful early morning of 20 April continue to unearth evidence of widespread mistakes and failures . 
The singling out of BP for criticism over the last eight weeks has led some to conclude this side of the ocean at least that the oil company was a convenient target . 
It was after all a foreign-controlled entity and had very deep pockets when it came to being asked to set aside $ 20bn -LRB- # 13bn -RRB- for potential claims before blame had even been formally apportioned . 
The fact remains that the American drilling company , Transocean , with its first quarter profits of $ 677m , is a relatively small target for any ambulance-chasing lawyers who know that BP made almost 10 times that amount . 
Tony Hayward , the chief executive of BP , did not help his own cause with a number of ill-judged remarks . 
Early on he appeared to clumsily lay the blame for the disaster entirely on Transocean : `` This was not our accident . 
This was not our drilling rig . 
This was not our equipment . 
It was not our people , our systems or our processes . 
This was Transocean 's rig . 
Their equipment , '' he said . 
The verbal hailstones that followed this attempt to pass the buck left BP reluctant to make any other effort to suggest others were to blame , although it did talk about a `` complex accident '' and `` multiples causes '' being at the heart of the accident . 
Last night BP said it had always believed that a lot of different things went wrong . 
BP might well have reminded everyone who their partners were on Macondo because the names of Mitsui of Japan and Anadarko Petroleum of America are little known in this unfortunate saga . 
Both made appearances in front of a Senate sub-committee earlier this week , where Anadarko executives seemed happy to keep all the blame on the main operator BP . 
But BP will start to fight its own corner more vocally next Tuesday when Hayward reveals first half financial results , talks about future corporate strategy and argues BP should not be the sole focus of blame . 
