WASHINGTON | Mon Aug 2 , 2010 1:36 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - This year 's low-oxygen `` dead zone '' in the Gulf of Mexico is one of the largest ever , about the size of Massachusetts , and overlaps areas hit by oil from BP 's broken Macondo well , Louisiana scientists report . 
The area of hypoxia , or low levels of oxygen , covered 7,722 square miles -LRB- 20,000 square kilometers -RRB- of the bottom of the Gulf and extended far into Texas waters , researchers from the Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium said in a statement late on Sunday . 
`` This is the largest such area off the upper Texas coast that we have found since we began this work in 1985 , '' said Nancy Rabalais , the consortium 's executive director . 
`` The total area probably would have been the largest if we had had enough time to completely map the western part -LRB- of the Gulf -RRB- . '' 
The annual summer `` dead zone '' in the Gulf is fueled by farm chemicals carried by the Mississippi and Atchafalaya rivers . 
Nitrogen and phosphorus in agricultural runoff stimulates algae growth in the Gulf . 
When these tiny plants or fecal matter from animals that eat them settles to the bottom waters , decomposition of this organic material by bacteria consumes oxygen in the water , the consortium said . 
The result , the researchers said , is oxygen depletion that forces many types of fish , shrimp and crabs to leave the area or suffocate . 
Animals that live in the sediments that can survive with little oxygen will die if the oxygen level falls toward zero . 
To be considered hypoxic , oxygen content in the bottom waters of the Gulf must reach the level of 2 parts per million or less . 
By late July , large patches of the northern Gulf had reached that level , including one swath off Texas 's Galveston Bay . 
While the area of the BP oil spill overlaps some parts of the `` dead zone , '' Rabalais said , `` It would be difficult to link conditions seen this summer with oil from the BP spill in either a positive or negative way . '' 
More information , including maps of the 2010 `` dead zone '' can be found here -LRB- Reporting by Deborah Zabarenko , editing by Doina Chiacu -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
