WASHINGTON | Mon Jun 1 , 2009 4:17 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Cases of the new H1N1 flu virus have been found in all 50 U.S. states and tests have confirmed the virus in more than 10,000 people across the country , U.S. officials said on Monday . 
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said the confirmed tests represent about one in 20 of the actual number of infections , which would bring the total number of U.S. cases to around 200,000 . 
California health officials reported the state 's first two deaths from the swine flu virus , bringing the nationwide total to 19 fatalities . 
Both involved middle-aged people , a man from San Bernardino County and a woman from Los Angeles County , who had pre-existing medical conditions . 
`` While , overall , we have seen predominantly mild flu cases in the state , these fatalities remind us that all flu viruses can be deadly , including the H1N1 flu , '' Dr. Mark Horton , director of the California Department of Public Health , said in a statement . 
California has identified 802 people with confirmed or probable cases of the disease , with 47 requiring hospitalization . 
Most of those hospitalized had underlying medical conditions that included lung disease , weakened immune systems and heart disease , and a smaller number had diabetes or were obese or pregnant . 
The virus , which spreads easily and causes mostly mild disease , has been diagnosed in 17,564 people in 64 countries , killing 115 , according to the World Health Organization . 
It was found this week in patients in Bulgaria , Vietnam and Jamaica . 
Although H1N1 swine flu appears mild , it affects mostly older children and young adults , and experts worry it could change into a more dangerous form . 
-LRB- Reporting by Dan Whitcomb and Maggie Fox ; editing by Mohammad Zargham -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
