LONDON | Mon Sep 13 , 2010 7:03 am EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP believes compensation claims related to its Gulf of Mexico oil spill will be less than the $ 20 billion the oil giant has put into an independent claims fund , analysts at Citigroup said , following a meeting with incoming Chief Executive Bob Dudley . 
`` He added that given current estimates of claims the $ 20 billion Independent Claim Fund -LRB- ICF -RRB- that BP established probably exceeds calls , '' Citigroup said in a research note . 
Dudley added the $ 32 billion provision BP made for the total cost of the disaster remained a reasonable indicator of eventual cost . 
Dudley also told the analysts that claims by Gulf states for lost tax revenue related to the spill `` should not be too high '' as any tax drops due to lower economic activity following the spill would be offset by the economic stimulus of the response effort . 
Citigroup said that , following the meeting with Dudley , it had growing confidence BP would reinstate its dividend early next year . 
`` Dudley pointed out that the company was not ordered to cut the dividend by the U.S. government - it was a choice by the corporation to preserve liquidity ... we believe the company can re-instate a dividend with the Q4 results , '' Citigroup said . 
Analysts at Bernstein took a more skeptical view on a return to dividends in a note on Monday . 
`` BP 's cashflow position should be just strong enough to support a restoration of dividends by 1Q 2011 , under an $ 80\/barrel oil price scenario based on estimates . 
However , this assumes divestments are completed , '' analysts at Bernstein said . 
Dudley told the investment bank that BP 's divestment target remained $ 25 billion to $ 30 billion , despite reports that this had been increased by $ 10 billion . 
BP was not immediately available for comment . 
-LRB- Reporting by Tom Bergin ; Editing by Hans Peters -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
