NEW ORLEANS -- NEW ORLEANS -LRB- AP -RRB- -- For days now , Dr. Damon Dietrich and other physicians have seen patients come through their emergency room at West Jefferson Medical Center with similar symptoms : respiratory problems , headaches and nausea . 
In the past week , 11 workers who have been out on the water cleaning up oil from BP 's blown-out well have been treated for what Dietrich calls `` a pattern of symptoms '' that could have been caused by the burning of crude oil , noxious fumes from the oil or the dispersants dumped in the Gulf to break it up . 
All workers were treated and released . 
`` One person comes in , it could be multiple things , '' he said . 
`` Eleven people come in with these symptoms , it makes it incredibly suspicious . '' 
Few studies have examined long-term health effects of oil exposure . 
But some of the workers trolling Gulf Coast beaches and heading out into the marshes and waters have complained about flu-like symptoms -- a similar complaint among crews deployed for the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska . 
BP and U.S. Coast Guard officials have said dehydration , heat , food poisoning or other unrelated factors may have caused the workers ' symptoms . 
The Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals is investigating . 
Brief contact with small amounts of light crude oil and dispersants are not harmful . 
Swallowing small amounts of oil can cause upset stomach , vomiting and diarrhea . 
Long-term exposure to dispersants , however , can cause central nervous system problems , or do damage to blood , kidneys or livers , according to the Centers For Disease Control and Prevention . 
In the six weeks since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded , killing 11 workers , an estimated 21 million to 45 million gallons of crude has poured into the Gulf of Mexico . 
Hundreds of BP contractors have fanned out along the Gulf , deploying boom , spraying chemicals to break up the oil , picking up oil-soaked debris and trying to keep the creeping slick out of the sensitive marshes and away from the tourist-Mecca beaches . 
Commercial fisherman John Wunstell Jr. spent a night on a vessel near the source of the spill and left complaining of a severe headache , upset stomach and nose bleed . 
He was treated at the hospital , and sued -- becoming part of a class-action lawsuit filed last month in U.S. District Court in New Orleans against BP , Transocean and their insurers . 
Wunstell , who was part of a crew burning oil , believes planes were spraying dispersant in the middle of the night -- something BP disputes . 
`` I began to ache all over ... '' he said in the affidavit . 
`` I was completely unable to function at this point and feared that I was seriously ill . '' 
Dozens of complaints , most from spill workers , have been made related to oil exposure with the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals , said spokeswoman Olivia Watkins , as well as with the Louisiana Poison Center , clinics and hospitals . 
Workers are being told to follow federal guidelines that recommend anyone involved in oil spill cleanup wear protective equipment such as gloves , safety glasses and clothing . 
Michael J. Schneider , an attorney who decided against filing a class-action lawsuit in the 1990s involving the Valdez workers , said proving a link between oil exposure and health problems is very difficult . 
`` As a human being you listen to enough and you 've got to believe they 're true , '' he said . 
`` The problem is the science may not be there to support them ... Many of the signs and symptoms these people complained of are explainable for a dozen different reasons -- it 's certainly coincidental they all shared a reason in common . '' 
Similar to the Valdez cleanup , there have been concerns in the Gulf that workers are n't being supplied with enough protective gear . 
Workers have been spotted in white jumpsuits , gloves and booties but no goggles or respirators . 
`` If they 're out there getting lightheaded and dizzy every day then obviously they ought to come in , and there should be respirators and other equipment provided , '' said LuAnn White , director of the Tulane Center for Applied Environmental Public Health . 
She added that most of the volatile components that could sicken people generally evaporate before the oil reaches shore . 
BP PLC 's Chief Operating Officer Doug Suttles said reports of workers getting sick are being investigated but noted that no one has pinpointed the cause . 
Suttles said workers were being given `` any safety equipment '' needed to do their jobs safely . 
Unlike with Exxon Valdez , in the Gulf , the oil has been lighter , the temperatures warm and humid , and there have been hundreds of thousands of gallons of chemicals used to break up the oil . 
Court records showed more than 6,700 workers involved in the Exxon Valdez clean up suffered respiratory problems which the company attributed to a viral illness , not chemical poisoning . 
Dennis Mestas represented the only known worker to successfully settle with Exxon over health issues . 
According to the terms of that confidential settlement , Exxon did not admit fault . 
His client , Gary Stubblefield , spent four months lifting workers in a crane for 18 hours a day as they sprayed the oil-slicked beaches with hot water , which created an oily mist . 
Even though he had to wipe clean his windshield twice a day , Stubblefield said it never occurred to him that the mixture might be harming his lungs . 
Within weeks , he and others , who wore little to no protective gear , were coughing and experiencing other symptoms that were eventually nicknamed Valdez crud . 
Now 60 , Stubblefield can not get through a short conversation without coughing and gasping for breath like a drowning man . 
He sometimes needs the help of a breathing machine and inhalers , and has to be careful not to choke when he drinks and eats . 
Watching the Gulf situation unfold , he says , makes him sick . 
Associated Press writers John Flesher from Michigan , Brian Skoloff and Kelli Kennedy from Miami contributed to this report . 
