The Deepwater Horizon rig explosion led to the worst environmental catastrophe in US history A committee of MPs has raised `` serious doubts '' about the UK 's ability to combat oil spills from deep sea rigs following the BP Gulf of Mexico oil disaster last year . 
They also warned that taxpayers could pay for a major spill in the North Sea . 
But they said a moratorium on deep sea drilling would undermine the UK 's energy security and is unnecessary . 
Energy Minister Charles Hendry `` welcomed '' the report and said he would consider its recommendations in detail . 
The report came as a US presidential commission found that decisions to cut costs and save time had contributed to last year 's BP spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
It added that the failures were `` systemic '' and likely to recur without industry and government reform . 
In the UK report , MPs singled out the `` harsh conditions '' off the west coast of the Shetland Islands in Scotland , where oil wells are being drilled more than 1,000 metres deep . 
There were `` serious doubts '' about the ability of clean-up equipment to function in such an environment , it added . 
Committee chairman Tim Yeo said : `` The harsh and windy conditions in the North Sea would make an oil spill off the coast of Shetland very difficult to contain or clean up '' . 
David Shukman with the `` top hats '' used by BP to help seal oil leaks The report also warned that a lack of clarity surrounding liability rules in the UK `` could see taxpayers pick up the tab for a major oil spill in the North Sea '' . 
And Mr Yeo questioned the response plans currently in place at oil exploration firms , saying that these must be site-specific and not generic . 
`` Companies can not continue producing cut and paste oil spill response plans and rig operators must make it easier for staff to raise concerns without fear of intimidation , '' he said . 
The MPs said the commercial pressures to keep on drilling were so great that workers who drew attention to safety problems `` may be - or feel - intimidated by their managers '' . 
They also noted contradictions in Health and Safety Executive reports about bullying and harassment on oil rigs . 
Mr Hendry said the government welcomed the committee 's `` thorough and comprehensive report '' . 
`` We note in particular that the committee supports the government 's view that a moratorium on UK deepwater drilling is not warranted . '' 
Industry body Oil & Gas UK also welcomed the report 's finding that a moratorium was unnecessary . 
`` We also warmly welcome the committee 's utter rejection of calls for increased regulatory oversight from the European Commission , '' added the group 's chief executive Malcolm Webb . 
He told the BBC that the industry had made `` gigantic strides '' in being prepared for an accident - and that the UK now had the equipment to cap a well . 
And addressing the concerns of the report about firms ' ability to deal with problems off the Scottish coast , he added : `` The industry is working to develop a capping device which can be deployed in the rough waters west of Shetland . '' 
Mr Webb also questioned the concerns of MPs over whether oil firms would be able to afford the clean up operations in the event of a spill - saying that it was clear companies were liable to cover costs , meaning that taxpayers or the government would not lose out . 
`` The regulator has all the powers to ensure that the oil companies are carrying all the requisite insurance , '' he added . 
However , the report was not universally praised . 
Greenpeace executive director John Sauven said : `` This report lists all the reasons why a ban on deep sea drilling makes sense and then ignores its own findings '' . 
`` The oil companies have no idea how they would deal with a major spill off the coast of the UK but apparently we 're supposed to trust them until they come up with an adequate plan . '' 
The MPs ' report is a response to the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig explosion in the Gulf of Mexico in April last year - that blast killed 11 workers and spilled millions of barrels of oil over several months . 
The oil leak became one of the worst oil spills in history . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
