Excerpts : BP oil spill report In an advance released chapter of its forthcoming final report , the US presidential National Oil Spill Commission found that the companies involved in the BP oil spill had made decisions to cut costs and save time , contributing to the disaster . 
Here are some key excerpts from their findings . 
The well blew out because a number of separate risk factors , oversights , and outright mistakes combined to overwhelm the safeguards meant to prevent just such an event from happening . 
But most of the mistakes and oversights at Macondo -LRB- well -RRB- can be traced back to a single overarching failure - a failure of management . 
Better management by BP , Halliburton , and Transocean would almost certainly have prevented the blowout by improving the ability of individuals involved to identify the risks they faced , and to properly evaluate , communicate , and address them . 
The Macondo well blowout was the product of several individual missteps and oversights by BP , Halliburton , and Transocean , which government regulators lacked the authority , the necessary resources , and the technical expertise to prevent . 
The blowout was not the product of a series of aberrational decisions made by rogue industry or government officials that could not have been anticipated or expected to occur again . 
Rather , the root causes are systemic and , absent significant reform in both industry practices and government policies , might well recur . 
What we ... know is considerable and significant : -LRB- 1 -RRB- each of the mistakes made on the rig and onshore by industry and government increased the risk of a well blowout ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- the cumulative risk that resulted from these decisions and actions was both unreasonably large and avoidable ; and -LRB- 3 -RRB- the risk of a catastrophic blowout was ultimately realized on April 20 and several of the mistakes were contributing causes of the blowout . 
Federal regulations did not address many of the key issues - for example , no regulation specified basic procedures for the negative pressure test used to evaluate the cement seal or minimum criteria for test success . 
Whether purposeful or not , many of the decisions that BP , Halliburton , and Transocean made that increased the risk of the Macondo blowout clearly saved those companies significant time -LRB- and money -RRB- . 
Some of the risky decisions taken by the companies involved include : Halliburton not fully reporting the results of tests on the foam cement used to seal the well until after the blowout , including ones that suggested that the mixture might have been unstable . 
The failure by BP to use 15 additional centralisers to stabilise the well instead of six , as recommended , which are critical to a good cementing job . 
The failure to properly conduct and interpret the negative-pressure test was a major contributing factor to the blowout . 
It was not necessary or advisable for BP to replace 3,300 ft -LRB- 1,006 m -RRB- of mud below the mud line with seawater , which placed more stress on the cement job at the bottom of the well than necessary . 
The drilling crew and other individuals on the rig missed critical signs that a kick -LRB- an unplanned influx of gas or fluids -RRB- was occurring . 
The crew could have prevented the blowout - or at least significantly reduced its impact - if they had reacted in a timely and appropriate manner . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
