By Richard Black Environment correspondent , BBC News Vast amounts of methane are present in the Arctic , often in the form of hydrates Writing in journal Science , US researchers report that methane-absorbing bacteria multiplied in the Gulf following the April accident . 
The Arctic contains vast stores of methane , and its release could quickly accelerate warming around the world . 
But scientists caution that the regions are very different . 
The research ship Pisces , operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration -LRB- Noaa -RRB- , made several voyages into the Gulf in the months following the leak . 
`` There were thousands of different types of molecule coming out of the well , and by far the most abundant was methane , '' said research leader John Kessler , from Texas A and M University . 
`` In fact , by weight , 30 % of it was methane . 
`` Normally we have to go around and study what 's seeping naturally out of the sea floor ; but this release was massive and localized . '' 
Virtually all of the methane remained suspended and dissolved in sea water at depths of around one kilometre . 
Bacteria in the water that have evolved to process naturally-seeping methane apparently increased in number , taking oxygen from the water as they did so , and mopping up the Deepwater Horizon 's cargo . 
The team 's calculations indicate that less than one hundred thousandth of the gas released made it into the atmosphere . 
Methane is the second most important gaseous component of the man-made portion of the greenhouse effect . 
The Gulf waters were sampled for methane And vast quantities of it - no-one knows how much , though some estimates put it as 3,000 times the current amount in the atmosphere - lie trapped in the sea bed around the Arctic . 
There are other deposits around the world as well . 
Some see this methane hydrate as a potential future energy source . 
Others fear that if it escapes as the seas warm , it will act to amplify global warming . 
In principle , the Deepwater Horizon research could help inform scientists about how serious methane releases could be - how much would be processed in sea water , and how much would make it into the atmosphere . 
We do n't know the distribution of the methane hydrates - we do n't know how pervasive they are in the region '' End Quote Professor Graham Westbrook Birmingham University `` In the Arctic , there definitely would be some sort of microbial response ; and in most places on the sea floor that have the capacity for massive release , there will be some seepage that will help to populate the water with microbes that could respond , '' Dr Kessler told BBC News . 
However , he cautioned , there are big differences between the Gulf of Mexico leak and potential methane sources in the Arctic . 
Ed Dlugokencky , who runs Noaa 's global registry of methane concentrations but was not involved in the Gulf research , agreed . 
`` The implications of this work for release of methane from hydrates likely only applies to deep waters , not areas where hydrates exist on shallow continental shelves such as the East Siberian Arctic shelf , '' he said . 
`` There , water is only about 40m deep , and bubbling is an important mechanism for transport of methane from the sediments to the atmosphere . '' 
The shallower the water , the less time methane would spend in it , making absorption less likely . 
Temperature , currents and the types of bacteria present could be other factors important in determining how much makes it into the atmosphere . 
However , Dr Dlugokencky noted that evidence of vast , rapid releases of methane from the sea floor has not been seen in ice-core records , which now trace Earth history back about 800,000 years . 
Methane can escape from hydrates on or under the sea bed , and bubble to the surface ; higher temperatures may exacerbate the problem Research ships make regular cruises to the Arctic and have regularly found evidence of methane bubbling into the atmopshere . 
But , said Professor Graham Westbrook from the UK 's University of Birmingham , there is still a lot of basic science to be done . 
`` We do n't know the distribution of the methane hydrates - we do n't know how pervasive they are in the region , '' he said . 
`` And in places like the shelf areas north of Siberia , where releases have been found , it 's not clear how much of this is coming from the sea bed and how much is brought into the sea by rivers . 
`` Also , we do n't know how much of the releases we see are down to anthropogenic warming in the last couple of centuries , and how much relates to the natural warming we 've seen since the end of the last Ice Age . '' 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
