Ben Sutherland | 09:43 UK time , Thursday , 6 January 2011 The final report into the Deepwater Horizon oil spill has said BP made decisions to cut costs and save time that contributed to the disaster - but that Haliburton and Transocean were also to blame . 
The report , by a US presidential panel , has said failures of BP were `` systemic '' - and were likely to happen again unless there were reforms in the oil industry . 
Perhaps most damningly , the chapter of the report detailing the circumstances of the actual explosion is headed with this quote from an internal BP email : `` But , who cares , it 's done , end of story , -LRB- we -RRB- will probably be fine and we 'll get a good cement job . '' 
However , from BP 's perspective , the key phrase in the report may be that the disaster was due to `` multiple causes and multiple companies . '' 
Certainly , it 's what they have emphasised in their reaction to the report 's findings . 
BP 's shares took a big jump as a result of the report . 
So has BP got away with it ? 
The essence of the report is that BP 's key fault was in its lack of `` adequate controls '' aimed at ensuring the engineering on the rig was `` safe and sound . '' 
There 's certainly a sense from some that BP should be suffering more as a result of this , summed up by Arbolioto on Twitter : `` The entire board and top management of BP should resign after presidential report on Gulf of Mexico oil spill . '' 
Charlie Krenock of Greenpeace told BBC News this morning that `` at the last minute ... they ignored their own recommendations , '' adding that `` the real answer is to stop chasing every last drop of oil ... chasing supply is going to continue to lead to problems . '' 
But on Facebook , Thabale points out that : `` Time saving & cost cutting are n't always a bad thing , its just the manner in which they are done and its a good thing they 've acknowledge that other parties were also involved ; at the end of the day , I would say BP deserved the share price rise . '' 
And on the Daily Telegraph , RiskManager argues that the line that Deepwater Horizon was the biggest environmental disaster in history is `` a hysterical Obama lie , '' and that the damage has largely disappeared . 
If that is the case , has enough already been done - and has BP been punished enough ? 
WHYS is a global conversation hosted by BBC News . 
For updates on the stories and issues being covered on our broadcasts , pls visit our facebook page . 
This is when we 're on air : 1100 & 1700GMT Monday to Friday BBC World Service radio 1500 & 1930GMT on Fridays BBC World News television For the latest updates across BBC blogs , 3 months , 1 week ago 3 months , 1 week ago You can stay up to date with World Service - World Have Your Say via these feeds . 
These are some of the popular topics this blog covers . 
