REDENCAO , Brazil | Fri Sep 23 , 2011 6:27 pm BST REDENCAO , Brazil -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Cassio Carvalho do Val is about to invest nearly $ 2 million to add 10,000 cattle to his ranch on the edge of the Amazon . 
But instead of burning down forest for his growing herd to graze freely he will break with tradition , reducing his pastureland and adding grain to their diet . 
Val is one of a growing number of farmers betting on so-called integrated farming by diversifying production and revenue . 
His move epitomizes a quiet and fragile revolution that marks a departure from Brazil 's slash-and-burn past . 
It is a trend that may also help ease the felling of the world 's largest rain forest . 
Soy growers are rotating fields with more corn and cotton , planting forest and raising cattle . 
Ranchers are planting corn to supplement their herd 's traditional diet of grasses . 
This tends toward greater and more efficient output while easing pressure for expanding area , and bodes well for the consumers struggling worldwide with higher food prices , as well as conservationists who see Brazil as a crucial battlefield . 
Such investments in yield are not new in the United States or Europe . 
They are , however , in the tropical grain and cattle belt of Brazil , which means there are risks and uncertainties . 
`` I lose 80 calves a year to jaguars , '' Val said from a dark hardwood paneled farm house in southern Para state , where any movement more complex than breathing triggers perspiration . 
Val , a Sao Paulo University-educated sociologist , is one of a growing number of farmers taking a more scientific view of production . 
He has hired consultants to help acquire a whole new set of skills in grain farming . 
Yet , he still embodies many of the older ruralist sentiments that thrived here in an era defined by man-versus-nature . 
The jungle and the bush were the enemy . 
Brazil , with its chronic social inequalities , relied on homesteading until the last decade to populate and secure its vast , United States-sized Val 's father packed 40 days by burro to the area that is now Redencao in 1959 -- aging black-and-white photographs of that trek don the walls of his son 's farm house . 
The shoot-from-the-hip , pioneering spirit is still revered here . 
He secured government financing to clear 220 square miles of forested land that he had bought title to and named Santa Teresa Ranch . 
The family has since sold off most of the farm . 
The dictatorship of the time threatened to repossess homesteaders ' land if they failed to improve it , which meant clearing the forest to raise cattle and plant crops . 
Unbridled expansionist policies eventually brought environmental and trade pressure to a head in the last decade , on fears the Amazon would be lost , hastening global warming . 
Government efforts to rein in agriculture also threaten to derail the very investments needed by farmers to keep yields improving in existing areas and for orderly , legal expansion . 
Brazil 's 5.3-million square mile area still has over 625,000 square miles of unutilized land that could be legally converted to agricultural ends , according to the IBGE . 
Katia Abreu , a senator and the head of the National Confederation of Agriculture , estimates that current laws governing land use criminalize 70-90 percent of Brazil 's 5 million growers and ranchers for cutting forest that had been state-sponsored under previous governments . 
Some are guilty of illegal clearing after the laws had forbidden such practices , she admits . 
`` The bulk of them are more victims of bad enforcement of the law , '' Abreu said , adding that a new law before Congress should normalize most farmers ' legal status . 
The implications for global food prices could be profound . 
China , Europe and the Middle East are Brazil 's main buyers and a couple percentage points variation in its output of soy , beef , sugar and coffee could send market prices reeling . 
Val plans to invest 3 million reais -LRB- $ 1.8 million -RRB- to plant corn on 9 square miles of his 88 square miles of pasture . 
The remaining 94 square miles of his ranch must remain forested reserve in this part of the Amazon . 
His farm is in legal order and thus would be eligible for government subsidized financing . 
But many farms are not . 
Four hours south of Val 's farm by twin-engine plane lies the 80-square-mile Falavinha integrated farm in Deciolandia , Mato Grosso . 
It was categorized as savanna biome , which means 20-35 percent of the farm had to be forested reserve . 
But , after authorities redrew Brazil 's biomes , the region may be forced to comply with Amazon Basin requirements of 50 percent reserve . 
The costs of replanting would be high . 
Federal agencies are also notoriously slow to provide vital services . 
Farms bigger than 3 square miles must submit satellite maps of their land to agrarian reform agency Incra . 
But farmers say Incra is understaffed for the workload as it is , and the government plans to eventually expand the number of farms to smaller properties that must submit maps . 
`` We spent 10,000 reais to complete the farm 's mapping and submitted it a year ago and still nothing , '' the owner of the farm , Geraldo Falavinha , said over the roar of cotton gins . 
`` We are locked out of government financing and need to invest . '' 
The keystone to large-scale integrated farming in Brazil is cattle , especially as far as preservation of the Amazon and other tropical biomes are concerned . 
In Para , Val says he will expand his herd to roughly 30,000 from 20,000 . 
A recent study by the Institute for Atmospheric Research Research singled out cattle ranching as the main agricultural source of pressure behind deforestation . 
Inevitably , leaders in Brazilian agriculture and ranching will throw out numbers about the 137,000 square miles of pasture in Brazil that can be easily converted into farmland `` without having to cut a single tree . '' 
Brazil currently plants 66,875 square miles to crops and commercial forest . 
But converting pasture into planted area is not simple . 
It raises the question of where the cattle will graze . 
Brazil 's beef production is grass-fed , unlike in the United States and Europe where grain on feedlots is used mostly . 
The U.S. writer on food Michael Pollan says cattle should be taken off `` their typical feedlot diet of grain '' and allowed `` to eat grass '' , to help bring down sky-high grain prices . 
In Brazil -- the world 's top exporter of beef and a major grain producer -- many ranchers and farmers would disagree . 
`` Cattle need to eat more grain here to reach slaughter faster . 
There 's less environmental impact , '' Darci Ferrarin Jr. said his DGF integrated farm in Sorriso , Mato Grosso . 
Brazil could double or triple the cattle per hectare from the present average of nearly 1 head\/ha simply by introducing grain to their diet , better breeding practices and fertilizing and replanting grasses in pastures , beef analysts say . 
`` We make more money from this type of farming , but nature and consumers benefit , '' he added , while leaning on one of his sister 's prize-winning white Nelore heifers that stands nearly seven-feet-tall and weighs as much as a mid-sized car . 
-LRB- Editing by Todd Benson , Kieran Murray and Alden Bentley -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
