ERFURT , Germany | Fri Sep 23 , 2011 11:16 pm BST ERFURT , Germany -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Pope Benedict held a surprise meeting on Friday with victims of clerical sexual abuse and expressed his deep regret for their suffering , saying the church was committed to the protection of children , the Vatican said . 
The private meeting came on the second day of Benedict 's four-day trip to Germany , where record numbers of Catholics have officially left the faith in protest at clerical abuse , and where the Church faces some 600 requests for compensation . 
The Pope was `` moved and deeply shaken '' and assured victims the Church was `` committed to the promotion of effective measures to protect children , '' the Vatican said in a statement . 
The meeting took place in a seminary in Erfurt , in eastern Germany , and was similar to those held by Benedict on other recent trips . 
The wording of the statement also mirrored those issued after previous meetings . 
Victims ' associations have said the Vatican has not done enough to bring the perpetrators to justice , a view echoed by German victims who joined 8,000 protesters on a march through Berlin , where the Pope began his visit . 
Earlier on Friday the Pope visited the monastery where Martin Luther lived before launching the Reformation , and warned his Lutheran hosts that `` a new form of Christianity '' posed challenges to mainline Protestants and Catholics alike . 
While not naming them , it was clear he was referring to the evangelical and Pentecostal churches which have spread rapidly , especially in developing countries , by attracting converts from more established churches . 
He appealed for unity between Roman Catholics and Protestants , who began their split from the Catholic Church when Luther , who had lived in Erfurt as a Catholic monk , posted his 95 theses on a church door in 1517 . 
Few people turned out to see the pope in Erfurt , a Protestant city under tight security for the visit , but about 90,000 Catholics -- 40,000 more than expected -- flooded the nearby Catholic town of Etzelsbach for a vespers service . 
Benedict told the Lutherans : `` Faced with a new form of Christianity , which is spreading with overpowering missionary dynamism , sometimes in frightening ways , the mainstream Christian denominations often seem at a loss . 
`` This is a form of Christianity with little institutional depth , little rationality and even less dogmatic content , and with little stability . 
This worldwide phenomenon poses a question to us all : what is this new form of Christianity saying to us , for better and for worse ? '' 
Geoff Tunnicliffe , Vancouver-based secretary general of the World Evangelical Alliance , told Reuters his organization had recently issued a code of conduct for responsible missionary work with the Vatican and World Council of Churches . 
`` I do n't see this as a blanket statement on evangelicals , which includes Pentecostals , '' he said . 
The three groups that signed the pioneering code of conduct in June , after five years ' work , claim to represent over 90 percent of Christianity . 
While stressing Christian unity , Benedict deflected recent public appeals from Protestants for a relaxation of rules barring them from participating in Catholic communion . 
He said it was a `` political misunderstanding '' to think he would come with an `` ecumenical gift '' such as permission for Protestants to receive the Catholic eucharist . 
Germany 's top Protestant bishop urged the pontiff to take `` real steps for reconciliation '' before the 500th anniversary of the Reformation in 2017 , which the Protestants would like to mark with Catholic participation . 
Luther is `` as a hinge between our two churches , because he belongs to both , '' said Lutheran Bishop Nikolaus Schneider , head of the Evangelical Church in Germany . 
`` It is time to heal the memories of the mutual injuries in the Reformation period and the subsequent history of our Churches . '' 
Chancellor Angela Merkel , daughter of a Lutheran pastor , attended the service highlighted by interludes of sacred organ music by Johann Sebastian Bach and other German composers . 
Erfurt , where atheism is also widespread after four decades of communism , gave the pope a cool reception . 
There were few posters or banners announcing his presence . 
In a shop near the cathedral , atheist Dagmar Schneidert said : `` I do n't know anyone who is enthusiastic about the visit , only 7 percent of people in Erfurt are Catholic anyway . 
It 's wasted money that could be used for something more meaningful . '' 
The pope is due to hold an open-air mass in central Erfurt on Saturday at which Church officials expect 85,000 Catholics . 
At Etzelsbach , in the Eichsfeld region near the former Iron Curtain between East and West Germany , Benedict praised Catholics for keeping the faith despite pressure from `` two godless dictatorships '' -- Nazism and Communism . 
`` Eichsfeld is a very religious place , '' said Holungen Wiebert , 67 . 
`` We 're very proud to have a German pope again , for the first time in 500 years . '' 
Polish , Croatian and Bavarian flags in the crowd indicated some pilgrims had come long distances to see the pope . 
Before leaving Berlin , Benedict met leaders of Germany 's four million Muslims and promised cooperation with them as long as they respect Germany 's constitution and the limits it sets on pluralism . 
Merkel warned Muslims last year that sharia , Islamic law , had no place in Germany . 
Muslim leaders praised the pope for confirming through the meeting that Islam was now a part of German society , but said their loyalty to the constitution was never in question . 
`` As Muslims in Germany , we have always said that we see the German constitution as a good basis for peaceful life together , '' said Bekir Alboga , head of interreligious dialogue for the Turkish mosque association DITIB . 
He said the pope 's short address also represented a change from his controversial 2006 speech in Regensburg , where his use of a Byzantine emperor 's quote about Islam being violent and irrational provoked protests across the Muslim world . 
`` The pope has now chosen a new approach in his meeting with Muslims , '' Alboga said . 
`` I think one must look to the future and see where the possibilities for good cooperation are . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
