Fears about the global crisis helped Prime Minister Stephen Harper 's Conservative Party gain seats in Tuesday 's vote . 
-LRB- By Mike Ridewood -- Getty Images -RRB- TORONTO , Oct. 15 -- While the United States reels from the global financial crisis , with credit markets still frozen and stock prices careening from highs to lows , Canada has remained relatively insulated . 
Canadian banks have not gone shaky like their American counterparts , economists and other experts said . 
There is no subprime mortgage or home foreclosure mess . 
And while the United States fears a prolonged recession , Canadians have remained relatively sanguine , convinced that they are in a good position to weather the economic tsunami from the south . 
`` We will be pulled down , '' said Michael Gregory , chief economist at BMO Nesbitt Burns , an investment firm . 
`` Not as deep , not as long . '' 
The main reason for optimism here is the banking system . 
Experts here note that Canadian banks are more tightly regulated , more liquid and less highly leveraged . 
Instead of being highflying investment banks , they tend to operate in a more traditional manner , with large numbers of loyal depositors and a more solid base of capital . 
`` I think the regulatory framework in Canada is a little more stringent , '' Gregory said , `` and Canadian banks are a little more conservative in terms of lending . '' 
The World Economic Forum this month rated Canada 's banks as the world 's soundest , ahead of banks in Sweden and Luxembourg . 
According to the Canadian Banking Association , one reason for the system 's solidity is that banks are national in scope . 
Each of the largest five institutions has branches in all 10 Canadian provinces , meaning they are less susceptible to regional downturns and they can move capital from region to region , as needed . 
`` As far as I am aware , no American bank has branches in all 50 states , '' banking association spokesman Andrew Addison wrote in an e-mail . 
Strict rules also govern mortgage lending . 
By Canadian law , any mortgage that will finance more than 80 percent of the price of a home must be insured . 
Two-thirds of all Canadian mortgages are insured by the quasi-governmental Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corp. . 
As a result of the tough standards for insurance , `` people tend not to get mortgages they can not afford , '' Gregory said . 
Defaulting on a loan is also more difficult in Canada than the United States , Gregory said . 
`` You ca n't just drop off the keys and walk away . '' 
For Canada 's seven biggest banks , the percentage of mortgages at least three months in arrears was 0.27 percent in July , close to historic lows , according to the banking association . 
Also , few Canadian banks got caught holding large numbers of toxic American mortgages . 
Another difference is that in Canada , mortgage interest is not tax-deductible , making it harder to buy a house . 
As a result , Canada did not have as strong a construction surge as the United States did during the boom years , and thus does not now have a big oversupply . 
People do not take out mortgages just for the tax break . 
In Canada , `` a mortgage is seen as something you want to get rid of as fast as possible , '' said Peter Dungan , an economist with the Rotman School of Management at the University of Toronto . 
Amid this relative health , there have been reports that American companies , needing cash and credit , have been turning to their Canadian subsidiaries for short-term loans . 
But Canada 's economy has not been entirely trouble-free . 
The Toronto Stock Exchange is down . 
The appreciation of the Canadian dollar has harmed exports . 
The slowdown in the United States -- which takes 80 percent of Canada 's exports -- has a direct impact here . 
In particular , the American housing troubles have hurt because much of the wood in new U.S. houses comes from Canada . 
`` What Americans are not buying is directly what we export , '' Dungan said . 
Fears about the global crisis helped Prime Minister Stephen Harper increase his Conservative Party 's presence in Parliament in Tuesday 's elections , many analysts here believe , though the party still fell short of an absolute majority . 
Harper called the election in September , just before the crisis hit . 
After some initial verbal stumbles -- he at first seemed to play down the fall of the Toronto exchange -- he campaigned as the steady hand to see Canada through hard economic times ahead . 
Polls showed that the economy was the main issue in the election . 
