President Obama discusses the role that American small businesses play in the economy during an event in the Rose Garden at the White House , Tuesday , May 25 , 2010 , in Washington . 
-LRB- AP -RRB- As the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico continues to gush after BP 's multiple attempts to contain it have failed , President Obama is losing patience . 
At a recent White House meeting on the oil spill , the president reportedly snapped , `` just plug the damn hole . '' 
`` Obviously he 's frustrated as the rest of the people are , particularly along the Coast , '' White House energy adviser Carol Browner told Fox News . 
`` We want this thing to shut down . '' 
Obama was in no mood Tuesday to discuss the spill after praising the Small Business Administration for the work it has done to help those affected by the disaster . 
At the Rose Garden event celebrating small businesses , Obama refused to answer a question shouted out by a reporter on whether he has confidence in BP to plug the hole . 
With anger building , Obama will travel to the region Friday for the second time . 
Unlike the first time , he 'll see the sludgy catastrophe from the shore . 
Meanwhile , Coast Guard Commandant Thad Allen retired Tuesday . 
He will , however , remain national incident commander of the spill . 
`` This job will be needed for a long long time because of the natural resources damage assessments and the clean up that will be doing on , '' he said . 
The new Coast Guard commandant , Adm. Robert Papp , compared it to a sprint relay race . 
`` I had to be up to speed to be ready to take that baton , '' Papp said . 
`` I think we 're there . 
I 'm just a little worried there might be an oil on the baton . '' 
On Capitol Hill , Florida Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson called the federal response so far weak and said the military needed to take control . 
Top White House officials said they 're in charge . 
`` All decisions about the clean up , all decisions about shutting down the well are being run through the federal government , '' Browner said . 
`` The federal government is in charge . '' 
And yet , BP is still defying a federal order to use less toxic oil dispersants , despite mounting warnings of secondary environmental damage . 
`` If we can minimize the toxicity , if we can minimize the amount being used , obviously that 's what we 're going to do , '' Browner said . 
BP has agreed under pressure to show a live feed of a procedure called a `` top kill '' designed to choke off the oil spill . 
BP started showing live feed of the leak itself after pressure from the Obama administration . 
But lawmakers had said they had learned that the `` top kill '' procedure would not be shown . 
The Associated Press contributed to this report . 
