May 25 , 2010 - 4:00 PM | by : Malini Wilkes Passing around internet porn . 
Accepting gifts from the oil companies . 
Apparently , all that went on in the Lake Charles , Louisiana office of the federal Minerals Management Service between 2000 and 2008 . 
And some of the workers involved were inspectors on offshore drilling platforms in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The long and troubling list of employee behavior is outlined in a new report from the Interior Department 's Inspector General . 
The IG released her findings early because of attention to the BP oil spill . 
Acting Inspector General Mary Kendall says her greatest concern is the cozy relationships between federal inspectors and oil companies , and how easily inspectors move back and forth between industry and government . 
For example , the report found one worker conducted four inspections on an oil company platform while he was actively negotiating for a job with that same company . 
The investigation also found that oil companies invited inspectors to all kinds of events including `` skeet-shooting contests , hunting and fishing trips , golf tournaments , crawfish boils and Christmas parties . '' 
Investigators confirmed that inspectors attended many of these events . 
Investigators found emails containing porn or links to porn sites . 
They found additional emails containing racist or sexist humor . 
Two workers admitted using illegal drugs . 
Perhaps the most damning allegation was that some inspectors allowed oil company workers to fill out the federal inspection forms . 
The inspector general was not able to conclusively substantiate that tip from a confidential source . 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar responded to the report in a statement , calling it `` deeply disturbing '' and `` further evidence of the cozy relationship between some elements of MMS and the oil and gas industry . '' 
But Salazar was quick to defend his own record . 
Both he and the inspector general point out that the report covers ethical lapses before he became Interior Secretary . 
Salazar notes that he implemented new ethics rules in 2009 . 
He has asked the inspector general to expand her investigation to the period after 2009 , looking into any possible failures to enforce standards at the Deepwater Horizon oil platform . 
Some of the employees mentioned in the report have resigned , been fired or referred for prosecution . 
The rest are on administrative leave . 
Several weeks after the BP oil spill Salazar announced that he would break up the Minerals Management Service , reorganizing it into three separate bureaus . 
-LRB- Fox 's Kristin Brown contributed to this report . -RRB- 
FOX News covers the action from all the angles . 
Get constant updates from our in-the-field reporters and producers and read stories you 'll only see here . 
