May 23 : An oil-covered pelican flaps its wings on an island in Barataria Bay off the coast of Louisiana . 
AP2010 WASHINGTON -- Responding to the massive BP oil spill , Congress is getting ready to quadruple -- to 32 cents a barrel -- a tax on oil used to help finance cleanups . 
The increase would raise nearly $ 11 billion over the next decade . 
The tax is levied on oil produced in the U.S. or imported from foreign countries . 
The revenue goes to a fund managed by the Coast Guard to help pay to clean up spills in waterways , such as the Gulf of Mexico . 
The tax increase is part of a larger bill that has grown into a nearly $ 200 billion grab bag of unfinished business that lawmakers hope to complete before Memorial Day . 
The key provisions are a one-year extension of about 50 popular tax breaks that expired at the end of last year , and expanded unemployment benefits , including subsidies for health insurance , through the end of the year . 
The House could vote on the bill as early as Wednesday , though Democrats were still working Monday to round up the votes . 
Democratic leaders had wanted to hold a vote Tuesday . 
There has been little public opposition to the oil tax from the petroleum industry . 
But the overall bill would add about $ 134 billion to the federal budget deficit , drawing opposition from Republicans and some Democrats . 
Senate leaders hope to complete work on the bill before Congress goes on a weeklong break next week . 
The Obama administration issued a statement Monday supporting the bill . 
Lawmakers want to increase the current 8-cent-a-barrel tax on oil to make sure there is enough money available to respond to oil spills . 
At least 6 million gallons of crude have spewed into the Gulf of Mexico since a drilling rig exploded April 20 off the Louisiana coast . 
President Barack Obama and congressional leaders have said they expect BP to foot the bill for the cleanup . 
`` Taxpayers will not pick up the tab , '' Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , D-Nev . 
BP executives told Congress last week they would pay `` all legitimate claims '' for damages . 
But the government needs upfront money to respond to spills , as well as money to pay for cleanups when the responsible party is unable to pay , or is unknown . 
Money spent from the fund can later be recovered from the company responsible for the spill . 
The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund has about $ 1.5 billion available . 
Under current law , only $ 1 billion can be spent from the fund on a single incident . 
The bill would increase the spending limit to $ 5 billion . 
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce said the tax increase was hastily put together , without adequate study , to help pay for an unrelated bill . 
The tax increase was unveiled Thursday , without any congressional hearings to study its impact . 
`` I have seen no analysis on how this would impact energy security , how this would impact domestic production , how this would impact the overall economics in the country , '' said Christopher Guith , vice president of the chamber 's energy institute . 
`` There has n't been any sort of deliberation on this . '' 
Guith said the tax could be passed on to consumers , depending on the ability of oil companies to raise gas prices in response to a tax increase . 
Lawmakers felt the tax increase , to 32 cents a barrel , was reasonable , said Rep. Sander Levin , D-Mich . 
, chairman of the tax-writing House Ways and Means Committee . 
`` We just decided to take a look at what we thought would be a reasonable increase , '' Levin said . 
The American Petroleum Institute has not taken a position on the tax increase , though a spokeswoman said Congress should study the ramifications before acting . 
`` We understand we need to have an insurance policy in order to cover people in the event of a spill , '' said the spokeswoman , Cathy Landry . 
`` At the same time we need to have a vital oil and gas industry . '' 
The bill does not address a federal law that caps liability at $ 75 million for economic damages beyond direct cleanup costs . 
Democratic Senators tried to pass a bill last week that would have increased the cap to $ 10 billion , but they were blocked by Republicans . 
The oil industry says such a high cap would make it difficult , if not impossible , to insure oil rigs . 
BP said Monday its costs for responding to the spill had grown to about $ 760 million . 
