May 5 : The crew of a Basler BT-67 fixed wing aircraft releases dispersant over an oil discharge off the shore of Louisiana . 
U.S. Coast Guard Some Louisiana fishermen affected by the massive oil spill in the Gulf -- including some hired by BP to help in the cleanup -- are reporting cases of debilitating headaches , burning eyes and nausea , and some industry and public officials are pointing the finger at chemical dispersants as the cause . 
Gary Burris , a fisherman who works along the Gulf Coast , said he has observed planes spraying dispersants into the water , a chemical rain meant to stop oil slicks from forming and break down the crude more quickly . 
Now Burris says that after breathing in the dispersants he grew ill and disoriented , confining himself to bed for days and ultimately going to a doctor for treatment and antibiotics . 
`` It filled my lungs with fluid , '' he said . 
`` I 'm hurting -- I 'm sore from coughing . '' 
Burris and other residents of the Gulf are reporting a slew of symptoms that some biologists say are directly attributable to the chemicals now gushing into the Gulf on a daily basis . 
`` These are the exact symptoms that you could expect from overexposure to crude oil and to the chemicals that are being used out on the cleanup , '' said Riki Ott , a marine toxicologist and activist who worked on the cleanup in Alaska after the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill . 
Ott said she had been in contact with several Louisiana fishermen suffering a range of ailments -- `` sore throats , burning headaches , burning eyes , skin rashes , nausea , dizziness '' -- that track with those suffered in the aftermath of the Valdez spill . 
The dispersants , she says , compound the health risks created by exposure to crude oil . 
`` This is like throwing kerosene on a fire , '' she said . 
BP has sprayed more than 800,000 gallons of dispersant into the Gulf since an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig on April 20 . 
At the same time , the oil giant has been enlisting the paid help of Gulf fishermen , whose fleet of hundreds of boats provides them broad access to areas affected by the spill . 
BP 's '' Vessels of Opportunity '' program employs commercial fishermen to hem in surface oil and help clean oil clumping along the coast , creating work for the industry likely to suffer most in the fallout from the oil spill . 
But critics say the rudimentary safety training given to the fishermen is n't enough . 
While BP 's `` key requirements '' include a four-hour training session and a dockside examination by the Coast Guard , the company does not appear to be providing special Hazmat equipment for the ad hoc cleanup crews . 
`` We are not seeing correct personal protection equipment , '' said Clint Guidry , secretary of the Louisiana Shrimp Association , who touted his own experience with toxins from working on oil rigs before he became a fisherman . 
Guidry 's colleague , Acy Cooper , gave a blunt assessment of the situation faced by fishermen patrolling the Gulf 's oily waters . 
`` They 're putting themselves at risk ... -LRB- with -RRB- nothing to protect themselves , '' he said Thursday . 
`` Their eyes are burning , their noses are burning , but all of them need to go -- they need the money . '' 
The Coast Guard referred inquiries about the health of service members patrolling the Gulf to a unified command team set up by BP . 
Calls and an e-mail message sent to BP seeking comment about their safety measures were not returned . 
Some fishermen aiding in the cleanup are reluctant to speak out against BP in public for fear of losing their temporary jobs , while others are willing to abide the hazards in order to keep earning paychecks from the company , according to fishermen who spoke to FoxNews.com . 
`` The problem is some of the fishermen do n't want to lose the jobs they 've got , '' said George Barisich , head of the United Commercial Fishermen 's Association . 
`` Kind of a Catch-22 situation . '' 
Members of Congress are now demanding better safety precautions for fishermen surrounding the use of dispersants in order to protect those involved in the cleanup . 
Rep. Edward Markey , chairman of the House subcommittee on energy and the environment , criticized BP for ignoring a directive from the Environmental Protection Agency to use less toxic chemicals to help disperse the oil . 
`` The release of hundreds of thousands of gallons of chemicals into the Gulf of Mexico could be an unprecedented , large and aggressive experiment on our oceans , '' said Markey , a Democrat from Massachusetts . '' 
-LRB- T -RRB- he reality is we know almost nothing about the potential harm from the long-term use of any of these chemicals on the marine environment in the Gulf of Mexico , and even less about their potential to enter the food chain and ultimately harm humans , '' Markey said in a written statement Sunday . 
Rep. Charlie Melancon , D-La . 
, is urging the White House to establish temporary health clinics in the Gulf to help afflicted workers . 
`` Many residents and volunteers are being exposed to hazardous materials on a daily basis , and some will have to travel hours to get treatment at the nearest health care facility , '' he said in a letter to Kathleen Sebelius , secretary of Health and Human Services . 
`` It is imperative that temporary health care clinics be established to provide basic health care services in this geographic area . '' 
Melancon argued that BP should foot the bill for the clinics if any are set up , though it remains unclear how many would be necessary or how long they would be required . 
`` What is most frightening about the long-term effects of the oil and the dispersant chemicals is n't what we know , it is what we just do n't know , '' said Markey . 
