Benghazi , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Libyan opposition leaders received a major morale boost Friday as a top U.S. senator made a surprise visit to the rebel stronghold of Benghazi and urged greater American involvement in the bloody campaign to oust longtime strongman Moammar Gadhafi . 
The visit from Arizona Sen. John McCain came a day after the United States said it was deploying predator drones to Libya . 
When we decide to use military force , we should make it short and decisive . 
Dragging it out is when more innocent people get hurt and killed and it gets exponentially more expensive . 
That is exactly what is happening now in Libya . 
In the long run , when America shows that we do n't waver on military comittments like we have been , diplomacy will also begin working much more effectively . 
That 's the ultimate goal . 
April 22 , 2011 04:25 pm at 4:25 pm | Is this really a surprise . 
John McCain never met a war he did n't like ... as long as he does n't have to serve again . 
April 22 , 2011 04:35 pm at 4:35 pm | It 's a civil war and we should not be involved ; especially since the rebels have ties to AQIL . 
And now , BHO is helping to arm those that would kill us . 
The only reason that the Euros were front and center so quickly was to protect their petroleum interests and nothing more . 
The only reason that US force is being used is to protect the petroleum interests of the Europeans . 
The Europeans and the rest of NATO do not have the capabilities that the US has for enforcing a no-fly zone -- Navy Air , Surface and Subsurface Arms and , now , drones . 
Ya know they do n't do anything for humanitarian reasons . 
And , they got all that favorable legacy media support . 
Do ya think the US would get the same favorable coverage if they had done the same in Kuwait\/Saudi Arabia or Iraq ? 
Ya know they would n't and did n't . 
Remember all those placards of , `` No Blood For Oil !! '' And we still have n't been repaid by either country ; not just for the fiscal expenditures , but for the lost and disrupted lives . 
I was a regressive -LRB- aka liberal progressive -RRB- until I learned to read , got a job and was mugged by willful tax and spend regressives and acolytes ; i.e. , unions . 
April 22 , 2011 04:39 pm at 4:39 pm | The French , UK and Italians have boots on the ground , let the rest of the world do it 's part , We are already thin as it is with our Police the world attitude . 
Dammed if you do dammed if you do n't . 
April 22 , 2011 04:44 pm at 4:44 pm | Conspiracy theories are always so interesting . 
So it 's all about oil , huh ? 
For a country that supplies 2 % of the world 's oil supply ? 
Maybe it really is about the massacre that Gadhafi was about to impart on dissenters of his own country . 
The timing of our intervention really seemed to indicate the latter . 
April 22 , 2011 05:04 pm at 5:04 pm | Ca n't we just send drones to hover around his compounds , wait for Gaddafi to show his face -LRB- hint : it 's the guy in the ridiculous daishiki and stunner shades -RRB- and shoot the drone 's missiles ? 
April 22 , 2011 05:09 pm at 5:09 pm | So now folks are concerned over all the `` fighting '' going on in Congress , and gas prices and all of a sudden they 're not feeling too good about the future and where our country s heading . 
We 've got a situation in Lybia involving a madman out to kill or suppres anyone against him . 
Oil prices are going to be impacted , go figure . 
We 've had a situation here at home where one team 's goal has been to do everything possible to keep the country in the toilet so that they could regain the White House . 
That 's going to cause some fighting , go figure . 
We 've got a national press that sees dollar signs for themselves for every negative story they can post or concoct out of misinformation or innuendo , regardless of its ' lack of journalistic integrity . 
That 's going to cause collateral damage perception wise , and in turn at the polls . 
We 've re-elected the same idiots to power that put us in the crapper ; and we did it because we believed their lies about geting us out of the crapper , and with jobs no less they said . 
Instead they are reneging , again , on their promises and sworn duty to us , go figure . 
April 22 , 2011 05:11 pm at 5:11 pm | Looks like McCain has jumped on board the bus President Bush was driving . 
God bless George for pointing the way with the war in Iraq to get this Democracy ball rolling . 
He knew that if we could get just some of those people to see what Freedom is all about , the rest would get jealous and want a taste of it as well and so , here we go . 
The Arab people are tired of dictators and religious zealots telling them what to do and finally they are going to have their own Crusade . 
Now the question is first the Democrats could n't justify killing Sadam , but are now targeting Kadafi , but not Assad in Syria . 
Pray tell , what is the difference with Assad killing hundreds of protestors almost daily . 
As a side bar , I notice the liberal media says little about the mass graves that keep turning up in Iraq . 
THe latest had over 800 bodies in it and were victiims of Sadam . 
So Bush went in because of WMD , but really did it for MIC or Murder of Innocent Civilians ... God Bless George . 
April 22 , 2011 05:17 pm at 5:17 pm | What a hypocrite John Mccain is , he was bad mouthing the President for aiding the rebels , and now he is there acting like their savior . 
Is there no low that the GOP wo n't stoop to . 
April 22 , 2011 05:20 pm at 5:20 pm | April 22 , 2011 05:21 pm at 5:21 pm | McCain please stop trying to ` bait and trip-up ' the President , you simpleton . 
If you want more $ $ $ upport for the rebels than sell off one of your many mansions and ship them the cash . 
You WISH for the President to fall for your okey-doke sucker punch and spend money to help the rebels , that way you 'll be one of the first to flip-flop and scream : `` We 're BROKE , how dare he ? '' . 
Go back to the nursing home , or better yet go fly one of those fighter jets you 're so good at maneuvering . 
April 22 , 2011 05:22 pm at 5:22 pm | As you can see , if McCain were elected president , we probably would have had thousands of troops in Libya by now and ended up in another quicksand mess . 
Obama was smart to limit our involvement and let NATO and the allies pick up some slack . 
Yes , we are still involved -LRB- this is aimed at poster BeanerECMO -RRB- but some -LRB- like this poster -RRB- seems to ignore the fact that a prominent Republican is calling for MORE US involvement ! 
April 22 , 2011 05:32 pm at 5:32 pm | Its Good Friday , so I will try to be nice , but this little escapade of John McCain 's is totally disgusting . 
First he wants America to do more . 
We are doing enough , thank you very much . 
Then he says they should set up a Government with mainly the Europeans help because they are closer . 
Bet the Europeans a happy to be told what to do by this loser . 
Then , `` if he demands formal recognition of the rebels '' -- who is he to demand anything . 
I thought the rebels `` might '' be somewhat infiltrated by Al Quida . 
So who are we `` formally recognizing '' ? 
Then The lovely American Enterprise Institute chimes in because they are run by Cheney , et al , another war monger . 
Then he wants advisors , well did n't the French already send in advisors ? 
when we use military force , we should make it short and decisive '' . 
Do you mean like the Bush\/Cheney Ten Year Wars , that they started , did n't finish and left the next guy , who happens to be President Obama to clean up Two men charged in death of Chicago girl who performed in inauguration event - wp . 
me\/p4HKM -191 H Rove and Trump ` all good Republicans , ' says McDonnell - wp . 
me\/p4HKM -191 E 6:28 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Apple CEO Tim Cook to be Obama 's State of the Union guest - wp . 
me\/p4HKM -191 A CNN 's GUT CHECK for February 11 , 2013 - wp . 
