GENEVA | Wed Apr 20 , 2011 10:33 am EDT GENEVA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The Libyan government 's reported use of cluster munitions and heavy weapons in Misrata has caused substantial civilian casualties and may amount to crimes under international law , the United Nations said on Wednesday . 
U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay called for a halt to the siege of Misrata and condemned the attacks , including a cluster bomb said to have exploded last week several hundred meters from the hospital in the west Libyan city . 
`` Under international law , the deliberate targeting of medical facilities is a war crime and the deliberate targeting or reckless endangerment of civilians may also amount to serious violations of international human rights law or international humanitarian law , '' Pillay said in a statement . 
The rebels accuse forces supporting Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi of using cluster bombs . 
The U.S.-based Human Rights Watch said last week government forces had fired the weapons into residential areas of Misrata and it had found remnants . 
The Libyan government , which denies shelling civilians , has also denied this allegation . 
At least two medical clinics in Misrata are reported to have been hit by mortar rounds or sniper fire , according to Pillay . 
Libya 's third largest city and the insurgents ' last major stronghold in the west has been under siege for more than seven weeks . 
Rebels said they fought troops for control of a main thoroughfare there Wednesday and eight people had been killed the previous day , mostly civilians . 
Hundreds of people are believed to have been killed in Misrata where aid workers say the humanitarian situation is worsening due to a lack of food , water and medical supplies . 
`` Using imprecise weaponry such as cluster munitions , multiple rocket launchers and mortars , and other forms of heavy weaponry , in crowded urban areas will inevitably lead to civilian casualties , '' Pillay said , adding that women and children were among the dead . 
Pillay , a former U.N. war crimes judge , said pro-government forces besieging Misrata , including commanders , could be held criminally liable for their orders and acts . 
The International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- was already investigating possible crimes . 
ICC prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo has said Libyan authorities decided they were ready to kill unarmed protesters opposed to Gaddafi 's 41-year rule even before unrest spread from Tunisia and Egypt . 
He has raised concern about abductions , torture and killings . 
Pillay voiced concern about mistreatment of journalists by the Libyan authorities and said at least two journalists had been killed and 16 were missing , including 10 foreigners . 
`` Dozens of others have been detained , assaulted , physically abused -- possibly to the point of torture -- or expelled . '' 
-LRB- Reporting by Stephanie Nebehay ; editing by Tim Pearce -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
