Turkey protests as Syrians open fire at border Jim Muir , reporting from Beirut , says there is little prospect of the ceasefire `` gaining hold '' Turkey has protested after Syrian forces opened fire across the border , in the first such attack since Turkey began housing refugees from the unrest . 
Ankara summoned Syria 's envoy after two incidents in which violence spilled over into Turkey , leaving at least two people dead and many injured . 
Separately , a Lebanese cameraman was shot dead on the Syria-Lebanon border . 
The violence comes amid fading hopes that a UN-brokered Syria ceasefire will start on Tuesday as planned . 
Monday has proved to be one of the bloodiest days of the uprising despite the truce deal , which should be marked by troop withdrawals from towns and cities if it is being implemented . 
Activists reported more than 100 deaths - among them at least 30 civilians who died during Syrian army bombardment in the central province of Hama . 
Harrowing scenes were reported in the town of al-Latmana , where 17 women and eight children were said to have been crushed under the rubble of their homes in the second attack on the area in days . 
The deaths come as a report by Human Rights Watch accused Syrian forces of carrying out more than 100 summary executions since March . 
The report says most of the victims were civilians . 
Jim Muir BBC News , Beirut Turkey is furious at the latest violence spilling over the border from Syria . 
These are serious incidents which will exacerbate already high political tensions between Turkey and Syria . 
Turkey 's Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan is already very concerned about the conduct of the counter-insurgency in Syria . 
He has strongly insisted on changes by the Syrian government and is gravely disappointed with his former ally , President Bashar al-Assad . 
President Assad is facing growing pressure from Turkey for some kind of action , perhaps involving a protected buffer zone or corridor , inside Syria . 
It is all speculation at the moment , but this is the kind of thinking that could emerge the more we have these kinds of incidents and the more the peace process in Syria stumbles . 
In the first of the skirmishes on the Turkish border at least two people died after people crossing from Syria into Turkey at Kilis were shot at by the Syrian army . 
The governor of Kilis told the BBC that 18 people were also wounded . 
In the second incident two Syrian refugees and a Turkish translator were wounded inside a refugee camp after being hit by stray bullets from clashes between Syrian rebels and troops , according to Turkey 's foreign affairs ministry . 
Turkey summoned Syria 's envoy to demand an immediate halt to such violence . 
In a separate incident , a Lebanese cameraman for Lebanon 's Al-Jadeed television channel was shot dead amid gunfire in the border region between Syria and Lebanon 's northern Wadi Khaled district . 
Ali Shaaban was killed and a colleague injured when a film crew from Al-Jadeed came under a hail of bullets from troops on the Syrian side of the border . 
Lebanon 's prime minister condemned the killing of Mr Shaaban . 
The BBC 's Jonathan Head , on the Turkey-Syria border , says the Syrian army has been careful to keep away from the border but that seems to have broken down this time . 
He says incidents like this have inflamed emotions in Turkey and the Turkish government has almost given up on the ceasefire plan , brokered by UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan . 
Turkey has seen a sharp rise in the number of refugees coming over the border in the past week , and now hosts some 24,000 Syrians , including hundreds of army defectors . 
Mr Annan will briefly visit Syrian refugees on the Turkish border on Tuesday , reports say . 
However , there are now serious doubts about whether Mr Annan 's ceasefire plan will come into effect on its Tuesday deadline . 
10 April : Government must withdraw troops and heavy weapons such as tanks from towns , cities and villages Following 48 hours : Ceasefire to be implemented on the ground with the onus on the opposition to follow the government 's lead 06:00 local time on 12 April : All forms of violence must be stopped on all sides Next step : All parties to hold talks on a political solution After having earlier agreed to Mr Annan 's plan , Damascus on Sunday called for written guarantees from rebel fighters to end attacks and a promise from foreign states not to fund them . 
It said it did not want the rebels to exploit any troop withdrawal to reorganise and rearm themselves . 
The rebel Free Syrian Army said although it backed the UN-Arab League truce , it refused to meet the government 's new demands . 
Brazilian diplomat Paulo Pinheiro , who is chairing a UN inquiry into the Syrian conflict , said the demands made by Syria were almost `` impossible '' to meet . 
`` I think that everybody in the world is worried that at the eve of the deadline , the government of Syria - instead of preparing to retreat - has escalated the military offensive , '' Mr Pinheiro said . 
China on Monday called on the government and opposition in Syria to `` honor their commitment of ceasefire and withdrawal of troops '' . 
But correspondents say Russia , Syria 's main ally , may now have to play a crucial role . 
Syrian Foreign Minister Walid Muallem is in Moscow for talks . 
The UN says more than 9,000 people have been killed in the uprising against Mr Assad 's rule which began more than a year ago . 
The Syrian government says 2,000 security personnel have been killed in the uprising and blames the violence on `` armed gangs '' and `` terrorists '' . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
