This article was reported jointly with Jeff Gerth of ProPublica , an independent , non-profit newsroom that produces investigative journalism in the public interest . 
ProPublica is supported entirely by philanthropy and provides the articles it produces , free of charge , both through its own Web site and to leading news organizations . 
General Electric , the world 's largest industrial company , has quietly become the biggest beneficiary of one of the government 's key rescue programs for banks . 
The company did not initially qualify for the program , under which the government sought to unfreeze credit markets by guaranteeing debt sold by banking firms . 
But regulators soon loosened the eligibility requirements , in part because of behind-the-scenes appeals from GE . 
As a result , GE has joined major banks collectively saving billions of dollars by raising money for their operations at lower interest rates . 
Public records show that GE Capital , the company 's massive financing arm , has issued nearly a quarter of the $ 340 billion in debt backed by the program , which is known as the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program , or TLGP . 
The government 's actions have been `` powerful and helpful '' to the company , GE chief executive Jeffrey Immelt acknowledged in December . 
GE 's finance arm is not classified as a bank . 
Rather , it worked its way into the rescue program by owning two relatively small Utah banking institutions , illustrating how the loopholes in the U.S. regulatory system are manifest in the government 's historic intervention in the financial crisis . 
The Obama administration now wants to close such loopholes as it works to overhaul the financial system . 
The plan would reaffirm and strengthen the wall between banking and commerce , forcing companies like GE to essentially choose one or the other . 
`` We 'd like to regulate companies according to what they do , rather than what they call themselves or how they charter themselves , '' said Andrew Williams , a Treasury spokesman . 
GE 's ability to live in the best of both worlds -- capitalizing on the federal safety net while avoiding more rigorous regulation -- existed well before last year 's crisis , because of its unusual corporate structure . 
Banking companies are regulated by the Federal Reserve and not allowed to engage in commerce , but federal law has allowed a small number of commercial companies to engage in banking under the lighter hand of the Office of Thrift Supervision . 
GE falls in the latter group because of its ownership of a Utah savings and loan . 
Unlike other major lenders participating in the debt guarantee program , including Bank of America , Citigroup and J.P. Morgan Chase , GE has never been subject to the Fed 's stress tests or its rules for limiting risk . 
Also unlike firms that have received bailout money in the Troubled Assets Relief Program , or TARP , GE is not subject to restrictions such as limits on executive compensation . 
The debt guarantee program that GE joined is administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. , which was reluctant to take on the new mission , according to current and former officials who were not authorized to speak publicly . 
The FDIC also initially resisted expanding the pool of eligible companies , fearing it would add more risk to the program , the officials said . 
Despite those misgivings , there have been no defaults in the loan guarantee program . 
It has helped buoy confidence in the credit markets and enabled vital financial firms to raise cash even during the darkest days of the economic crisis . 
In addition , the program has raised more than $ 8 billion in fees . 
