President accepts full responsibility for invasion Pentagon to plant pro-US stories in global media President Bush conceded yesterday that much of the pre-war intelligence on Iraq `` turned out to be wrong '' but took sole responsibility for ordering the invasion , which he said was justified by the potential threat posed by Saddam Hussein . 
Mr Bush has acknowledged flaws in US intelligence on Iraq before , but this was his most wholehearted acknowledgment to date of the scale of the errors underlying his administration 's allegations over Saddam 's alleged weapons of mass destruction . 
`` It is true that much of the intelligence turned out to be wrong , '' he said . 
But he repeated the administration 's frequently made defense that other intelligence agencies had made similar mistakes , and Democratic politicians had voted for war based on the same intelligence the president had seen . 
However , Mr Bush acknowledged that the final decision to invade had been his alone . 
`` As president , I am responsible for the decision to go into Iraq , '' he said . 
It was revealed yesterday , on the eve of elections in Iraq , that the Pentagon had set up a $ 300m -LRB- # 170m -RRB- psychological warfare operation that involves placing pro-American messages in foreign media outlets across the world , including those of its allies , without disclosing the US government as the source . 
One of the military officials in charge of the program told USA Today the campaign was designed to counter terrorist ideology and sway foreign audiences to support American policies . 
It will target newspapers , websites , radio and television . 
The revelations come amid the growing controversy over the US military 's covert operations to plant `` good news '' in the Iraqi media by paying newspapers to run stories . 
Military officials involved with the latest Pentagon campaign said they did not plan to place false stories in foreign news outlets clandestinely . 
But Mike Furlong , the deputy director of the joint psychological operations support element , told the newspaper that the military would not always reveal its role in distributing pro-American messages . 
`` While the product may not carry the label ` Made in the USA ' , we will respond truthfully if asked -LRB- by journalists -RRB- , '' he said . 
The Pentagon was also under scrutiny yesterday for its activities inside the US following claims that it has a secret database on those who oppose the Iraq war and may also be monitoring peace demonstrations . 
The database , obtained by the NBC television network , lists 1,500 `` suspicious incidents '' across the US over a 10-month period and includes four dozen anti-war meetings or protests , some aimed at military recruiting , The monitoring of anti-war activities has been treated with suspicion by Americans since the Vietnam era when it emerged the Pentagon spied on anti-war and civil rights campaigners . 
The White House and Pentagon refused to comment on the Pentagon 's plans to place pro-American stories in foreign media outlets . 
It is legal for the government to plant propaganda in other countries but not in the US . 
According to USA Today , special operations command awarded three five-year contracts in June for contractors to develop slogans , advertisements , newspaper articles , radio spots and television programs overseas to build support for US policies . 
Among the companies to have been awarded a contract is the Lincoln Group , a firm set up in Washington two years ago and run by a Briton , Christian Bailey . 
Military chiefs are currently investigating the program and the reported payment of Iraqi journalists and newspapers to run pro-American stories . 
