MISRATA\/TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- In rebel-held Misrata , the vegetable market is half empty ; shoppers fret over shortages and soaring prices . 
A few miles away in Zlitan , controlled by Muammar Gaddafi , Libyans worry about sanctions and NATO strikes . 
As Libya 's civil war churns on into Ramadan with no end in sight , Libyans on both sides of the conflict say shortages , high prices , rising summer temperatures and worry about loved ones fighting on distant fronts could mar the Muslim fasting month . 
`` A few hours ago NATO conducted a precision airstrike that disabled three ground-based Libyan state TV satellite transmission dishes in Tripoli , '' NATO spokesman Colonel Roland Lavoie said . 
BENGHAZI\/TRIPOLI , July 29 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- As mourners carried the body the slain Libyan rebel military chief to his funeral , fighters fresh from the front unleashed volleys of gunfire into the air and vowed Abdul Fattah Younes had not died in vain . 
Far away from the grieving rebel stronghold Benghazi , supporters of Muammar Gaddafi , whose 41-year rule the rebels are struggling to end , Tripoli residents on Friday said the man they labeled a traitor merely got what he deserved . 
TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi shows no sign of giving any ground as rebels win wider recognition abroad , so , with no breakthrough likely in the war , a stalemate looks set to extend well into the Muslim holy month of Ramadan . 
If anything , diplomatic efforts to end the five-month conflict may have been further complicated by rifts emerging between the rebels and their Western allies over whether or not Gaddafi could stay in the country even if he stood down . 
TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Libya 's Muammar Gaddafi shows no sign of giving any ground as rebels win wider recognition abroad , so , with no breakthrough likely in the war , a stalemate looks set to extend well into the Muslim holy month of Ramadan . 
If anything , diplomatic efforts to end the five-month conflict may have been further complicated by rifts emerging between the rebels and their Western allies over whether or not Gaddafi could stay in the country even if he stood down . 
TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- A U.N envoy trying to find a way to end the war in Libya said after talks with the prime minister in Tripoli on Tuesday that the government and the rebels remained far apart in the drive for an end to the crisis . 
The government told him NATO must end air strikes before any talks could begin and that Muammar Gaddafi 's role as leader was non-negotiable , though rebels and the West insist he step down . 
TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Efforts to find a deal to end the civil war in Libya intensified on Tuesday , with a U.N. special envoy heading for Tripoli and Western powers signaling that Muammar Gaddafi could stay in the country if he gives up power . 
U.N. envoy Abdul Elah al-Khatib , who visited the rebels in Benghazi on Monday , is looking for a `` political process '' that will end a war that has failed to dislodge Gaddafi despite months of rebel attacks backed by NATO bombing raids . 
TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Explosions rocked central Tripoli for the second night in a row and Britain said weeks of NATO bombardment had inflicted extensive damage on Muammar Gaddafi 's heavily-fortified compound . 
Libya 's leader is clinging to power despite a four-month-old NATO air campaign and a lengthening conflict with rebels seeking an end to his 41-year rule and who have seized large swathes of the North African country . 
TRIPOLI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- -- Libya is ready to hold more talks with the United States and with rebels trying to overthrow Muammar Gaddafi , but the Libyan leader will not bow to demands he quit , a government spokesman said . 
Moussa Ibrahim said Libyan officials had a `` productive dialogue '' with U.S. counterparts last week in a rare meeting that followed American recognition of the rebel government that hopes to end Gaddafi 's 41-year rule . 
TRIPOLI , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- Libyan representatives are ready to hold more talks with the United States and with rebels hoping to push Muammar Gaddafi from power , a Libyan government spokesman said , but Gaddafi will not bow to demands he leave power . 
Government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim said that senior Libyan officials had a `` productive dialogue ' with U.S. counterparts last week in a rare meeting that followed the Obama administration 's recognition of the rebel government that hopes to end Gaddafi 's 41-year rule . 
`` Prior to heading the Mexico bureau , Missy was deputy bureau chief in Baghdad . 
She has also covered commodities in Washington , DC and worked in Peru , Argentina and Egypt for Reuters . '' 
