Libyans face Ramadan of shortages , fear as war drags on By Mussab Al Khairallah and Missy Ryan MISRATA\/TRIPOLI | Sat Jul 30 , 2011 11:01 am EDT MISRATA\/TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - In rebel-held Misrata , the vegetable market is half empty ; shoppers fret over shortages and soaring prices . 
A few miles away in Zlitan , controlled by Muammar Gaddafi , Libyans worry about sanctions and NATO strikes . 
As Libya 's civil war churns on into Ramadan with no end in sight , Libyans on both sides of the conflict say shortages , high prices , rising summer temperatures and worry about loved ones fighting on distant fronts could mar the Muslim fasting month . 
Misrata 's market is just a collection of makeshift stalls , built after the original market was destroyed in fighting . 
Given that Misrata is marooned in the Gaddafi-held west and only able to bring in supplies by sea , locals are resigned to shortages . 
`` Dates do not have a long shelf life . 
Our best dates are in the south , '' said Mohammed Abu Zreeba of the high-energy fruit popular among Muslims breaking the dawn-to-dusk fast . 
`` This is far from us and can not reach us by sea . 
Cars and transportation can not get here . '' 
Just a few miles west of Misrata , in the Gaddafi-held town of Zlitan , locals said sanctions and air strikes were biting . 
The Libyan government recently bussed foreign journalists to Zlitan to see what they said were government food warehouses it said were struck by planes from NATO , which says it strikes only military targets . 
Sacks of flour and rice and boxes of canned tomatoes and oil that were destined to be sold to Libyans at reduced prices were burned or sat surrounded by rubble . 
`` We use this food for Ramadan and now it is destroyed , '' nearby resident Mohamed Muftah said angrily . 
`` They want to starve us . '' 
Rebels fighting in the Western Mountains region , near Libya 's border with Tunisia , were worried about fighting without food and water in the searing heat . 
`` Ramadan will be very tough for us . 
We 're already struggling now . 
The weather will be very hot and we wo n't have the energy to fight while we are fasting , '' said Abdelbadr Adel , 19 , a rebel fighting in the Western Mountains . 
`` It is now more important than ever that NATO help us beat Gaddafi . 
We know Gaddafi 's men will not be fasting . '' 
The United Nations has warned of fuel and cash shortages on the eve of Ramadan , when families and friends typically gather to break their fast together with hearty meals . 
Long petrol lines snake down highways near the capital Tripoli . 
Ahmed al-Kafi , a retired diplomat who lives in the city of Sabratha west of Tripoli , said the fuel shortage would prevent him from visiting relatives and friends as he would normally do . 
Gaddafi 's finance minister , Abdulhafid Zlitni , told CNN earlier this month that the government was providing subsidies to control costs and fixing prices of basic foodstuffs . 
Zlitni said the country still has significant `` contingency reserves , ' but it was not clear how long the government , unable to access assets frozen abroad , could afford such support . 
Abdussalam bin Sulaiman , a Libyan journalist , said Ramadan this year would be overshadowed by the air strikes that rock Tripoli and other areas virtually every day . 
`` We hope but that by the time Eid al-Fitr comes around , this obsession with death will be finished , '' he said , referring to the feast that marks the end of the fast . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
