Fergus Walsh | 14:07 PM , Monday , 1 June 2009 One of the UK 's leading flu experts has predicted that a pandemic of swine flu is likely to strike Britain in the autumn . 
Professor John Oxford , an expert on virology at Queen Mary School of Medicine , University of London , says that children going back to school , universities reopening and people going back to work after the summer break would give swine flu the `` opportunity '' that it needs to spread . 
Another fifteen cases of swine flu were confirmed yesterday by the Health Protection Agency , bringing the UK total to 244 . 
One of the cases was in Wales and is believed to be the first there . 
But Professor Oxford thinks that many cases are going undetected : `` Already , sporadic cases in the UK have been shown that are not linked with cases that have traveled . 
That does suggest that the virus is silently spreading around . '' 
However , he said that people should behave as usual , as far as possible , if a pandemic strikes . 
`` What we do n't want is people stopping at home and not going to work , because then you have an economic problem on top of a pandemic , '' he said . 
`` The best advice is to carry on as normal but to be sensible about it . 
`` This includes a bit of social distancing and shielding people from coughs by coughing into the crux of your arm . '' 
Professor Oxford said that in the next few months , global health officials will be keeping a close eye on what happens to the H1N1 swine flu virus in countries like Australia and South Africa . 
The southern hemisphere is entering its winter and the peak period for flu . 
On Friday , the World Health Organization reported that Australia has had 147 confirmed cases ; Argentina has had 37 ; and none so far in South Africa . 
What happens in the southern hemisphere in the coming months will be a good indicator of how the virus will behave in Europe and North America later this year . 
There would be particular concern if H1N1 mutated substantially to become a more virulent illness . 
Thankfully , there are no signs of that yet . 
The Australian Science Media Centre is an excellent resource for anyone wanting to know what experts are thinking about the spread of the virus there . 
The Science Media Centre in London has lots of reliable specialist comments on flu and a host of other issues . 
At 6:19 pm on 01 Jun 2009 , drmattprescott wrote : I wish the BBC would check the facts before telling everyone they were going to die from swine flu or , after almost nothing happens for two weeks , tell us that we are all going to die in the autumn . 
If a million people had died in Mexico we would have something to worry about , but as it is this flu seems no worse than normal flu , even though it has an unusual origin . 
Unusual does not equate to dangerous and I wish that the relative risks had been far better explored before the Beeb had decided to follow the herd and jump off the deep end . 
Thousands of people die of flu every year , whilst millions die of diahorrhea so perhaps you could instead whip up some hysteria where it is 100 % justified and could genuinely help to reduce the number of preventable deaths in the world . 
At 7:40 pm on 01 Jun 2009 , lawyer_jake wrote : I have not been to Mexico . 
I know nobody who has - as far as I am aware . 
I have developed a throat problem over this past weekend -LRB- 30\/31 May 2009 -RRB- . 
I am losing my voice - coupled with sneezing and running nose but no fever temperatures . 
I am still going to work . 
I have an appetite . 
I do not think it is flu - I have had it - in Royal Air Force many years ago - temperature of 102 etc. . 
Should I get it checked out ? 
I do not normally go to Doctors . 
At 7:45 pm on 01 Jun 2009 , Ikarus wrote : I 'm trying to remember the government predictions recently circulated . 
I believe they predicted that 25 % -50 % of the population would catch swine flu at some stage - probably next winter . 
Of these , 0.25-1 % would die . 
So the scenario for swine flu related deaths in the UK is : Anywwhere between 37,500 and 300,000 deaths . 
I presume these numbers were a prediction for the next 12 months . 
I do n't believe this is reason to panic . 
It is , however , reason to have some concern . 
One would expect hospitals and health care to get very stretched , probably overstretched , in six month 's time . 
One would expect some level of disruption . 
The scariest thing : One would expect to experience a bereavement in the next year . 
This flu is not the equivalent of the Great War - but neither is it just the equivalent of a Heat Wave , in terms of its likely impact . 
I find advice telling people to sneeze hygienically stupid : It does not benefit the sneezer , and it only might benefit the sneezed at people . 
I do n't want advice on `` how to keep your illness to yourself '' - I want advice on `` how to not get ill , or minimize the impact if you do '' . 
If I were the government , I would advise people to try and keep their immune system strong this year , at least until the flu season has passed . 
If that means healthier living and less excess for a year , then so be it . 
I 'd rather catch the flu after spending six months eating and drinking sensibly , than after weeks of poor nutrition and binge drinking . 
As for Tamilflu - I would like to know how bad the side effects are -LRB- and the likely mortality from those -RRB- before I 'd consider taking it . 
At 9:33 pm on 01 Jun 2009 , ghostofsichuan wrote : We certainly do not want to advise people to stay at home when sick with the flu when they could be out shopping and helping the economy . 
Money first , citizens second . . 
we need to understand the priorities . 
N1H1 can mutate as it spreads and become resisitent or become more lethal . 
World travel makes the problem difficult to contain and the incubation period adds to the difficulties . 
We are in a world with a severe economic crisis , global warming and poor air quality and suspect pulbic health systems ... . . 
and now the bad news . 
At 06:50 am on 02 Jun 2009 , firtreesix wrote : I m sorry , but I don t see the sense in advising people to go on about their routine activities , when they have the flu , swine type or otherwise . 
Stay at home , rest up and get over the virus . 
Don t go out and infect other people you come in contact with , that is irresponsible . 
I have always followed this advice , thereby sparing others from suffering your fate . 
I would have thought this to be a common sense approach . 
Now we get various types of advise from the medical field , the media , the economists etc. , all telling us to carry on as usual . 
That s just plain stupid advise , sorry !! I work in retail , other family members in the health industry and one thing we all agree upon is , if you are infected with the cold , the flu or any other affliction , such as the plague , measles , small pox etc , do us a favor , stay at home ... we don t want it either !!! At 07:28 am on 02 Jun 2009 , Shi-Hsia wrote : It seems that a lot of people have misunderstood what the word `` pandemic '' means . 
It just means a disease outbreak that has spread around the world , not doomsday . 
The word describes the spread of a disease , not its lethality . 
By saying that a swine flu pandemic is imminent neither the BBC nor the government or universities are guilty of scare-mongering . 
People who accuse them of being so are guilty of being too lazy to use a dictionary or check the WHO website . 
By the way , I 'm a virologist and I 'm sticking with calling it swine flu rather than H1N1 because it has been shown to be mostly from swine lineages . 
There are so many circulating H1N1 strains of human origin that calling it swine flu is about as helpful as telling a policeman that you were hit by a silver car , instead of a Toyota Corolla with licence plate ABC 1234 . 
At 07:31 am on 02 Jun 2009 , Shi-Hsia wrote : Oops sorry , I meant '' ... that calling it H1N1 is about as helpful ... '' At 08:33 am on 02 Jun 2009 , sensiblegrannie wrote : As the global problem of ` swine flu ' develops , those countries at a more advanced stage of infection , have learned a few new things . 
Mr Fergus Walsh could at least bring some of the new learning into the discussion . 
It should not be up to us , the bloggers and twitters to spell out necessary changes to government and populations that are needed to reduce the speed of infection to a manageable rate . 
One of the ideas put forward is the protection of agency workers , to enable them to go off sick if they become ill . 
Many agency workers have to take risks and work whether they are ill or not , because they are not covered by the usual protection that a regular employee enjoys . 
A regular employee can take comfort in the fact that they know which days they will be working , have holiday pay , have normal sickness benefits etc etc. . 
An agency worker is called in to cover a worker who has gone off SICK . 
The government has already advised certain work groups to keep a list of agencies to whom they can get cover when their workers go off sick . 
Should there now be greater protection for agency workers ? 
After all agency workers help out when there is no-one else available , and without them , some key work areas could find themselves seriously compromised . 
Very mild symptoms which would have been missed if I had n't found out by chance that she 'd had contact with a confirmed case at school . 
That was last Thursday . 
So far neither my husband nor I have any symptoms and our daughter has fully recovered . 
She was given Tamiflu to hasten recovery , but we would prefer not to take it ourselves as we do n't have any symptoms and want to build up our own immunity in case this flu returns in a nastier form . 
Our family has been quarantined , but the ` contain ' policy is being reviewed as more schools are closing and more cases confirmed . 
Victoria -LRB- where we live -RRB- has the majority of cases in Australia - almost 400 here alone . 
My suggestion is to be cautious and let common sense prevail . 
There is a lot you can do to prevent the spread of flu , but it 's proven to be more of an inconvenience than a threat so far . 
Thanks to drmattprescott for your comments . 
Have a good look in the blog and on the BBC coverage and I 'm confident that you wo n't find any hysterical claims from correspondents about swine flu . 
If you watched the Six or Ten o'clock news on BBC1 on Friday you would have seen me do a report about the threat of drug-resistant malaria . 
I have also reported several times on HIV\/AIDS , TB and child mortality - from a variety of causes - including diarrhoea . 
You are quite right to say that thousands of people die from flu every year - the WHO global estimate is 250,000-500 ,000 . 
I have pointed this out several times . 
Death estimates for flu are not simple but it 's thought that between one and two million people died in each of the last two pandemics , many times more than with seasonal flu . 
Clearly that is not as many as die from malaria , TB and HIV\/AIDS , but a pandemic , even of largely mild illness , would have a huge impact both in the UK and internationally . 
In Britain , hundreds of thousands of people might be off work during the peak periods of infection and that would have a major economic and social impact - far more than with seasonal flu . 
I ca n't give personal health guidance on this blog - not least because I 'm not medically qualified . 
If you are ill you should probably seek medical advice of some kind , via NHS Direct , or NHS 24 in Scotland . 
It 's generally not a good idea for people with coughs , colds or flu to take the virus down to their GP surgery . 
Hope you feel better soon . 
Thanks for your comments Ikarus . 
An earlier post `` Explaining flu '' gives you the predictions about mortality in the UK in a pandemic . 
Like all drugs , Tamiflu has potential side-effects , nausea being a common complaint . 
RE Comment 5 : Let me clear up any confusion about what Professor Oxford 's comments . 
He is advising that healthy people should carry on life as normal , in the event of a pandemic , although they should follow sensible hygiene guidance . 
But sick people should stay at home and keep the flu virus to themselves . 
RE Comments 6 and 7 . 
It 's interesting that the CDC and WHO stopped calling it swine flu sme time ago . 
The CDC goes for `` novel influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- '' and the WHO `` influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- infection '' . 
Both are a bit of a mouthful for when I 'm reportng on TV or radio . 
I tend to call it H1N1 swine flu when I mention it first and then shorten that to swine flu or H1N1 virus afterwards . 
RE Comment 9 , thanks very much for getting in touch . 
It 's very good to know what is happening on the ground in Australia and to hear that your daughter is ok . 
Please let me know how she gets on with the Tamiflu and whether she suffers any of the reported side-effects such as nausea -LRB- which seem to be very mild -RRB- . 
I 'd be interested to get some first-hand accounts of the disease and the treatment . 
At 8:47 pm on 02 Jun 2009 , MajorGallagher wrote : Ikarus wrote : `` One would expect to experience a bereavement in the next year '' , which , based on the current evidence is surely grossly over-stating the dangers , even assuming a figure at the higher end of the projected figures -LRB- that is a 1 % fatality -RRB- . 
You say `` no reason to panic '' but in the next breath seem to be saying `` people can expect one of their loved ones to die within the next year from swine flu '' ! 
Thanks for your comments MajorGallagher . 
Please point out to me where I suggest that someone close to you is going to die from swine flu in the next year ? 
I have never intended to imply that . 
Remember that `` pandemic '' means simply a global epidemic of an infectious disease . 
It does not imply severity . 
Thankfully , the vast majority of cases of swine flu so far have been mild . 
At present you need to have underlying health conditions or be very unlucky to be struck down severely ill with the virus . 
But the case of the 45-year-old man in hospital in Paisley - who had been otherwise healthy - shows that H1N1 is not always a mild disease . 
At 12:35 pm on 03 Jun 2009 , MajorGallagher wrote : Fergus , you misread my post - I was responding to the comment 3 . 
I did indeed misread it ! 
At 12:30 pm on 08 Jun 2009 , kockatoo wrote : Latest news from Melbourne , Australia - the Swine Flu capital of the world ! 
Victora currently has 1,011 confirmed cases of H1N1 - the highest number per capita in the world . 
The Victorian government has moved from a Contain to a modified Sustain Phase of its influenza plan . 
Our daughter had no side effects from taking Tamiflu , but I read in the weekend paper about overseas findings of suicide tendencies in some young people after taking it . 
Neither my husband nor I had any flu symptoms at all despite being in close contact with our daughter the whole time . 
I understand that the authorities would only test for H1N1 if there had been contact with a confirmed case , even if someone had flu like symptoms . 
Consequently I heard of children who were ill , but not tested as there was no known contact with a confirmed case . 
The authorities in Victoria have struggled to deal with this epidemic and it 's easy to see how a pandemic of a more serious nature could claim many lives world wide . 
At 2:07 pm on 08 Jun 2009 , jodablco wrote : To kockatoo : your point about IF it were more serious -LRB- i.e. deadly -RRB- is rather scary ! 
Thank goodness only a few hundred thousand -LRB- or should that be a million or so ? -RRB- 
may die ... that way governments can justify giving only lip-service to the problem . 
At the end of the day there are some far more serious health problems worldwide so why bother about yet another one which is minor in comparison anyway ??? I pity my childrens generation ... they are going to face far far more serious problems and will have to make extraordinarily difficult decisions once world -LRB- i.e. non-localized -RRB- water and food problems start happening every year . 
i.e. they will simply have to say `` No , we only have enough to save ourselves ! '' 
But , on a positive note , the ONLY realistic way to achieve any significant reduction in CO2 is for major global population reduction ... so , we need - yes NEED - either a series of high-mortality pandemics , a high-mortality war -LRB- or two -RRB- , or mass starvation . 
But , lets be realistic , the most politically acceptable is , of course , an `` uncontrollable '' pandemic . 
It will happen ... world governments just wish it were sooner rather than later -LRB- that is IF global warming is accepted as a serious problem by governments in the first place ... which it appears not to be -RRB- . 
At 2:11 pm on 08 Jun 2009 , jodablco wrote : Oh my GOD ! 
I have just realized that a mad -LRB- or is that merely ultra-sane and cold blooded ? -RRB- 
government may now develop a deadly flu specifically for this purpose ... and then blame terrorists ! 
You will note that it is already being promulgated as being a terrorist threat , so the ground is being laid !!!! Good thing I do not believe in conspiracy theories ... At 01:42 am on 10 Jun 2009 , cutthecarbon wrote : This comment was removed because the moderators found it broke the House Rules . 
I 'm Fergus Walsh , the BBC 's medical correspondent . 
This is my blog for discussion of medical and health issues , especially research and ethics . 
Please get involved and leave a comment . 
For the latest updates across BBC blogs , You can stay up to date with Fergus 's Medical Files via these feeds . 
