Gulf oil spill could be unprecedented disaster - Obama President Obama said he would ` spare no effort ' in responding to the crisis US President Barack Obama has described a sprawling oil slick in the Gulf of Mexico as a `` potentially unprecedented '' environmental disaster . 
Speaking in Louisiana , Mr Obama said his government would do whatever it takes to clean up the oil , adding that BP was responsible and must pay . 
He said the focus was now on preventing any further damage to the Gulf coast . 
BP says it will be at least a week before temporary measures to stem the leak are in place . 
But it could take up to three months to drill relief wells that could fully contain the spillage , Interior Secretary Ken Salazar warned on Sunday . 
BP is responsible for this leak , BP will be paying the bill The Deepwater Horizon rig , which was carrying out work on behalf of BP , sank on 22 April , two days after a huge explosion that killed 11 workers . 
Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal has warned the spill threatens the way of life in his state . 
Mr Obama flew to Louisiana on Sunday to see for himself the damage . 
Speaking in the town of Venice , he said : `` We 're dealing with a massive and potentially unprecedented environmental disaster . 
`` The oil that is still leaking from the well could seriously damage the economy and the environment of our Gulf states . 
`` And it could extend for a long time . 
It could jeopardise the livelihoods of thousands of Americans who call this place home . '' 
The president said the slick was now nine miles -LRB- 14km -RRB- off the coast of south-eastern Louisiana . 
BBC meteorologist Daniel Corbett explains how the weather will affect the slick And he warned : `` BP is responsible for this leak . 
BP will be paying the bill . '' 
BP chief executive Tony Hayward , who is in Louisiana to oversee the company 's clean-up , said : `` I agree with the president that the top priority right now is to stop the leak and mitigate the damage . '' 
The company has said it will honor legitimate claims for damages . 
BP chairman Lamar McKay said they hoped to lower a hastily made dome a mile below the surface to cap the wellhead in the next six to eight days , as a short-term option . 
There have been warnings that within weeks the spill , if unchecked , could eclipse the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster as the worst in US history . 
The Louisiana wetlands host a multi-billion-dollar fishing industry and are a prime spawning area for fish , shrimp , crabs and oysters . 
Mississippi , Alabama and Florida have also declared a state of emergency and are considering their legal options . 
This is Money BP shares continue slide as slick spreads - 1 hr ago Computing . 
