Tony Hayward said there was an `` armada '' of ships trying to clean the spill Oil giant BP has acknowledged it is `` absolutely responsible '' for cleaning up a huge oil spill after an explosion at one of its wells off the US coast . 
But BP boss Tony Hayward said the firm was not to blame for the accident which sank the Deepwater Horizon rig on 22 April , causing the slick . 
He said the equipment that failed belonged to drilling firm Transocean . 
Both companies are expecting lawsuits over the slick , which threatens to cause major ecological damage . 
US President Barack Obama has described the oil leak as a `` potentially unprecedented '' environmental disaster . 
`` BP is responsible for this leak . 
BP will be paying the bill , '' he said . 
The US government has been putting pressure on BP to act quickly . 
In a BBC interview , Mr Hayward dismissed talk of a rift between BP and US officials . 
Hundreds of people have been drafted in to help clean up the oil `` Despite some of the rhetoric we have established an incredible co-operative relationship with the federal authorities , '' he said . 
`` It 's clear that we 're working very well together . 
In terms of the responsibility , I want to be clear , this was not our accident but it is our responsibility to deal with the leak and clean up the oil . '' 
Thousands of barrels of oil have been leaking into the Gulf of Mexico every day since the rig sank . 
Some oil has washed ashore , but officials say the bulk of the slick remains a few miles from the Louisiana coastline . 
The oil is already having a devastating effect on the area 's fishing industry , and officials fear much wider environmental damage if the full slick hits land . 
Forecasters said south-westerly winds on Monday were pushing the slick towards Florida . 
Mr Hayward said BP was making a three-pronged effort to stop the leak : Undersea robots are working on the safety valve which failed , allowing the oil to escape A containment vessel is being sent to the site and would , in effect , suck up the escaped oil BP is drilling a new well to help relieve the pressure and stem the flow from the rupture Experts warn that the cost of clearing up the spill could run into billions of dollars . 
BP has said it will honor legitimate claims for compensation from people affected . 
The firm 's shares continued to fall on Monday , after previous trading had seen about $ 20bn wiped from its market value since the accident . 
UK markets were closed on Monday , but BP 's Frankfurt-listed shares opened 8 % lower before clawing back some of the losses . 
Analysts say the costs associated with the slick are uncertain , meaning that the share price was likely to remain volatile while the leak continues . 
In California , Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger withdrew his support for a plan to expand oil exploration off the state 's coast . 
He said seeing TV images of the spill in the Gulf had changed his mind about the safety of offshore oil platforms in the Pacific Ocean . 
He had supported more drilling as a way to ease the state 's budget deficit . 
