Still the best political coverage . 
Its work in such high-visibility missions accelerated after Sept. 11 , 2001 , when Congress swept the Coast Guard into the Homeland Security Department . 
But the changes had the unintended consequence of lowering the profile of the Coast Guard 's vital programs related to oil . 
`` Priorities changed , '' a 2002 Coast Guard budget report said . 
Internal and congressional studies highlighted the difficulty the agency faces in balancing its many added responsibilities . 
`` Oil-spill issues were not at the top of the list , '' said retired Capt. Lawson Brigham , a former strategic planner for the Coast Guard . 
When Coast Guard inspectors board offshore drilling rigs such as the Deepwater Horizon , which exploded and killed 11 workers in April , they rely on regulations put in place three decades ago , when offshore drilling operations were far less sophisticated , records show . 
The Coast Guard acknowledged 11 years ago in a little-noticed disclosure that its regulations had `` not kept pace with the changing offshore technology or the safety problems it creates . '' 
Since the Deepwater Horizon blowout in the Gulf of Mexico , investigations into oversight gaps have focused on systemic problems within the Interior Department 's Minerals Management Service , which in recent weeks has been renamed and revamped . 
But the Coast Guard , which shared oversight with MMS , has largely escaped scrutiny . 
While the MMS inspected drilling equipment , the Coast Guard inspected rigs for worker safety . 
It also set standards for companies that clean up spills , and has coordinated the joint response to the spill in the gulf . 
Some analysts said the spill highlights the need to rethink Coast Guard priorities . 
In the past 35 years , Congress has handed the agency at least 27 new responsibilities , according to a tally by Rep. James L. Oberstar -LRB- D-Minn . -RRB- 
, chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee . 
`` They just do n't have enough personnel to carry out all those missions , '' said Oberstar , who favors severing the Coast Guard from the Homeland Security Department . 
`` That 's just not possible . '' 
Coast Guard officials said they did not have budget figures to compare how much is spent on oil-related programs now and before Sept. 11 , 2001 . 
Even current budget numbers for these programs are unclear because spending falls into two categories that encompass many other activities , including fighting invasive species and oversight of recreational boating . 
Marine environmental protection was allotted 2 percent of this year 's operating expenses , marine safety 8 percent . 
The Coast Guard said that before 2001 , the agency was organized differently . 
A private study in 2003 by one Coast Guard officer calculated that , before the attacks , marine environmental programs accounted for 11 percent of operating funds and marine safety accounted for 14 percent . 
Congressional staffers said the lack of reliable figures has complicated their efforts to ensure that vital programs are not neglected . 
