JERUSALEM -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Palestinians in Gaza have acquired anti-aircraft and anti-tank rockets from Libya during its six-month civil war , enlarging but not significantly improving their arsenal , Israeli officials said on Monday . 
While the rebellion against Muammar Gaddafi has stirred concern abroad about the fate of Libya 's aging chemical weapons stockpiles , Israel has no indication Hamas or other Palestinian factions have sought these , the officials said . 
Instead , Israeli officials have detected an inflow of SA-7 anti-aircraft missiles and rocket-propelled grenades -LRB- RPGs -RRB- , said one official , describing an overland supply route that opened up between eastern Libya -- after it fell to the rebels -- and the Gaza Strip via Egypt . 
`` We 've been seeing more SA-7s and RPGs coming across , '' said the official . 
`` It 's not a major qualitative enhancement for them . '' 
The Soviet-designed SA-7 is a shoulder-fired , heat-seeking missile which Israel said Palestinians had previously smuggled into Gaza . 
Rocket-propelled grenades -LRB- RPGs -RRB- , designed to penetrate armor , are plentiful in the territory . 
Another Israeli official said `` thousands '' of the weapons had reached Gaza in recent months , but did not provide figures on how many had originated in Libya . 
Egypt 's Sinai peninsula , which borders both Israel and Gaza , has long seen traffic in arms bound for Palestinians . 
The weapons come up through Sudan or arrive by ship over the Mediterranean . 
State television reported in Cairo on Monday that Egyptian border guards had discovered `` a large quantity '' of weapons at the border with Libya , giving no more details . 
Hamas , an Islamist group that governs Gaza , and smaller armed factions declined comment on the Israeli statements . 
Egypt has stepped up efforts to impose order in Sinai , though Cairo 's authority has been weakened by the citizen revolt that forced President Hosni Mubarak from power . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It would be a never ending battle of rockets and bombs against Israel but on a much wider scale . 
The US has no business in funding the PA or Hamas especially concerning the statements Abu Maven has made recently about never recognizing Israel . 
God bless Israel and it 's eternal undivided capital Jerusalem which all of us Christians support . 
No we do n't . 
Speak for yourself amos033 . 
The Palestinians will be much easier to deal -LRB- constructively -RRB- with than Al Queada . 
Looks like history is set to repeat . 
The palestinians do n't want peace , they want war . 
God Bless Israel This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
