BP attempts to place new cap over Gulf of Mexico oil rupture Work will begin this weekend on installing a better device to collect much more of the crude spilling out of the failed blowout preventer Saturday 10 July 2010 13.25 BST The cap currently on the well is not stopping all the oil from flowing into the sea . 
Photograph : AP BP engineers will spend the weekend trying to arrest the flow of oil gushing into the Gulf of Mexico by lowering a replacement cap over the ruptured well . 
If successful , the scheme could stem the spill in time for David Cameron 's first visit to Washington , which is expected to be dominated by discussion of the environmental disaster . 
The cap currently on the well collects only a fraction of the estimated 35,000-60 ,000 barrels of oil per day spewing out of the failed blowout preventer on the sea bed . 
Installation work on the new cap should start today , and while it is still only a temporary measure it should be able to siphon off far more oil . 
The spill is only likely to be fully curtailed by the relief wells BP is currently drilling more than 5km below sea level . 
A new cap would , however , give BP chief executive Tony Hayward something tangible to present to politicians and investors when BP announces second-quarter results on 27 July and should be in place by 20 July when Cameron is due to arrive in the US . 
The capping procedure , which could take up to 10 days , means that the existing `` top hat '' on the well would have to be removed , allowing oil to flow freely into the sea again . 
But the plan was approved on Friday by national incident commander Thad Allen and energy secretary Steven Chu . 
In an email to staff outlining the plan , Hayward struck an optimistic note , saying the oil group would emerge from the disaster , caused by an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon rig on 20 April , `` as a stronger and safer company in the months and years to come '' . 
BP 's clean-up costs to date amount to some $ 3.12 bn -LRB- # 2bn -RRB- , including the cost of the spill response , containment , relief well drilling , grants to the Gulf states , claims paid , and federal costs . 
To recoup some of those losses , in June BP sent out demands for almost $ 400m to its partners in the well Houston-based Anadarko and Japan 's Mitsui Oil Exploration Company . 
Anadarko owns 25 % of the well and Mitsui has 10 % . 
Anadarko , however , has flatly refused to pay up . 
The latest attempt to halt the spill comes after a week of shuttle diplomacy by Hayward , who is searching for a friendly investor to see off a potential hostile takeover from a rival such as Total , Shell or ExxonMobil . 
After talks with an existing shareholder , the Kuwait Investment Office , about taking a larger stake in the business , the BP boss is understood to have met the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority -LRB- ADIA -RRB- last week . 
The Libyan Investment Authority was also advised to invest in BP shares by Shokri Ghanem , chairman of Libya 's national oil company . 
A version appeared on p37 of the Main section section of the Observer on 13.32 BST on Saturday 10 July 2010 
