Iranian Gholam Reza Karimi works in Azadegan oil field . 
With the drop in prices , Iran is struggling to finance oil and gas development projects . 
-LRB- By Vahid Salemi -- Associated Press -RRB- Despite huge domestic outlays , Hugo Ch vez said Venezuela , with $ 40 billion in central bank reserves , is secure . 
Vladimir Putin built up a reserve by taxing oil profits , but Russia dipped into it for bank rescues . 
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad wo n't say how much Iran has in reserve . 
-LRB- Ng Han Guan - AP -RRB- An oil worker in Saudi Arabia , which has dipped into its cash hoards to rescue domestic financial institutions . 
-LRB- By Hasan Jamali -- Associated Press -RRB- The world 's petro-powers -- the oil-exporting nations armed with vast , high-priced crude reserves -- are looking a little less imposing now that prices are tumbling . 
Instead of flexing their financial muscle abroad , cash-rich oil exporters have been forced to bolster institutions at home , spending billions of dollars to prop up banks , currencies , stock markets and other aspects of their economies . 
Around the world , oil price shock has given way to aftershock . 
Yesterday , crude oil prices briefly touched a 16-month low before closing at $ 67.84 a barrel , up $ 1.09 but less than half their July peak as traders worried that a global economic slowdown will shrink demand for petroleum products . 
For oil exporters , the price decline has compounded the global financial crisis . 
Kazakhstan has raided its once sacrosanct national oil fund to bolster banks that borrowed from abroad ; Iran , which drained much of its rainy day fund to pump up its economy even before oil prices fell , is now having trouble financing oil and gas development projects ; Venezuela might run a deficit to pay for massive social spending ; Mexico has spent billions of dollars defending the peso ; and Russia , Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates have dipped into their cash hoards to rescue domestic financial institutions . 
The sudden change in fortune will dominate the agenda at today 's emergency meeting of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries ; the 13-member cartel that is expected to slash output by 1 million to 2 million barrels a day to stop the slide in oil prices . 
`` The meeting this week shows they 're concerned and they need to micromanage -LRB- output -RRB- some more , '' said Fareed Mohamedi , head of country strategies at PFC Energy , a Washington consulting firm . 
To members of OPEC , this moment recalls the Asian financial crisis in 1997 , when the oil cartel increased production to ease international economic pressures only to see oil prices collapse . 
Now , in a new economic crisis , OPEC members will only be debating how big a cutback is needed . 
There is , however , no need to pass the tin cup for oil exporting countries , analysts note . 
The six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council have $ 2 trillion of financial reserves . 
Russia 's and Kazakhstan 's financial reserves are big enough , for now , to stave off the kind of crisis that shook both nations in 1998 . 
Even populous and impoverished Nigeria has paid off foreign debts and built up reserves . 
Moreover , the average oil price has still been higher than in the previous year , according to OPEC . 
Kuwait 's finance ministry said last week that it had collected $ 54 billion in revenue in the first half of the year , more than it had anticipated for the entire year . 
The spike in prices has also happened so quickly that oil exporting nations have n't had time to raise the price assumptions used for spending plans . 
The Saudi 2008 budget assumes prices between $ 40 and $ 45 a barrel . 
`` Many of these countries were much more prudent than they were in past , '' said Robin West , chairman of PFC Energy . 
As a result , he said , most oil exporters `` are still in pretty good cash positions for now . '' 
The biggest exceptions are Iran and Venezuela , two of the Bush administration 's main adversaries . 
