Alan Greenspan , once viewed as the infallible architect of U.S. prosperity , was called on the carpet yesterday , pilloried by a congressional committee for decisions that contributed to the financial crisis devastating world markets . 
The former chairman of the Federal Reserve said the crisis had shaken his very understanding of how markets work , and agreed that certain financial derivatives should be regulated -- an idea he had long resisted . 
When he stepped down as Fed chairman less than three years ago , Congress treated Greenspan as an oracle , one of the great economic statesmen of all time . 
Yesterday , many members of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee treated him as a hostile witness . 
`` You found that your view of the world , your ideology was not right , it was not working ? '' 
said Rep. Henry A. Waxman -LRB- D-Calif . -RRB- 
, the committee chairman . 
`` Absolutely , precisely , '' Greenspan said . 
`` You know , that 's precisely the reason I was shocked , because I have been going for 40 years or more with very considerable evidence that it was working exceptionally well . '' 
Greenspan alternately defended his legacy and acknowledged mistakes . 
Waxman asked whether the former chairman was wrong to consistently oppose regulating the multitrillion dollar derivative market that has contributed to the financial crisis . 
`` Well , partially , '' said Greenspan , before stressing the difference between credit-default swaps and other types of derivatives . 
With the global financial system unraveling , economists and political leaders are coming to doubt some of Greenspan 's most closely held views : that markets can exact self-discipline , that central bankers should generally not try to prick bubbles in the price of houses or tech stocks , that a policymaker 's most powerful tool to encourage growth is to stay out of the way . 
Even Greenspan seemed genuinely perplexed yesterday by all that had happened , hard-pressed to explain how formerly fundamental truths about how markets work could have proved so wrong . 
Members of Congress who not long ago would seek Greenspan 's blessing for their preferred public policies were at turns combative and disdainful . 
Rep. John Yarmuth -LRB- D-Ky . -RRB- 
called him a `` Bill Buckner , '' referring to the Boston Red Sox first baseman who missed an easy ground ball against the Mets in the 1986 World Series , costing the team the game . 
The tough talk reflected a widening sense that some of Greenspan 's apparent successes in managing the economy from 1987 to 2006 were in fact illusory , that they came at the cost of building the biggest credit bubble in world history . 
`` Markets and societies move on belief systems , '' said James Grant , editor of Grant 's Interest Rate Observer and a longtime critic of Greenspan . 
`` The belief system of finance featured the notion that someone with unusual power to see around corners and through walls and into the future was running things , and that someone was Alan Greenspan . '' 
