By Bryony Jones for CNN Protesters have taken control of several key cities across Libya , but government forces appear to be fighting back . 
U.N. has imposed sanctions against Gadhafi , freezing assets and blocking travel Some experts are calling for a no-fly zone , but further U.N. resolution would be needed Libya 's ambassador to U.S. says his people are being ` slaughtered like sheep ' , pleads for action -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- More than two weeks after protests against Moammar Gadhafi 's regime began , the Libyan leader is still clinging to power , insisting `` we will fight until the last man and woman to defend Libya . '' 
Continuing unrest and violence has left experts warning of a major humanitarian disaster , as thousands of people flee across the borders into neighboring Tunisia and Egypt . 
So what can the international community do to stop further bloodshed ? 
And will anything they do convince Gadhafi to step down after more than 40 years in power ? 
What about a no-fly zone to keep Libyan military aircraft out of the skies ? 
Some witnesses have accused pro-Gadhafi forces of firing on civilians from the air , but U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates and Michael Mullen , chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , said Tuesday that these reports could not be confirmed . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said the imposition of a no-fly zone was under consideration . 
But Mullen said doing so would be `` an extraordinarily complex operation . '' 
Ali Suleiman Aujali , the Libyan ambassador to the U.S. who broke with the Libyan government over the use of force against protesters , told CNN 's Wolf Blitzer that his people were being `` slaughtered like sheep '' and the international community needed to step in -- or else stop encouraging the uprising . 
Should US arm Libyan rebels ? 
John McCain pushes Libya no-fly zone `` They have to dominate the skies , they have to stop the march of the tanks towards Misrata and towards Tripoli , '' he said . 
`` They have to take measures to stop these massacres going on in my country . 
If you ca n't act now , then do n't encourage us to die . '' 
John Bellinger , a former legal adviser to the U.S. State Department , told CNN , `` Legally , there is no authority for the United States or any other country to do that under international law unless authorized by the Security Council . 
`` Politically it could be quite problematic ... for the United States or NATO to begin shooting down Libyan aircraft , even in the face of the things that Gadhafi is doing against his own nationals . '' 
What role does the United Nations play ? 
The United Nations Security Council has already taken some action against the Gadhafi regime , but it has not authorized the use of armed force . 
Its members met at the weekend and voted unanimously for sanctions , including an arms embargo , assets freeze , and a travel ban for Gadhafi , his family , and key associates . 
However , they did not support calls for a no-fly-zone , and any decision on whether to impose one is likely to have to wait for a further U.N. resolution . 
If the U.N. did vote in favor of a no-fly-zone , NATO would likely play some role in enforcing it , but NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen insists no action could be taken without a U.N. mandate . 
`` A no-fly-zone is not a part of the U.N. Security Council resolution , and a far-reaching approach like that would require a U.N. Security Council mandate , '' he told CNN . 
`` It 's a hypothetical question at this stage , but if the issue is raised , and if there is a request -LRB- for cooperation -RRB- then the NATO council will consider it , but that 's not the case for the time being . 
`` We have started preparations for all eventualities , but I think it is a bit premature to outline any timeline . '' 
Is Italy 's decision to suspend its non-aggression pact significant ? 
If any military action , such as enforcing a no-fly-zone , were to be taken , troops would likely have to use air bases in Italy . 
Italy is also home to the U.S. Navy 's Sixth Fleet . 
Under a friendship treaty , signed three years ago by Gadhafi and Italian PM Silvio Berlusconi , Italy agreed to pay Libya compensation for its colonial rule of the country , and Libya pledged to help stem the tide of refugees heading for Italy from its shores . 
But the pact also included a non-aggression clause , under which Italy promised not to allow its territories to be used to launch military operations against Libya . 
The treaty was suspended over the weekend . 
What happens to Libya after Gadhafi ? 
Explain it to me : Libya unrest Possible military aid to Libya Explain it to me : Libya unrest Kurt Volker , a former U.S. ambassador to NATO , told CNN that Italy 's suspension of the pact would not immediately enable military operations to be launched from that country . 
`` If you 're really trying to think about military action , do you have some kind of authorization to do so ? 
You would need a U.N. mandate and possibly a NATO declaration or both , and there is n't anything like that on the table at the moment , '' he said . 
Aldo Amati , deputy press secretary for the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs , insisted the treaty had not been suspended to pave the way for military action . 
`` There 's no connection , '' he told CNN . 
`` There 's no link between the two things . '' 
What about sanctions against the Gadhafi regime ? 
Gadhafi is no stranger to sanctions : He was subject to them for many years following Libya 's refusal to hand over suspects in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie in 1988 , in which 270 people were killed . 
This time around though , the international community has taken further action , freezing the Libyan leader 's assets and those of his family and the regime . 
The U.S. alone has blocked access to at least $ 30 billion in Libyan government assets , the largest amount ever blocked under a sanctions program . 
Travel bans too are likely to impact the Gadhafi family 's jet-setting lifestyle . 
What will the U.S. do ? 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton insists that : `` Nothing is off the table , so long as the Libyan government continues to threaten and kill Libyan citizens . '' 
However , analysts say it seems unlikely that that the U.S. would launch attacks on Libya without a U.N. mandate . 
Rosemary Hollis , Professor of Middle East Policy Studies at City University London , said : `` The messy fact of Afghanistan and Iraq has been to deter any kind of gung-ho notion that you can sort our any very foreign country by force . '' 
But some prominent figures have called for other forms of military action to be taken - and quickly . 
Senator John McCain -LRB- R-Arizona -RRB- is one of those urging the introduction of a no-fly-zone : `` Libyan pilots are n't going to fly if there 's a no-fly-zone . '' 
And Senator Joe Lieberman -LRB- I-Connecticut -RRB- has gone one further , arguing that as well as offering aid to the rebels , the U.S. should be supplying them with weapons . 
Thomas Donnelly , of the American Enterprise Institute , says the mere sight of U.S. fighter jets over Libya would send a powerful message to Gadhafi . 
`` Even if we just buzzed the palace and did n't release any ordnance , the symbolic action or the psychological effect could be enough to bring the war to a quick conclusion , '' he said . 
The U.S. military is already close by : At least one destroyer is in the Mediterranean , and the amphibious assault ship the USS Kearsarge is in the Red Sea , close to the Suez Canal . 
The Kearsarge is well equipped to deal with casualties : it houses a floating hospital -- including six operating theaters -- which can care for up to 600 patients . 
The aircraft carrier USS Enterprise and its strike group are also in the region , able to move closer , if needed . 
However , Hollis said without a U.N. resolution , action remains unlikely . 
`` The only way I think they would launch military action without a clear U.N. mandate is by covertly supporting the opposition on the ground , '' she said . 
