By Pam Benson , Jeniffer Rizzo and Adam Levine , CNN Rebel fighters shoot into the air during a funeral for slain comrades in Ajdabiya , Libya . 
Gadhafi military units are defecting , says a U.S. official Aiding the opposition is complicated Washington -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Anti-Gadhafi fighters appear to have the resources to carry on the fight against the Libyan government for some time , according to a U.S. official . 
`` This could be a sustained conflict , '' said the official , but acknowledged this was a fluid situation . 
When asked if the conflict in Libya was now becoming a civil war , the official , who is knowledgeable about U.S. assessments , said the fighting `` has the characteristics of a civil war . '' 
The anti-government forces are bolstered by some weapon caches previously under the control of the Libyan government , according to a U.S. official and military officials not authorized to speak on the record . 
Defectors from the Libyan military are helping the rebels with fighting and armaments . 
`` Whole units of the Libyan army have now defected '' said a military official . 
That said , the United States does not have a good read yet on how much of the Libyan military leader Moammar Gadhafi still may control . 
When asked about what the anti-government forces had in their control , one of the military officials said they have tanks and anti-aircraft guns . 
Some of this , of course , comes from defecting units , but there also has been captures of weapons caches , the officials said . 
There are large caches of weapons around the country that the official said are no longer secure . 
Rebels have been seen with shoulder-fired missiles , anti-tank missiles and small-arms such as rocket-propelled grenades . 
The prospect of a civil war could dampen the will of the United States and other countries to intervene directly in the country . 
American officials have expressed caution regarding military intervention , stressing the need for humanitarian aid first . 
President Barack Obama said Thursday he wanted to ensure the United States was ready to respond , if `` defenseless civilians were finding themselves trapped and in grave danger . '' 
Aiding the opposition is also complicated , officials said , because of the lack of clarity about the capability , motives and strength of the disparate groups comprising the opposition . 
White House and State Department officials said Friday that even though the opposition is arming itself and fighting the government , that does not entitle Gadhafi to fight his own people . 
Gadhafi , officials said , lost his legitimacy when his forces fired on innocent protesters . 
`` It is the people of Libya that are forced to defend themselves in light of the aggression that the Libyan regime has carried on , not just a military forces , but by these mercenaries that are in the employment of Colonel Gadhafi , '' State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said . 
`` The unrest is aimed at ending his rule , his oppressive and violent rule , and we believe that that would result in a more peaceful Libya and would allow the Libyan people to take the kind of steps that they want to take towards a representative democratic government that addresses their legitimate grievances and respects their aspirations , '' said White House spokesman Jay Carney . 
Earlier in the week , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said the situation demands `` a strong and strategic American response . '' 
`` In the years ahead , Libya could become a peaceful democracy , or it could face protracted civil war , or it could descend into chaos . 
The stakes are high , '' said Clinton . 
Libya being in a civil war would `` neither enhance or diminish your right as a third party actor to intervene , '' but the foremost consideration needs to be whether Gadhafi is needlessly cruel to the people of Libya , said Ruth Wedgwood , professor at Johns Hopkins School of International Advanced Studies . 
`` Can a government defend itself ? 
Yes , '' Wedgwood said . 
`` Can a government use means that are grotesquely excessive ? 
No. '' CNN 's Barbara Starr contributed to this report . 
