2 men charged in death of Chicago teen who performed in inauguration event . 
-LRB- Updated at 11:20 a.m. ET , 6:20 p.m. local time -RRB- Before reports of the killings emerged , a report on Libyan state TV said people in Zawiya , west of Tripoli , and `` their public leadership have secured and took control over the city from the armed terrorist elements . '' 
-LRB- Posted at 11:06 a.m. ET , 6:06 p.m. local time -RRB- At least 15 people have been killed and 200 more wounded in the Libyan city of Zawiya , an eyewitness told CNN . 
Wounded people started arriving at the hospital Friday morning . 
Most of the injuries resulted from gunshots , and many of the injuries were to the head and chest . 
The eyewitness said the hospital is running out of medical supplies . 
`` There is a river of blood here in the hospital . 
The situation is very bad , '' he said . 
Subject : URGENT OPEN LETTER TO BAN KI-MOON , UN SECRETARY GENERAL Date : Sat , 5 Mar 2011 14:30:12 +1100 I urge you , that either you or the UN or the Prosecutor of the International Court of Justice issue a warning ASAP to Gaddafi 's pilots and army that they will be individually held responsible for any civilian deaths and charged with crimes against humanity . 
Secondly , a no fly zone over Libya should be declared ASAP . 
Gaddafi has all the money in the world to finance mercenary armies and pilots as China and India are continuing importing Libyan oil , with payments going to Gaddafi 's regime . 
Thirdly , the UN should resolve to send in UN troops to Libya to stop the civil war and to allow the people of Libya to decide their own future . 
The world ca n't just stand by when there is a totally unequal David and Goliath struggle unfolding in Libya between the rag-tag army of revolutionaries and Gaddafi 's well equipped professional killers . 
It 's the duty of the world to prevent the massacre of the civilian freedom fighters of Libya , as it happened in the 1956 Hungarian Revolution . 
There too , the revolution started as a peaceful demonstration against the tyrannical regime . 
People only took up arms there too after State Security Police shot at them . 
The revolutionaries held out for over a week , but the overwhelming force of the invading Soviet army , comparable to Gaddafi 's reliance on external professional mercenaries , squashed the revolution , killing over 2500 freedom fighters . 
Let this not happen in Libya ! 
Andris Heks 568 Peach Tree Rd Megalong 2785 NSW Australia Ph : 047879173 -LRB- Please notify if published -RRB- No Andris , neither the U.S. nor the U.N. have ant business interfering in the internal affairs of Libya . 
We need to let the Libyans decide their own future and the way to do that is to adopt a `` laissez-fair '' policy . 
Not all Libyans want Qadaffi gone despite all the propaganda spewed by the right-wing news media !!! March 5 , 2011 at 6:15 am | Report abuse | Sorry Andris about the missprint above . 
I meant `` any '' , not `` ant '' . 
Excuse me , please . 
March 5 , 2011 at 6:21 am | Report abuse | They should send Charlie to talk to gadhafi that would be a media paradise . 
Seriously there both crazy and its just ridiculas anyway you look at it from charlie sheen crazy rant to gadhafi cruel insand dictator . 
Just crazy Really kim ? 
All this Qadaffy bashing is starting to get awfully old , but the thugs in Washington want you to feel that way because they want Libya 's oil !!! March 5 , 2011 at 3:58 pm | Report abuse | Por que a discuss # o sobre a l bia agora ? 
Devemos voltar a nossa aten # o para o Brasil e render solidariedade e respeito as fam lia envolvidas no massacre . 
Why the discussion on Libya now ? 
We must turn our attention and one to Brazil and make Solidarity Respect Family massacre not as involved . 
We must turn our attention to Brazil and render solidarity and respect for the families involved in the massacre . 
-LRB- required , but will not be displayed -RRB- CNN welcomes a lively and courteous discussion as long as you follow the Rules of Conduct set forth in our Terms of Service . 
Comments are not pre-screened before they post . 
You agree that anything you post may be used , along with your name and profile picture , in accordance with our Privacy Policy and the license you have granted pursuant to our Terms of Service . 
Carnival in Merida , Mexico seems like they favor throwing candy instead of beads ! 
ie\/11BX93W 7:01 pm ET February 11 , 2013 RETWEET Could the next pope be from Africa or Latin America ? 
