A worker contracted by British Petroleum scrapes oil from a beach after it was inundated by the oil spill from the Deepwater Horizon spill in Port Fourchon , Louisiana May 23 , 2010 . 
VENICE , La\/HOUSTON | Sun May 23 , 2010 7:25 pm EDT VENICE , La\/HOUSTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The U.S. government threatened on Sunday to remove BP from efforts to seal a blown-out oil well in the Gulf of Mexico if it does n't do enough to stop the leak , though it acknowledged only the company and the oil industry have the know-how to halt the deepwater spill . 
The Coast Guard said on Sunday that over 65 miles of Gulf Coast has experienced `` shoreline impact '' and less than half of it could be cleaned up relatively quickly , underscoring the growing ecological toll of the disaster . 
Interior Secretary Ken Salazar said Washington is frustrated and angry that BP Plc missed `` deadline after deadline '' in its efforts to seal the well more than a month after an oil rig explosion triggered the disaster . 
`` I am angry and I am frustrated that BP has been unable to stop this oil from leaking and to stop the pollution from spreading . 
We are 33 days into this effort and deadline after deadline has been missed , '' Salazar said after visiting BP 's U.S. headquarters in Houston on Sunday . 
`` If we find they 're not doing what they 're supposed to be doing , we 'll push them out of the way appropriately , '' he told reporters as the administration maintained its hard line . 
Salazar 's strong comments followed President Barack Obama 's on Saturday , when he blamed the spill on `` a breakdown of responsibility '' at BP . 
The unfolding disaster has become a top priority on Obama 's crowded domestic agenda . 
The chief of the Coast Guard , Admiral Thad Allen , acknowledged on Sunday that the government is forced to rely on BP and the private oil sector to try to plug the gusher . 
At the same time , BP said the containment method it was attempting on the ocean floor was capturing much less of the leaking oil than three days ago . 
Company engineers were readying other short-term solutions , the next one expected to start late on Tuesday . 
But BP Managing Director Bob Dudley said there was `` no certainty '' of success at the unprecedented depths at which they were being tried -- one mile down in the Gulf of Mexico . 
More than a month after a rig explosion triggered what Obama has described as an environmental disaster and `` BP 's mess , '' oil is still spewing virtually unchecked from BP 's ruptured Macondo seabed well . 
At a time of mounting U.S. government and public criticism of the company and its executives over the catastrophic spill , Allen said he trusted BP Chief Executive Tony Hayward , who has made comments downplaying its size and environmental impact . 
Sheets of heavy oil have washed ashore in Louisiana 's fragile marshlands and lesser `` oil debris '' has also reached the coasts of Mississippi and Alabama in what is seen as an ecological and economic calamity for the U.S. Gulf Coast . 
Given the lack of a solution so far and the doubts over BP , Allen was asked on CNN 's `` State of the Union '' why the U.S. government did not completely take over the spill containment operation from the London-based firm . 
`` What makes this an unprecedented anomalous event is access to the discharge site is controlled by the technology that was used for the drilling , which is owned by the private sector , '' Allen said . 
`` They have the eyes and ears that are down there . 
They are necessarily the modality by which this is going to get solved , '' he added . 
Asked too about the apparent growing U.S. lack of confidence in Hayward , Allen said : `` I trust Tony Hayward . 
When I talk to him , I get an answer . '' 
BP has deployed a long suction tube down to the larger of two leaks from the well , but a BP spokesman said on Sunday this captured only 1,360 barrels per day of oil over the 24 hours to midnight Saturday . 
The flow has been declining from the 5,000 barrels -LRB- 210,000 gallons\/795 ,000 liters -RRB- per day the company had said the tube was siphoning off three days ago . 
BP engineers are now preparing a `` top kill , '' pumping heavy fluids into the well to try to shut it off , an operation to begin late Tuesday or early Wednesday , Dudley told CNN . 
Many scientists believe the Gulf spill has already eclipsed the 11 million gallons -LRB- 41 million liters -RRB- spilled by the 1989 Exxon Valdez tanker accident in Alaska . 
They warn the spreading oil could be caught in a powerful ocean current that could take it to the Florida Keys , Cuba and the U.S. East Coast . 
Coast Guard Admiral Mary Landry said 65.6 miles of shoreline has been impacted so far and about 30 acres of marshland . 
She told a briefing that of the area affected on the coast `` 25 miles ... are really readily cleanable and the others are a little harder access but we 'll get to it . '' 
Of the impacted marshland about half of it has heavily oiled she said the rest `` lightly oiled with sheen . '' 
Churchgoers in Louisiana coastal parishes affected by the spill prayed for God 's help . 
`` You -LRB- God -RRB- can clear that oil up , because that oil was down there thousands of years before it came up in the Gulf . 
So you know what to do with it , dear God , '' retired oyster fisherman Herbert Guidry prayed in the New Mount Pilgrim Baptist Church in Houma . 
Analysts say growing ecological and economic damage from the spill could become a political liability for Obama before November congressional elections . 
While also promising to hold Washington accountable for proper oversight of the industry , Obama ramped up pressure on companies linked to the spill : BP , Halliburton and Transocean Ltd. . 
He believed a `` breakdown of responsibility '' between them led to the disaster . 
BP stocks have taken a beating in the markets in the month since the well blowout and rig explosion that killed 11 workers and touched off the spill . 
Its share price shed another 4 percent on Friday in London , extending recent sharp losses . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Fail closed simply means that they are designed so that they need to be activated to remain open , or in the absence of a signal to an activator forcing them open they close . 
This is mandated in many situations for safety and fire prevention . 
It must be mandated on Blow Out Preventers for all offshore rigs . 
The industry will lobby to avoid this so we the people must be diligent in demanding it without loop holes . 
Please copy this and post it every where you can Do the math , it s ALWAYS ABOUT THE MONEY at 70,000 barrels a day x $ 70 a barrel BP will make $ 766,500,000 a year . 
If BP stops the leak they would not be allowed to complete the two relief wells . 
Once their grouse negligence is brought out , they would never be allowed to drill that reservoir . 
So they keep it leaking because that reservoir will pay for the clean up . 
They are not about to loose $ 10,000,000,000 dollars over the life of the reservoir and pay the clean up cost , unless the Government makes them . 
BP keeps taking wks between actions but they started drilling two wells right away . 
Bp should have a second pipe lowered and ready on stand by , they should have tried the hole shot wks ago and the mud fill wks ago . 
If BP would have stopped the leak wks ago they never get the $ 10,000,000,000 . 
If BP would come out $ 10,000,000,000 ahead by stopping the leak in 10 days they would have don it , but the clean up cost would have been about the same with no money from the relief wells . 
IT S ALWAYS ABOUT THE MONEY . 
Believe me BP DID THE MATH ! 
Lets hope that the oil company executives got paid out with sufficiently large bonuses , earned by cutting corners , so as not to be unduly inconvenienced for this science fiction scale catastrophe . 
Perhaps this will get rid of those pesky fisherman , nature lovers , and tourists , who just get in the way . 
Seriously , if they did care about anyone else they would have had a plan in place . 
The fact is , executives are already paid out , and have no stake in what happens next to their large corporations or banks . 
An act of unspeakable violence has been done . 
The people have to take back their own country , and lest this become our French revolution moment , what we really need to pray for is PEACEFUL change , because any non peaceful change will sow the seeds of its own illegitimacy , and only replace one problem with another . 
The ruling class succeeds because they are more organized than the ruled . 
We must not allow ourselves to be divided arguing wither the earth is flat . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
