By the CNN Wire Staff NEW : NATO cites a `` weapons system failure '' for causing errant strike NEW : NATO `` regrets the loss of innocent lives , '' official says A Libyan official blames NATO , French , British and U.S. leaders for `` murder and crimes '' Dafniya , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- NATO acknowledged Sunday that an errant airstrike in Tripoli may have caused `` a number of civilian casualties . '' 
Libya 's government had claimed earlier Sunday that nine people were killed and six injured when a NATO strike hit a residential neighborhood in the Libyan capital . 
`` This is cold-blooded murder , '' government spokesman Musa Ibrahim said at the scene in Tripoli . 
`` Is this the protection of civilians ? 
Is this really the search for peace and democracy in Libya , to attack peaceful neighborhoods of Tripoli ? '' 
NATO said in a statement Sunday that a military missile site was the strike 's intended target . 
`` However , it appears that one weapon did not strike the intended target and that there may have been a weapons system failure , '' the statement said . 
Charles Bouchard said the organization `` regrets the loss of innocent lives . '' 
Cmdr. Mike Bracken told CNN Sunday that NATO was doing everything it could to avoid civilian casualties , citing a case in which a missile had been diverted after it was fired last week . 
The statement from NATO noted that the air campaign over Libya has involved more than 11,500 sorties , `` and every mission is planned and executed with tremendous care to avoid civilian casualties . 
NATO remains fully committed to this operation . '' 
On Saturday , the alliance denied earlier Libyan claims it was killing civilians . 
`` The claims made by Gadhafi and members of his regime are outrageous . 
It is Gadhafi and his regime that have been systematically and brutally attacking the Libyan people , '' NATO spokeswoman Oana Lungescu in response to Libyan government accusations . 
Separately , at least eight people were killed and 30 were wounded in fighting in Dafniya , west of Misrata , according to records at Al-Hikma hospital and a field hospital that are treating casualties . 
Most of the dead appear to be rebel fighters . 
A rebel who identified himself only as Walid said he and fellow fighters came under `` intense , intense , intense '' shelling when they tried to advance on Gadhafi forces Sunday . 
They were forced to retreat , allowing Gadhafi forces to advance , he told CNN . 
Bombardments began in the Dafniya area on Sunday morning , and a CNN crew could hear them continue on a fairly regular basis through the day . 
A stream of wounded people flowed into a makeshift hospital in Dafniya , and witnesses reported seeing intense artillery fire coming from both sides of the clashes . 
A local radio station in Misrata was calling for people to donate O-positive blood to meet increased demand after the fighting Sunday . 
Ibrahim , the Libyan government spokesman , said the government holds NATO , British Prime Minister David Cameron , French President Nicolas Sarkozy and U.S. President Barack Obama `` responsible morally and legally for this murder and crimes '' for the alleged strike that killed nine in Tripoli on Sunday . 
State TV reported that three of the people killed belonged to the same family . 
The network broadcast footage of a destroyed building and a chaotic scene of rescue teams and civilians pulling a body from the rubble . 
The incident occurred a day after NATO acknowledged that its aircraft had mistakenly struck vehicles aligned with the Libyan opposition in the hotly contested eastern oil city of al-Brega . 
On Saturday , NATO expressed regret over the incident . 
NATO did not provide details as to how many people , if any , died or were injured in the al-Brega strike , which took place on Thursday . 
But in a statement released Saturday , NATO admitted that its forces hit vehicles that were `` part of an opposition patrol '' -- an incident the military alliance described as `` unfortunate . '' 
For weeks , NATO forces have been targeting forces loyal to Gadhafi in an effort to prevent civilian casualties . 
Most of those strikes have come from missiles fired from off-shore ships or aircraft flying high above the north African nation , though earlier this month British and French attack helicopters did fly closer to the ground in al-Brega to go after targets in that city more precisely . 
Al-Brega is on a frontline -- east of Gadhafi 's base in Tripoli and west of the rebels ' headquarters in Benghazi -- in fighting that has taken place between the two sides over the past several months . 
In its statement , NATO said that `` a column of military vehicles , including tanks , '' were spotted Thursday around al-Brega where Gadhafi forces `` had recently been operating . '' 
During what it called `` a particularly complex and fluid battle scenario , '' leaders in the military alliance ordered a strike after determining these vehicles posed `` a threat to civilians . '' 
`` We regret any possible loss of life or injuries caused by this unfortunate incident , '' NATO said in its statement . 
CNN 's Ben Wedeman , Yousuf Basil and Bharati Naik contributed to this report . 
