By the CNN Wire Staff NEW : NATO says , `` This was a precision strike on a legitimate military target '' NEW :3 rockets from Gadhafi forces strike near port in rebel-held Misrata The Libyan government alleges 15 people , including three children , died Fighting is ongoing near Dafniya , west of Misrata Tripoli , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- NATO said Monday that a residential building west of Tripoli was targeted early Monday in an airstrike that the Libyan government alleges killed 15 people , including three children . 
NATO said in a statement that , while it could not confirm the casualties , `` we would regret any loss of civilian life and we go to great lengths to avoid civilian casualties . '' 
The organization added that the strike was justified . 
`` This was a precision strike on a legitimate military target -- a command-and-control node which was directly involved in coordinating systematic attacks on the Libyan people , '' NATO said in the statement . 
`` The facility which was struck was identified as a command-and-control node through rigorous analysis based on persistent intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance carried out over a prolonged period of time , '' it said . 
`` This strike will greatly degrade the Gadhafi regime forces ' ability to carry on their barbaric assault against the Libyan people , '' said NATO Lt.-Gen . 
Charles Bouchard , referring to the Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
Monday 's incident occurred about 4 a.m. -LRB- 10 p.m. ET Sunday -RRB- , said Libyan government spokesman Musa Ibrahim , and included strikes from eight rockets . 
Five houses and a farm were hit in the Surman area , he said . 
Surman is west of Tripoli . 
One of the homes belongs to Khaled el-Kweldi , a top aide to Gadhafi , Ibrahim said . 
He was not home at the time of the attack , but Khaleda el-Kweldi , a 6-year-old girl , was killed , along with Khalid el-Kweldi , a 4-year-old boy , the spokesman said . 
Another 6-year-old , Salam Lanouri , was also killed , according to Ibrahim . 
Monday 's strike in Surman came a day after NATO acknowledged an errant airstrike in Tripoli may have caused `` a number of civilian casualties . '' 
Libya 's government said Sunday that nine people were killed and six wounded when a NATO strike hit a residential neighborhood in the Libyan capital . 
NATO said Sunday that a military missile site was the intended target . 
`` However , it appears that one weapon did not strike the intended target and that there may have been a weapons system failure , '' a NATO statement said . 
Bouchard said the organization `` regrets the loss of innocent lives . '' 
`` This is cold-blooded murder , '' Ibrahim said at the scene of the Sunday attack . 
`` Is this the protection of civilians ? 
Is this really the search for peace and democracy in Libya , to attack peaceful neighborhoods of Tripoli ? '' 
Cmdr. Mike Bracken said Sunday that NATO was doing everything it could to avoid civilian casualties , citing a case last week in which a missile was diverted after it was fired . 
NATO noted that the air campaign over Libya has involved more than 11,500 sorties , `` and every mission is planned and executed with tremendous care to avoid civilian casualties . 
NATO remains fully committed to this operation . '' 
On Saturday , the alliance denied earlier Libyan allegations it was killing civilians . 
`` The claims made by Gadhafi and members of his regime are outrageous . 
It is Gadhafi and his regime that have been systematically and brutally attacking the Libyan people , '' NATO spokeswoman Oana Lungescu said in response to Libyan government accusations . 
The European Union 's Foreign Affairs Council , meeting Monday in Luxembourg , stepped up sanctions on Gadhafi 's regime , freezing assets of `` six port authorities under the regime 's control . '' 
`` The EU is taking further action against the military arsenal used by the regime against its own citizens , '' the organization said . 
Humanitarian shipments are exempt from the measure , it added . 
`` Time is not on Gadhafi 's side , '' the organization said . 
`` He has lost all legitimacy to remain in power . 
... The time has come for a new chapter where Libyans can choose their own future . '' 
Late Monday , Gadhafi forces fired three rockets near the port in rebel-held Misrata , said CNN reporters , who saw the strikes from their hotel . 
There were no immediate reports of casualties . 
Fighting was ongoing Monday between rebels and troops in Dafniya , west of Misrata . 
Several rounds of bombardments could be heard by a CNN crew , and three dead rebels were taken to a field hospital near the front lines . 
Hospital staff said 20 wounded rebels were taken to the hospital . 
Earlier Monday , the bodies of three other rebels were taken to a second field hospital . 
At least eight people died and 30 were wounded Sunday in the fighting , according to records at Al-Hikma hospital and a field hospital . 
Most of the dead appeared to be rebel fighters . 
Ibrahim , the Libyan government spokesman , said Sunday the government holds NATO , British Prime Minister David Cameron , French President Nicolas Sarkozy and U.S. President Barack Obama `` responsible morally and legally for this murder and crimes '' for the Sunday incident . 
On Saturday , NATO acknowledged its aircraft had mistakenly struck vehicles aligned with the Libyan opposition in the hotly contested eastern oil city of al-Brega . 
NATO did not provide details as to how many casualties , if any , resulted from the al-Brega strike , which took place Thursday . 
But in a statement Saturday , NATO admitted its forces hit vehicles that were `` part of an opposition patrol , '' an incident the military alliance described as `` unfortunate . '' 
For weeks , NATO forces have been targeting forces loyal to Gadhafi in an effort to prevent them from inflicting civilian casualties . 
Most of those strikes have come from missiles fired from off-shore ships or aircraft flying high above the North African nation , though this month British and French attack helicopters flew closer to the ground in al-Brega to go after targets in that city more precisely . 
Al-Brega is on a frontline -- east of Gadhafi 's base in Tripoli and west of the rebels ' headquarters in Benghazi -- in fighting that has taken place between the two sides over the past several months . 
NATO said that `` a column of military vehicles , including tanks '' was spotted Thursday around al-Brega where Gadhafi forces `` had recently been operating . '' 
During what it called `` a particularly complex and fluid battle scenario , '' leaders in the military alliance ordered a strike after determining these vehicles posed `` a threat to civilians . '' 
`` We regret any possible loss of life or injuries caused by this unfortunate incident , '' NATO said . 
CNN 's Per Nyberg , Stefan Simons , Mary Rogers and Ben Wedeman contributed to this report . 
