UPDATE 4-US says most BP spill oil is gone or degrading \* 50 percent of BP oil `` completely gone from the system '' \* Most of the rest rapidly degrading , NOAA chief says \* Microscopic droplets still toxic to marine wildlife -LRB- Updates with NOAA 's Lubchenco , environmental comment -RRB- By Deborah Zabarenko , Environment Correspondent WASHINGTON , Aug 4 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Most oil from the BP -LRB- BP . 
L -RRB- -LRB- BP . 
N -RRB- spill is gone from the Gulf of Mexico or has degraded into tiny particles , with 26 percent remaining as a sheen or tarballs , buried in sediment or washed ashore , U.S. scientists said on Wednesday . 
`` At least 50 percent of the oil that was released is now completely gone from the system , and most of the remainder is degrading rapidly or is being removed from the beaches , '' Jane Lubchenco , administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , told a White House briefing . 
A U.S. report released earlier in the day said 74 percent of about 4.9 million barrels released since the April 20 blowout at BP 's Deepwater Horizon rig can be accounted for : 25 percent was burned , skimmed or directly recovered from the wellhead , 25 percent naturally evaporated or dissolved and 24 percent was dispersed , either naturally or with chemicals . 
Even that dispersed oil can leave tiny particles in the water column between the sea floor and the surface , which pose a potential hazard to wildlife , Lubchenco said . 
A final 26 percent of oil is considered `` residual '' and is less easily categorized . 
Some is present as a light sheen on the ocean or as tarballs , some may have already washed ashore or been collected , some is buried in sand and sediment . 
Both the dispersed and residual oil , accounting for nearly half the total , include oil that is in the process of biodegrading . 
Until it has been totally broken down by natural forces and bacteria into water and carbon dioxide , it still can be dangerous , Lubchenco said . 
`` Oil that is in microscopic droplets that is still there may be toxic to any of the small creatures under the water that are encountered , '' she said . 
`` And even in very small droplets , it ... can be toxic . '' 
`` WHAT HAPPENED TO THE OIL ? '' 
The U.S. report , titled `` BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Budget : What Happened to the Oil ? '' 
found 33 percent of the oil was dealt with by government and private cleanup efforts . 
This 33 percent consisted of 17 percent captured straight from the wellhead , 5 percent by burning , 3 percent by skimming and 8 percent by chemical dispersion . 
Some environmental experts were skeptical of the government 's presentation . 
`` It 's troubling that reports are lumping dispersed oil still lurking under the water 's surface with oil that 's been captured , contributing to the sense that the oil that 's been swept under the rug is no longer a problem , '' Dr. Bruce Stein of the National Wildlife Federation said in a statement . 
`` But scientific evidence shows this oil is far from gone , '' he said , citing signs of oil-and-dispersant mix under shells of blue crab larvae , at the base of the Gulf food chain . 
The U.S. report was released just before officials from NOAA and the Environmental Protection Agency testified at a U.S. Senate hearing about the use of dispersant chemicals to combat the BP spill . 
Paul Anastas , of EPA 's office of research and development , acknowledged there were `` environmental tradeoffs '' to consider when using dispersants . 
Anastas told the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee that dispersants were generally less toxic than oil , cut the risk to shorelines and degraded quickly , in days or weeks . 
Much is unknown about the impact of oil and dispersants on the Gulf surface and deep down and study is needed now , Edward Overton of Louisiana State University told the committee . 
`` We certainly need to monitor for the long-term damage , how long will it take species to come back , '' Overton said . 
Jackie Savitz , a scientist at the marine conservation organization Oceana , discounted short-term EPA studies showing that most dispersant chemicals are less toxic than the oil . 
`` It 's a 48 - or 96-hour study , '' Savitz told the panel . 
`` Even if all the dispersant goes away in that period of time and the animal does n't die , that does n't mean that it 's going to survive and grow and flourish and be able to escape predators . '' 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Only time will tell how much damage the oil and dispersants have done to our environment . 
Do n't be fooled by over zealous news articles . 
Only time will tell . 
why does this sound like it was written by BP ? 
Wow , I 'm so happy that the oil disappeared . 
I was worried that it would have to obey the laws of chemistry and physics . 
: D Good thing BP and the US Coast Guard have magic powers . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
