Syria crisis : Fresh clashes in Aleppo The BBC 's Ian Pannell and cameraman Darren Conway were trapped by fighting in Aleppo . 
Their report contains graphic images of victims There have been fresh reports of clashes and attacks by helicopter gunships in Aleppo as the Syrian army offensive enters its fourth day . 
State TV said Syrian forces were inflicting heavy losses on `` terrorist groups '' in Aleppo and also claimed government successes in Homs . 
Thousands of refugees are continuing to flee Aleppo - Syria 's commercial hub . 
Meanwhile the US and Turkey have agreed to step up efforts to achieve `` political transition '' in Syria . 
This would include the departure of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad , the White House said . 
According to Syrian TV , government troops have been gaining ground in several Aleppo neighborhoods . 
On Monday , it reported that the army had won complete control over Salah al-Din , one of the areas of Aleppo where rebel fighters from the Free Syrian Army had become entrenched . 
Analysts say Salah al-Din provides an important route for Syrian troop reinforcements coming from the south . 
But activists and rebel commanders denied that government forces had gained ground there . 
Rebel fighters are outgunned by Syrian government forces but do have some anti-aircraft weapons They report renewed heavy shelling and helicopter gunship attacks there and in other rebel-held areas on Tuesday , especially around the Sakhour quarter on the north-east side of Aleppo . 
Fierce fighting also taken place near the headquarters of the feared Air Force Intelligence agency to the west of the city , they say . 
State television completely ignored events in Aleppo in its early morning news programs on Tuesday , the BBC 's Jim Muir in Beirut says . 
Instead , it broadcast a detailed report from Homs , where it said the quarter of Qarabis , which has long been held by rebel fighters , had finally fallen to government forces . 
But later bulletins carried reports of Syrian forces inflicting heavy losses on '' terrorist groups '' in Aleppo districts . 
Correspondents say neither side can afford to lose Aleppo , Syria 's largest city and is the country 's industrial and financial center . 
Until this month it had been spared the daily bloodshed seen in other cities since the uprising began in March 2011 . 
Supplies are now reported to be running out in certain areas and those citizens remaining in the city face long queues for bread . 
Melissa Fleming , a spokeswoman for the UN refugee agency , the UNHCR , said thousands of frightened residents had sought shelter from the fighting in schools , mosques and public buildings . 
`` These are the people who have n't fled the city , have n't had the means or feel that it 's too dangerous to make that journey , '' she said . 
`` There are 32 schools in Aleppo that we 've identified and in each of those schools , we have heard , or we have witnessed , that 250-300 people were packed inside , many of these families , kids . '' 
In a phone call on Monday , US President Barack Obama and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan agreed to help the growing numbers of refugees - both inside Syria and in neighbouring countries . 
Turkey has been a staunch critic of President Assad and has given refuge to large numbers of army defectors . 
Thousands of Syrian refugees are also living in refugee camps on the Turkish side of the countries ' long border . 
Source : UNHCR , 31 July 2012 Those arriving from Aleppo in recent days have spoken of incessant shelling . 
As the crisis deepened , Iran - a close ally of Damascus - warned Turkey not to intervene militarily , the Syrian state-controlled al-Watan newspaper said . 
`` Any attack on Syrian territory will meet with a harsh response , and the Iranian-Syrian mutual defense agreement will be activated , '' it reported on Monday . 
The newspaper said Turkey and the US were planning to create `` a safe haven guarded by the armed gangs '' in the north of Syria . 
`` Turkey has received very strong warnings in the past few hours and the following message - beware changing the rules of the game , '' al-Watan said . 
Turkey has said it will use troops if necessary to prevent another Halabja - a reference to a notorious massacre in Saddam Hussein 's Iraq . 
Greek officials were due to reveal further details of new border security plans on Tuesday , aimed at stopping Syrian refugees crossing from Turkey . 
On Monday , Greece - one of the busiest entry points for illegal immigrants entering the EU - said it was quadrupling the number of guards along its border with Turkey . 
In New York , UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon repeated that he was particularly concerned by the continued use of heavy weapons by Syrian government forces . 
He also called on the Syrian government to renounce the possibility of using chemical weapons under any circumstances , and to secure its stockpiles . 
Damascus has implicitly acknowledged its possession of chemical weapons but said it would not use them against its own people , only against foreign invaders . 
If you are happy to be contacted by a BBC journalist please leave a telephone number that we can contact you on . 
In some cases a selection of your comments will be published , displaying your name as you provide it and location , unless you state otherwise . 
Your contact details will never be published . 
When sending us pictures , video or eyewitness accounts at no time should you endanger yourself or others , take any unnecessary risks or infringe any laws . 
Please ensure you have read the terms and conditions . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
