UK plays down swine flu pandemic implications Health officials say WHO 's declaration is to do with geography , not deadliness of the virus Thursday 11 June 2009 16.17 BST Nicola Sturgeon , the Scottish health minister . 
who said her strategy was to mitigate the spread of swine flu . 
Photograph : David Moir\/Reuters The formal declaration of a global flu pandemic is bound to trigger anxiety and possibly panic . 
It 's one thing to say Britain is having outbreaks of swine flu but quite another to talk of being in the grip of a fully fledged , officially designated worldwide pandemic . 
But public health officials in the UK are already trying to talk down the implications of the World Health Organisation moving the alert status from level 5 to level 6 , the highest . 
Swine flu in most countries has been mild and there have been no signs of it becoming more deadly . 
The pandemic tag is to do with geography , public health experts say , and not severity . 
Swine flu has to be officially designated a pandemic because it is spreading easily in two distinct regions , the Americas and now Australia . 
In England , the Health Protection Agency , which is notified of every case , says there is no sustained transmission and containment of the virus is still the policy . 
`` We still have cases that have been linked to an outbreak , such as in schools , or linked to other cases , '' said a spokeswoman . 
`` The big change would be if we had sporadic cases . '' 
Scotland is taking a different tack . 
The Scottish health secretary , Nicola Sturgeon , told the parliament this morning that hospital cases in Scotland were at similar rates to the United States . 
There are 311 confirmed cases of H1N1 in Scotland , more than a third of the UK 's total , with cases heavily concentrated in the Glasgow area . 
By yesterday , 18 people had been admitted to hospital , with five in intensive care or high-dependency units . 
Fifteen schools and nurseries are either entirely or partly closed . 
Sturgeon says containment has failed , so the strategy in Scotland is to mitigate the spread . 
Doctors in the worst-affected areas Glasgow , Dunoon and Paisley will be allowed to make a swine flu diagnosis in their surgeries rather than wait for specialist or laboratory tests . 
Only the closest contacts of infected people will be given the antiviral drug Tamiflu . 
`` We have seen a rapid increase in the number of confirmed cases in Scotland over the past 10 days , '' Sturgeon told parliament . 
`` Based on this experience , Health Protection Scotland has expressed the view that sustained community transmission appears to be taking place . '' 
In England , the containment strategy continues for now . 
Every case is reported and close contacts are given Tamiflu , which reduces the flu 's duration and severity . 
Where schoolchildren have fallen ill , every pupil has been given the drug and most schools involved though not all have been closed . 
The aim is to stop swine flu spreading . 
If containment fails , that policy will end , and stocks of Tamiflu will be preserved for those most at risk of severe illness . 
There will be no more mass dosing of schoolchildren . 
Little else will change with the official pandemic announcement . 
The government is rolling out its anti-pandemic strategy as fast as it can because there is every possibility that swine flu could do a lot more damage once the winter flu season starts . 
Plans involve sending antiviral drugs and antibiotics to all GPs , and advertising campaigns telling people to wash their hands and if they fall ill , to stay at home , call the flu line and get a friend to collect their drugs . 
