BP 's behavior in the Gulf is appalling . 
But our thirst for oil is the real issue Science will solve this crisis , but the real cause is America 's demands and our refusal to pay oil 's true price Barack Obama examines tar balls from the spill on a Louisiana beach last week . 
Photograph : EPA As this piece is written , act one of the Gulf of Mexico tragedy continues , agonisingly , to unfold . 
We , the people of the region , keep hoping to leave behind the terrifying explosions and ghastly loss of human life , the dread invoked by black jets billowing endlessly from below and the floating oil spreading over an ever-growing area . 
We want to move on to act two , which will feature many dirty shovels , corpses of birds and people crying over the loss of a landscape they love . 
Act three has yet to be written ; it will employ an enormous cast of lawyers and last for decades , but in that time there will be some healing , we hope . 
That 's what we need to happen as soon as possible , but we ca n't seem to get the damned thing plugged up . 
I am told that Britons like to measure areas by comparison to the size of Wales . 
The oil spill stretching across the Gulf is now far bigger than Wales ; it 's about the size of Scotland and growing by more than 1,500 square kilometres -LRB- 580 square miles -RRB- a day . 
It was my observation , in satellite images of this inexorable spread , that led me to conclude in early May that the rate of release being cited by BP and repeated by our coastguard 1,000 barrels a day was preposterous . 
After initial pressure , the rate was upped to 5,000 barrels per day still too low by my estimation by at least a factor of five . 
BP , however , refused to make any effort to estimate the flow , claiming this could jeopardise its response efforts , which could not possibly be any greater , it avowed . 
At this point , three weeks into the calamity , BP had yet to release any video images of the oil gushing from the stricken well . 
Pressure from journalists eventually pried loose a single , 30-second clip , along with a statement from BP professing surprise that anyone was even interested and the certainty that no one looking at the images could possibly tell what the flow rate was . 
Not so , it turned out . 
Several scientists were able to estimate flow rates at between 40,000 and 100,000 barrels a day . 
Suddenly a great many people were highly interested in video and other information . 
Threat of congressional subpoena a very powerful writ in our system forced BP to produce more video and eventually the live feed from the bottom we can now see at bp.com . 
The gusher video went viral . 
Now here 's the remarkable thing . 
Through all this , Doug Suttles , head of BP America , appeared day after day on TV insisting that 5,000 barrels a day was the real number . 
In fact , he said , this number was at the heart of all its engineering calculations for stopping the leak with the dome , the top hat , the top kill , the junk shot and , in last resort , the LMRP cap whatever that is . 
BP , in the words of Suttles , felt deep and sincere concern for the people of Louisiana , and everywhere else where the oil might drift . 
When a CNN team videoed Louisiana governor Bobby Jindal and other dignitaries afloat in an oil-drenched marsh , Suttles was quickly on the air to profess BP 's determination to clean up that `` 30 acres '' of polluted wetland . 
When several fishermen working on a response team were hospitalised by fumes , he was quick to note the potential danger of `` volatile organic compounds '' and just as quick to claim that BP had looked for , but failed to find , any of these nasty VOCs . 
My personal experience of the oil spill has been quite different . 
Last Wednesday my colleagues and I encountered several square kilometres of oil about a centimetre thick ; it was 12 miles off the Mississippi delta and more than 50 miles from the leaking well . 
It comprises several thousand cubic metres poised to come ashore from this patch alone . 
There are many more like it . 
Working to sample it without a skimmer in sight by the way we would have been overcome by fumes had we not donned respirators . 
Next day , on boats and planes , we easily documented not 30 acres of oiled marshland , but more than 1,000 in only a portion of the vast , vulnerable delta . 
What baffles me is not that BP should seek to minimize the magnitude of the spill . 
After all , some of our laws would make it liable to penalties of $ 1,000 per barrel released . 
Any company would seek to avoid such exposure . 
What 's puzzling is why the company 's spokespeople cleave to statements that are so readily refuted . 
Casting BP executives as cardboard cut-out villains does not get us very far though . 
Whatever the courts may find about BP 's culpability the real cause is our demand for oil and our refusal to pay its true price . 
Right now , everyone in America wants to do something to fight the spill . 
However , if you suggest that perhaps we should double the price of fuel and use the revenue to rebuild our transportation network , the general response is suspicious silence . 
Facile comparisons do not do justice to this still unfolding drama . 
If the climate scientists are even partly right , this could be a dress rehearsal for greater crises : humans instigating vast change we then struggle to control . 
Amid such struggles , minimizing the spill rate for PR purposes does not stop the leak ; engineering stops the leak . 
Expunging oil from your publicity photos does not clean the beach or tell you how badly damaged was the ecosystem ; science does that . 
In the struggle between spin and science , we must demand that science wins . 
cents Ian R MacDonald is Professor of Oceanography , Florida State University Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@observer.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : BP 's behavior in the Gulf is appalling . 
But our thirst for oil is the real issue This article appeared on p21 of the Main section section of the Observer on 00.16 BST on Sunday 30 May 2010 . 
