Barack Obama ` heartbroken ' as BP top kill fails to plug Gulf oil spill BP turns to next approach to tackle worst oil spill in US history , as documents reveal safety concerns dating back to last June Barack Obama visiting the oil-hit Louisiana coast on Friday . 
Photograph : Win McNamee\/pool\/EPA BP has failed to stop the oil leak in the Gulf of Mexico using so-called top kill and junk shot techniques , prompting an exasperated response from Barack Obama . 
After three days of pumping drilling mud over the leak and an attempt to plug the flow by blasting tyres , golf balls and other debris at it , BP admitted defeat last night . 
In its latest attempt to contain the worst oil spill in US history , it is to launch a four - to seven-day operation that will involve more oil leaking into the Gulf even if it works . 
Obama described the setback as `` enraging '' and `` heartbreaking '' , as documents emerged showing that BP engineers were concerned about the safety of the Deepwater Horizon rig months earlier than the company has admitted . 
Papers obtained by the New York Times show that issues were raised as far back as last June . 
The problems involved the well casing and blowout preventer , considered critical pieces in the chain of events that led to the disaster . 
On 22 June last year , BP engineers were worried that the casing the company wanted to use might collapse under high pressure . 
`` This would certainly be a worst-case scenario , '' Mark Hafle , a senior drilling engineer at BP , warned in an internal report . 
`` However , I have seen it happen so know it can occur . '' 
The company went ahead with the casing , but only after getting special permission because it violated safety policies and design standards , the New York Times reported . 
Hafle , testifying before a panel in Louisiana on Friday about the cause of the rig disaster , rejected the notion that BP had taken risks . 
He declined to comment on the leaked report . 
Last night BP admitted the best hope of stemming the flow completely could take a further two months , using relief wells . 
BP 's chief operations officer , Doug Suttles , admitted : `` We have not been able to stop the flow This scares everybody , the fact that we ca n't make this well stop flowing , the fact that we have n't succeeded so far . '' 
He added : `` Many of the things we 're trying have been done on the surface before , but have never been tried at 5,000 ft. '' The next approach , which also has never been attempt at this depth , involves robot submarines cutting the leaking pipe , placing a cap over it and then pumping the oil to the surface . 
`` We 're confident the job will work but obviously we ca n't guarantee success , '' Suttles said . 
He explained that if the operation succeeded it would contain most , but not all , of the leaking oil . 
The spill is the worse than the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster and has dumped up to 40m gallons -LRB- 150m litres -RRB- into the Gulf of Mexico , according to government estimates . 
Obama , who is facing mounting criticism about the government 's response , showed his frustration last night . 
`` It is as enraging as it is heartbreaking , and we will not relent until this leak is contained , until the waters and shores are cleaned up , and until the people unjustly victimised by this manmade disaster are made whole , '' he said . 
It has been 40 days since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded , killing 11 workers , and unleashing an environmental catastrophe . 
Oil has washed up on a vast stretch of beaches and poisoned wildlife in the ecologically sensitive area . 
A version appeared in the Guardian on 12.46 BST on Sunday 30 May 2010 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off MatthewWells : Friend turns on TV and sees Ocado van driver reversing away from flames 2\/2 
