Sunday 30 May 2010 20.58 BST Salvage vessels skim and collect oil near the site of the spill . 
The White House said the US was ` prepared for the worst ' . 
Photograph : Win Mcnamee\/Getty Images An uncontrollable fountain of oil could gush into the Gulf of Mexico until August , the Obama administration warned today , as BP conceded it was moving to a containment strategy after failing to plug the well at the center of the most environmentally disastrous spill in US history . 
As anger and despair grew in the coastal communities of Louisiana , BP began preparations to cut a leaking drill pipe on the ocean floor and attach a containment cap intended to capture at least some of the 12,000 to 19,000 barrels of crude spewing from its Macondo well every day . 
The oil company , which has come under withering attack for its handling of the crisis , acknowledged there was `` no certainty '' of success in the effort , which will take four to seven days and which some experts say could make the leak worse . 
A White House adviser said the US government was `` prepared for the worst '' after efforts to halt the leak by pumping mud , golf balls , tyres and other debris into the well were halted without success yesterday . 
Carol Browner , the administration 's energy czar , said there may be no solution until two relief wells being drilled into the oilfield by BP are complete later in summer . 
`` There could be oil coming up till August when the relief wells are done , '' she said . 
`` This is probably the biggest environmental disaster we have ever faced in this country . '' 
At the weekend , as the failure of BP 's latest attempt became clear , President Barack Obama vented his frustration at the situation . 
`` It is as enraging as it is heartbreaking , and we will not relent until this leak is contained , until the waters and shores are cleaned up , and until the people unjustly victimised by this manmade disaster are made whole , '' Obama said in a statement . 
Another two months of leakage from the site of BP 's sunken Deepwater Horizon oil rig would mean that the spill , which already eclipses the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster in Alaska , would cause even more damage to marshland wildlife habitats and to the livelihood of shrimpers , fishermen and tourism workers in southern states . 
Oil already stretches over a distance of 130 miles by 70 miles . 
Browner said : `` We are prepared for the worst . 
We have been prepared from the beginning . '' 
As the crisis moved to its fifth week , both BP and Obama faced attacks for failing to come up with a solution . 
Billy Nungesser , president of Plaquemines parish , Louisiana , called for immediate funding to build a network of sand barriers to protect the coastline . 
`` It 's time for BP to step up to the plate do n't wait for the president , '' said Nungesser . 
`` Every time that oil takes out a piece of the marsh , a piece of Louisiana is gone forever . '' 
Oil has been leaking from a broken drilling pipe on the ocean floor since the rig caught fire and sank on 20 April , killing 11 offshore workers . 
At the weekend , BP abandoned a `` top kill '' operation to fix the leak after engineers were unable to stem the pressure of oil with thousands of tonnes of drilling mud . 
`` We 're disappointed that oil is going to flow for a while and we 're going to redouble our efforts to keep it off the beaches , '' BP 's managing director , Bob Dudley , told CNN . 
`` We 're moving to a containment operation . '' 
BP 's new plan involves using underwater robots and a diamond wire-cutter to create a clean cut through the leaking pipe , then attach a `` riser '' allowing oil to be pumped to the ocean surface and collected by a ship . 
Experts say it will be difficult to create a watertight seal on a high-pressure gushing pipe at a depth of 1,500 metres -LRB- 5,000 ft -RRB- . 
Former US secretary of state Colin Powell joined calls for the military to take command of the operation from BP . 
Powell said the problem was beyond the capacity of BP to solve and the government should bring in `` decisive force '' . 
He said : `` The military brings organization , it brings control , it brings assets . '' 
