Oil spill : What happens next ? 
Why top kill attempt failed , what BP will do next and more on the Deepwater Horizon oil spill crisis Sunday 30 May 2010 22.52 BST A video image released by BP shows equipment being used to try and plug its gushing oil well , a manoevre known as ` top kill ' that failed . 
Photograph : Associated Press Why did top kill fail ? 
`` Top kill '' was BP 's attempt to plug the oil leak by pumping huge quantities of mud into the blowout preventer -LRB- BOP -RRB- that sits on the seabed . 
Two high pressure pumps were used to force mud into the BOP , with the aim of pushing the oil and gas back down the well shaft . 
BP hoped this would halt the flow for long enough for it to pump cement into the shaft , sealing it . 
Top kill started last Wednesday night , and during the operation BP made three separate attempts to block the well , using a total of 30,000 barrels of heavy mud . 
It also fired a mixture of waste material into the BOP in an attempt to block the leak point . 
Early signs were encouraging a webcam pointing at the site showed that mud , rather than oil , was leaking out of the well pipe . 
But ultimately the pressure forcing the oil upwards proved greater than the force of the mud , which was delivered at a pressure of 6,800 pounds per square inch . 
BP 's chief operating officer , Doug Suttles , said it decided to pull the plug on top kill after its `` best and brightest people '' agreed it was not working . 
Oil industry experts had warned that the pressure of the mud might fracture the rock around the well , dissipating the pressure and letting the oil and gas surge back up . 
Top Kill 's failure has crushed hopes of an early end to the disaster . 
At the moment the pipe which would normally deliver oil from the wellhead to a rig floating on the surface is bent , running from the well to the sea bed , where it is broken and spewing oil . 
BP plans to sever the pipe at the well and then lower a container on to the BOP on the ocean floor . 
This container , called the lower marine riser package -LRB- LMRP -RRB- cap containment system , is `` an engineered containment device with a sealing grommet '' . 
BP hopes oil and gas will collect in the LMRP and then be taken to a tanker on the surface . 
How long will the new operation take ? 
Cutting the pipe and attaching the LMRP is expected to take between four and seven days . 
Both BP and the US government have tried to play down expectations . 
Barack Obama called it `` not without risk '' , while Suttles said it would only capture some of the escaping oil as there will not be a tight seal between the LMRP and the BOP . 
Philip Johnson , associate professor of engineering at Alabama University , has warned that the flow of oil will increase once the bent pipe is removed . 
Suttles , though , has said that pressure data from the BOP suggests there will not be a significant impact . 
What if LMRP does n't work ? 
BP could try and cover the leak by dropping a second BOP on to the existing one . 
As a BOP is much heavier than a LMRP cap , this might succeed . 
BP says it is still generating new ideas , partly thanks to more than 28,000 suggestions from the public . 
`` We 've taken bits and pieces from the ideas that have come into us , '' a spokesman said . 
Previous attempts to control the flow of escaping oil have included using robot submarines to try and activate the well 's built-in safety mechanisms . 
These failed to activate on 20 April when an explosion ripped through the Deepwater Horizon rig , and BP 's robots were unable to make them work either . 
BP then lowered a large container , similar but bigger to the LMRP , over the site , hoping to collect the oil and gas and transport it to the surface . 
This dome quickly became clogged with icy crystals . 
BP also pushed a riser insertion tube tool into the leaking pipe , to collect oil . 
This was only a partial success , collecting an average of 2,010 barrels of oil per day . 
Dispersants were used to break up the oil slick , but BP was ordered to cut some of their use by the White House after fears that these toxic chemicals were causing further damage to marine life in the Gulf . 
What else could BP try ? 
It has started drilling two more wells to intercept the existing shaft . 
That will allow it to inject concrete deep into the seabed and permanently stop the leak . 
Some experts believe this is the only certain way of stopping the disaster . 
The first relief well is already over 12,000 ft deep , but it is likely to take until the end of July to complete . 
The second well was paused last week so that its BOP was available in case BP tries the BOP-on-BOP procedure . 
Could these relief wells hit problems ? 
The most obvious risk is the weather . 
Hurricane season officially starts on1 June , and a serious storm could force BP to suspend drilling -LRB- as well as upset efforts to protect the US coastline from the spill -RRB- . 
Johnson believes hurricanes are `` a threat '' , but that BP should be able to complete the drilling before the serious storms arrive in August and September . 
`` You can stay on site through many storm conditions , but in the worst cases you have to pull up the well . 
The reality is that a big storm this early is not likely . '' 
How bad is the spill ? 
US researchers believe BP 's shattered well is leaking between 12,000 and 25,000 barrels of oil per day . 
If it continues at that rate until a relief well is completed , up to 2.275 m barrels -LRB- or 95.5 m US gallons -RRB- will have entered the Gulf of Mexico . 
That is nearly 10 times as much as in the Exxon Valdez disaster , and close to the Ixtoc spill in 1979 , the largest accidental spill in history , which leaked around 3m barrels . 
The all-time worst oil spill occurred in 1991 when Iraqi soldiers torched Kuwait 's oil fields , causing an estimated 11m barrels -LRB- 462m gallons -RRB- to leak . 
How much has BP spent on this crisis ? 
BP said the cost of the spill response , containment , relief-well drilling , grants to the Gulf states , compensation claims and federal costs had hit $ 930m -LRB- # 642m -RRB- . 
The final cost is unclear one analyst suggested BP could be liable for $ 60bn of civil penalties if it is found to have acted with `` gross negligence '' . 
How much damage has been caused on the mainland ? 
Rear Admiral Mary Landry of the US coastguard reported that around 105 miles of Louisiana coastline have been contaminated . 
Local fisherman fear their livelihoods will be damaged for many years , even if the LMRP container works . 
A version appeared on p14 of the Main section section of the Guardian on Follow the latest environment news , comment and analysis on Twitter 
