By David Lewis DAKAR | Wed May 11 , 2011 7:57 am EDT The fall-out southwards from the civil war in the North African country has so far been mainly limited to waves of returning migrant workers . 
But governments in the Sahel believe fighters of al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb -LRB- AQIM -RRB- have received convoys of weapons including SA-7 missiles looted from Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi 's abandoned arms caches . 
Targeting airliners would take training and moving al Qaeda cells nearer cities , so experts believe any heavy weapons are more likely to be used defensively in case of airborne attacks on the Islamist militants . 
However the remote and often volatile corners of countries such as Mauritania , Mali and Niger , where Islamists operate alongside rebels , local criminals and smugglers , are extremely vulnerable to the spillover effects of Libya 's conflict . 
`` The situation in Libya poses quite some problems for West African countries , '' said Kwesi Aning , a senior official at the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Center in Ghana . 
`` It is natural that some of the weapons would get into very bad hands ... There is no government control in the northern parts -LRB- of the Sahel fringing Libya -RRB- , '' Aning told Reuters . 
AQIM emerged out of the Algerian Salafist movement in 2007 and , under pressure from the Algerian army to the north , has become increasingly active in the Sahara region . 
The group , believed to number no more than a few hundred , has taken advantage of poor cross-border coordination to mount sporadic attacks on local armies and kidnap Westerners , earning some $ 50-70 million in ransoms so far , analysts say . 
A recent flurry of regional diplomacy has underscored pressing concerns over a spillover from Libya . 
Fears of a reprisal after the killing of Osama bin Laden are also high . 
The leaders of Mali and Chad believe looted weapons have reached AQIM bases in northern Mali , with Chad 's president warning they could become the best-equipped force in the region . 
An Algerian official spoke of several convoys . 
Others say there is no proof yet , though few think it would take much for AQIM , which is plugged into weapons smuggling networks and flush in cash from ransoms , to obtain them . 
`` There are enough floating around that it would be extremely easy for people keen to get hold of them to do so , '' said Peter Bouckaert , emergencies director at Human Rights Watch , who has spent weeks documenting the looted arsenals in Libya . 
Much of the focus has been on missing SA-7 shoulder-launched missiles , used by al Qaeda operatives who tried , but failed , to shoot down an Israeli charter plane in Kenya in 2002 . 
`` It is a top concern because this is one of the favorite weapons of al Qaeda groups , '' Bouckaert said , noting that militants in Iraq showed how stolen weapons could also be turned into bombs . 
Officials are acutely aware of the threat and fears of a `` spectacular '' attack in retaliation for the killing of bin Laden are real , but due to their short range , SA-7s would have to be moved by militants from remote desert bases to near airports by major cities if airliners were to be targeted , experts say . 
`` They are probably more useful as defensive weapons , '' said one diplomat who monitors the group 's activities . 
After mostly opportunistic kidnappings , attacks this year in Niamey and Nouakchott have proven AQIM 's ambition to hit capital cities . 
But another hurdle is the weapon itself , according to Nick Pratt , a terrorism expert at the George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies . 
`` It is not a weapon you just pick up and shoot ... The big issue is that it takes a long time to train , '' said Pratt , whose military experience included taking part in covert U.S. efforts to arm Mujahideen guerrillas in Afghanistan . 
`` Old Soviet-era -LRB- missiles -RRB- in the Sahara are less of a security concern than a truckload of AK 's -LRB- assault rifles -RRB- . '' 
It may not just be the weapons that flow south either . 
There are widespread reports of Gaddafi recruiting fighters , especially Tuareg nomads , to swell his ranks . 
Some of these new recruits , as well as fighters from the region who had long been in his ranks , will return home one day , officials say . 
Similar flows of experienced fighters back into marginalized parts of Mali and Niger were factors in rebellions during the 1990s . 
These countries ' governments are still struggling to heal wounds after the most recent uprisings between 2007 and 2009 . 
`` There is something of a historical pattern we do n't want to repeat , '' said Andre LeSage , Africa expert at the U.S-based National Defense University . 
Northern Mali , with its grinding poverty and isolation , is particularly susceptible . 
AQIM has turned it into a rear base , integrating into local tribes through marriage and seeking to drive a wedge between the government and local populations . 
Profitable smuggling networks also zigzag through the barren zone , undermining law and order and fuelling corruption . 
Mali President Amadou Toumani Toure last week sought out support among community leaders , warning them of the risks of the flow of weapons and fear of AQIM recruiting new fighters . 
`` We need community leaders to be on good terms with national governments so there is n't popular support for any movement ... so they do n't gain traction , '' LeSage said . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Arms infiltration has been a problem in North Africa for years coz border control there is very laxing or almost none . 
Some day , this problem may spread into Middle East . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
