-LRB- Adds further source , birthplace , comment -RRB- ALGIERS , Aug 30 -LRB- Reuters - Muammar Gaddafi became a grandfather again on Tuesday when his daughter Aisha gave birth to a girl within hours of fleeing across Libya 's desert border into Algeria , officials said . 
Algerian officials highlighted the plight of the expectant mother in explaining a decision to give refuge to the fugitive Libyan ex-leader 's wife and three of her children on Monday -- a move denounced by the country 's new rulers as an act of aggression . 
The child was born in Djanet , according to two Algerian official sources . 
An oasis deep in the Sahara , Djanet lies about 60 km -LRB- 40 miles -RRB- from the Libyan frontier and 500 km southwest of Sabha , one of the last bastions of support for Aisha Gaddafi 's 69-year-old father . 
`` Gaddafi 's daughter gave birth to a girl today , '' a source close to the Algerian health ministry , who spoke on condition of anonymity , told Reuters . 
`` This is all I can say . '' 
Aisha Gaddafi , a lawyer in her mid-30s about whom little information can be confirmed , was on the very point of giving birth when the family appealed to cross the border , another Algerian source said . 
That humanitarian consideration was the main reason for them being allowed in , the source added . 
Algeria 's ambassador to the United Nations , Mourad Benmehidi , told the BBC that in the desert regions there was a `` holy rule of hospitality . '' 
Analysts say the government in Algiers is wary of popular unrest in other Arab states and fears its own Islamist enemies may find support in the new Libya . 
However , a local newspaper in Algiers reported that Algeria would hand over Muammar Gaddafi to the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- if he himself entered the country . 
Another paper said part of the Libyan border would be closed . 
Gaddafi 's wife Safia and sons Hannibal and Mohammed were also in the party given refuge . 
Libya 's ruling council demanded them back for trial . 
But only Gaddafi himself , his son Saif al-Islam and a senior aide , who are both also in unaccounted for , are subject to an international arrest warrant for war crimes . 
Gaddafi 's only daughter who was not adopted , Aisha ran a charitable foundation and in 2004 joined a team of lawyers defending former Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein . 
There had been no public announcement that she was expecting a child . 
Aisha largely stayed out of Libyan politics , but since the start of a revolt against her father 's rule in February she appeared at pro-Gaddafi rallies and gave interviews in which she accused NATO of killing Libyan children . 
Quoting Algerian sources , the Echorouk newspaper said on its website that President Abdelaziz Bouteflika had told government ministers at a cabinet meeting on Monday Algeria would respect international law on all matters related to the Libyan conflict . 
`` Should Gaddafi try to enter Algerian soil ... Algeria would arrest him and hand him over to the International Criminal Court in compliance with international agreements , '' the newspaper said . 
It said the decision was not a reaction to the toppling of Gaddafi but was in accordance with the ICC 's arrest warrants . 
No one was immediately available from the government for comment . 
In a separate report , Echorouk said Gaddafi 's family would not be allowed to go to the capital Algiers . 
Algeria 's El Watan newspaper said the country was closing the southern part of its border with Libya . 
Quoting diplomatic sources , El Watan said an instruction had gone out to security services to close the southern part of the border with Libya because of the `` precarious situation '' there . 
Algeria 's border with Libya is hundreds of kilometers long and stretches through expanses of empty desert . 
Algerian officials say they are concerned that Islamist militants have infiltrated Libya 's National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- and that al Qaeda 's North African wing will exploit the chaos in Libya to acquire weapons and explosives . 
The NTC has denied those charges and in turn accuses Algeria of siding with Gaddafi during Libya 's civil war , something the Algerian authorities deny . 
