Tue Aug 30 , 2011 7:33 am EDT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Here is a timeline of the civil war in Libya since protests against Muammar Gaddafi 's four-decade rule began in February : February 15\/16 , 2011 - The arrest of human rights activist Fethi Tarbel sparks a riot in Benghazi , Quryna newspaper reports . 
February 24 - Anti-government militias take control of central coastal city of Misrata after evicting forces loyal to Gaddafi . 
February 26 - The U.N. Security Council imposes sanctions on Gaddafi and his family , and refers Libya 's crackdown on rebels to the International Criminal Court -LRB- ICC -RRB- . 
February 28 - EU governments approve a package of sanctions against Gaddafi and his closest advisers including an arms embargo and bans on travel to the bloc . 
March 5 - The rebel National Transitional Council -LRB- NTC -RRB- in Benghazi declares itself the sole representative for Libya . 
March 10 - France recognizes the NTC as legitimate representative of Libya 's people . 
Libya suspends diplomatic relations with France the next day . 
March 17 - The U.N. Security Council votes to authorize a no-fly zone over Libya and `` all necessary measures '' -- code for military action -- to protect civilians against Gaddafi 's army . 
March 19 - The first air strikes halt the advance of Gaddafi 's forces on Benghazi and target Libya 's air defenses . 
March 28 - Qatar becomes the first Arab country to recognize Libya 's rebels as the people 's legitimate representatives . 
March 29 - A London conference of 40 governments and organizations agrees to set up a contact group comprising 20 countries to coordinate efforts in a post-Gaddafi Libya . 
March 30 - Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa defects and flies to Britain . 
April 30 - A NATO missile attack on a house in Tripoli kills Gaddafi 's youngest son and three grandchildren . 
June 1 - Libya 's top oil official Shokri Ghanem appears in Rome , saying he has defected because of the bloodshed . 
June 15 - Gaddafi 's government approves $ 31.4 billion budget for the rest of 2011 , to show it is functioning as normal . 
June 27 - The ICC issues arrest warrants for Gaddafi , his son Saif al-Islam and intelligence chief Abdullah al-Senussi on charges of crimes against humanity . 
July 15 - The NTC wins U.S. recognition as the legitimate government of Libya at a meeting in Turkey of the contact group . 
July 27 - Rebels win diplomatic recognition from Britain , which also expels the remaining Gaddafi diplomats from London . 
July 28 - Abdel Fattah Younes , Gaddafi 's former interior minister who defected to the rebels on February 22 and became their military chief , is killed in mysterious circumstances . 
August 14 - Libyan rebels take the center of Zawiyah , 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- west of Tripoli , cutting the coastal highway to Tunisia that keeps the capital supplied with food and fuel . 
August 21 - Rebels enter Tripoli with little resistance . 
-- Gaddafi makes two audio addresses over state television calling on Libyans to fight off the rebel `` rats . '' 
He says he is in the capital and will be `` with you until the end . '' 
-- Rebels reach Green Square , the symbolic showcase the government had until recently used for mass demonstrations in support of Gaddafi . 
Rebels rename it Martyrs Square . 
-- Libyan rebels say they have detained three of Gaddafi 's sons , including Saif al-Islam , wanted for war crimes . 
August 22 - Libyan government tanks and snipers put up last-ditch resistance in Tripoli as rebels sweep into its heart . 
August 23 - Saif al Islam , waving in triumph and taunting his father 's enemies , surfaces in Tripoli to prove he remains free . 
-- The rebels overrun Gaddafi 's fortified Bab al-Aziziya compound in Tripoli trashing the symbols of his rule . 
August 24 - Gaddafi issues a rambling but defiant audio message overnight vowing to fight on to death or victory . 
-- The council says it is offering an amnesty to any of Gaddafi 's entourage who kill or capture him . 
Council chairman Mustafa Abdel Jalil says also a local businessman has offered two million dinars -LRB- $ 1.3 million -RRB- to anyone who caught him . 
August 25 - Gaddafi , in audio speech broadcast on loyalist TV channels , calls on supporters to `` purify '' the capital of rebels . 
August 29 - Algeria announces that Gaddafi 's wife , two of his sons and his daughter have crossed into its territory , prompting the ruling interim council to demand that they be returned to face trial and that to shelter them is an `` act of aggression . '' 
August 30 - The NTC says they are almost certain that Gaddafi 's son Khamis , and intelligence chief were killed on August 27 , during fighting in Tarhouna , 90 km southeast of Tripoli . 
-- Jalil gives pro-Gaddafi forces in Sirte and other towns until September 3 to surrender or face military force . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
