CHICAGO | Tue Aug 30 , 2011 12:08 am EDT CHICAGO -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Forces loyal to fallen Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi committed a vast array of possible war crimes while battling rebels in Misrata , the country 's third largest city , according to a report issued on Tuesday by a U.S.-based human rights group . 
The report by Physicians for Human Rights , titled `` Witness to War Crimes : Evidence from Misrata , Libya , '' is based on interviews of residents in the Misrata area conducted in June . 
The authors say they provide evidence of `` murder , torture , rape , forced internment , and disappearance . '' 
The group says Libya 's National Transitional Council must now move to prosecute people suspected of committing those crimes . 
A popular uprising in Libya in February against Gaddafi 's 42-year-old rule resulted in a civil war with rebels backed by a NATO bombing campaign from the air starting in March . 
Misrata was liberated by rebels in May after a fierce three-month battle , and they now control most of the country . 
`` The abuses that we gathered evidence of in Misrata are some of the most egregious war crimes and crimes against humanity I 've heard of in Libya , '' said Richard Sollom , deputy director of Physicians for Human Rights and author of the report . 
`` There has been some evidence of crimes committed by rebel forces , but certainly nothing anywhere near as widespread and systematic as those committed by Gaddafi 's forces . '' 
A single act can be deemed a war crime , but when troops commit `` systematic and widespread '' crimes against civilians , that is a crime against humanity , Sollom said . 
As evidence of one such crime , the report includes a copy of a government order for troops to prevent fuel and supplies reaching the city of some 400,000 to 500,000 people . 
The crimes detailed in the report are also consistent with what residents told Reuters reporters in Misrata during the summer and with video evidence provide by a member of the new city council 's media committee . 
For the report , the group focused on Misrata plus two towns immediately to the south of the city -- Kerzaz and Tomina -- which Sollom said were used as bases for Gaddafi loyalists during the government 's bombardment of the city . 
People interviewed for the report cited cases of torture , summary executions and allegations that Gaddafi loyalists targeted civilians , hospitals and mosques . 
The report mentions the case of Mohammed , a civilian resident of the town of Kerzaz , who was left blind in one eye and suffered a broken jaw that he said he sustained while being tortured by government soldiers . 
Video footage provided to Reuters shows at least one apparent rocket attack on a hospital , in which a room full of incubators for premature infants was hit . 
Rebel fighters also showed a team of Reuters reporters in late July a mosque on Misrata 's western front in the town of Dafniya , which they said had been targeted by Gaddafi loyalists . 
There were holes caused by tank and rocket fire on the west side of the mosque 's minaret -- indicating that government troops had inflicted the damage . 
And in interviews residents of Misrata told Reuters in July that Gaddafi loyalists targeted civilians . 
`` Gaddafi 's aim here was to kill as many people as he had to in Misrata in order to stay in power , '' said Fauzi al-Karshaine , a local businessman who was shot five time by Gaddafi troops on February 19 during a protest for greater freedoms by unarmed people in Misrata . 
`` He does not care how many innocent women and children he has to kill to do it . '' 
In June the International Criminal Court issued indictments against Gaddafi , his son and heir apparent Saif al-Islam and Libyan intelligence chief Abdullah al-Senussi . 
Physicians for Human Rights recommends that to move forward , post-Gaddafi Libya must come to terms with its past and prosecute individuals suspected of having committed war crimes during the country 's internecine conflict . 
`` The -LRB- ruling rebel -RRB- National Transitional Council has been saying the right things about moving forward and prosecuting war crimes , '' Sollom said . 
`` But eventually Libya will have to deal with its past and hold individual perpetrators accountable . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
