By Maggie Fox , Health and Science Editor WASHINGTON | Fri Jun 19 , 2009 9:46 am EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The new strain of H1N1 flu is causing `` something different '' to happen in the United States this year -- perhaps an extended year-round flu season that disproportionately hits young people , health officials said on Thursday . 
An unusually cool late spring may be helping keep the infection going in the U.S. Northeast , especially densely populated areas in New York and Massachusetts , the officials at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said . 
And infections among healthcare workers suggest that people are showing up at work sick -- meaning that workplace policies may be contributing to its spread , the CDC officials said . 
The new strain of swine flu is officially a pandemic now , according to the World Health Organization . 
So far the virus is causing mild to moderate disease , but it has killed at least 167 people and been confirmed in nearly 40,000 globally . 
The United States has been hardest hit , with upward of 100,000 likely cases and probably far more , with 44 deaths and 1,600 hospitalized . 
`` The fact that we are seeing ongoing transmission now indicates that we are seeing something different , '' the CDC 's Dr. Daniel Jernigan told a news briefing . 
`` And we believe that that may have to do with the complete lack of immunity to this particular virus among those that are most likely affected . 
And those are children , '' Jernigan added . 
`` The areas of the country that are most affected , some of them have very high population densities , like Boston and New York . 
So that may be a contributor as well . 
Plus the temperature in that part of the country is cooler , and we know that influenza appears to like the cooler times of the year for making transmission for effective . '' 
Jernigan said in areas that are the most affected up to 7 percent of the population has influenza-like illness . 
`` The United States will likely continue to see influenza activity through the summer , and at this point we 're anticipating that we will see the novel H1N1 continue with activity probably all the way into our flu season in the fall and winter . 
The amount of activity we expect to be low , and then pick up later . '' 
One worrying pattern : healthcare workers are being infected , and most reported they did little or nothing to protect themselves , the CDC 's Dr. Mike Bell said . 
People coming into emergency departments or clinics need to be checked right away for flu symptoms and anyone working with such a patient needs to wear a mask , gloves and eyewear , Bell said . 
`` We 're beginning to see a pattern of healthcare personnel-to-healthcare personnel transmission in some of the clusters , which is also concerning , because it gets to the issue of people showing up to work sick , '' Bell said . 
Doctors , nurses and technicians who have flu can spread it to vulnerable patients , Bell noted . 
As of May 13 , the CDC said it had received 48 reports of healthcare workers infected with swine flu . 
Detailed case reports on 26 showed that 13 were infected in a healthcare setting such as a clinic or hospital and 12 caught it from infected patients , the CDC said in its weekly report on death and disease . 
