WASHINGTON | Fri Jun 19 , 2009 2:55 pm EDT WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Drug makers are gearing up to make vaccines against the new H1N1 virus , starting test batches and pledging free doses for poor countries . 
Governments are pledging billions for the vaccine -- the United States has set aside $ 1 billion , the Netherlands ordered 34 million doses and Australia has ordered 10 million doses as the World Health Organization declared a pandemic . 
Yet no one is sure yet whether even to give the vaccine to anyone and if so , who should get it . 
Usually the guidelines for influenza vaccination are clear -- give it to the oldest , the youngest and the sickest . 
In an average year , influenza is a factor in 250,000 to 500,000 deaths , and in developed countries , 90 percent are the elderly . 
But the new H1N1 swine flu virus is not behaving typically . 
It has dragged the Northern Hemisphere 's flu season well into June , although influenza usually dies way down by April . 
`` The fact that we are seeing ongoing transmission now indicates that we are seeing something different , '' Dr. Daniel Jernigan of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention told reporters this week . 
Most cases are in people aged 5 to 24 -- usually the last group to get seriously ill from flu and the last group vaccinated during a normal flu season . 
There have been few serious H1N1 cases among the elderly , perhaps because they have some pre-existing immunity to a similar H1N1 that circulated in the past , or maybe because their immune system response is different -- flu experts do not know yet . 
To decide what to do , WHO officials will have to watch and see what this new strain does . 
As WHO Director-General Dr. Margaret Chan said at the beginning of the pandemic last month , the world is watching it unfold in real time -- and much of humanity is taking part in a real-time experiment . 
If the virus continues to affect mostly older children and young adults , the strategy should be clear -- vaccinate those groups . 
And at least one study supports this idea for other reasons . 
This week a team at Britain 's University of Warwick said computer models suggest that vaccinating children aged 6 months to 18 years may be the best way of using limited supplies to control the pandemic . 
Because schools can be epicenters for spreading flu infection , including the new H1N1 , this might make more sense than trying more general approaches . 
Vaccinating schoolchildren would prevent them from spreading it to two more vulnerable groups -- the elderly and the very young . 
It may also protect those clearly more at risk from both H1N1 and seasonal flu -- people with asthma , diabetes and heart disease , suppressed immune systems and pregnant women . 
By Friday , WHO had confirmed 44,287 cases of the new flu and 180 deaths , with Laos , Oman , Papua New Guinea , South Africa all reporting their first cases . 
The United States alone has more than 21,000 cases with officials saying there are likely at least 10 times that many , and 87 deaths . 
WHO estimates vaccine makers could produce up to 4.9 billion pandemic flu shots a year at most . 
That would depend on how many doses people needed and whether vaccine boosters called adjuvants could be used to stretch out the doses . 
Even this best-case scenario would leave more than a billion people unvaccinated . 
Vaccine maker Sanofi-Aventis , which says it makes 40 percent of the world 's supply of flu vaccine , says at full capacity its two Pennsylvania factories can make 150 million doses of seasonal influenza vaccine a year . 
Its French plant can make 120 million doses per year . 
This would triple for H1N1 , as the seasonal vaccine is a cocktail of three different viruses . 
Other companies that make flu vaccine include Novartis AG , Baxter International Inc , GlaxoSmithKline and Solvay . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
