Rebels say they ousted Gadhafi 's forces from Qawalish several days ago The small village is 90 miles south of Tripoli The fighters appear spirited , flashing victory signs and posing for photos Aided by NATO strikes , they are hoping to unseat the longtime Libyan leader Qawalish , Libya -LRB- CNN -RRB- -- Almost all civilians have fled the western Libya area around Qawalish , hoping to avoid the worst of the violence wracking the nation . 
Yet there is a buzz around this village , which is in the hands of rebel fighters eager to defeat forces loyal to longtime Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi . 
Their optimism and energy are matched , in many ways , by their inexperience . 
When spotters on a rooftop spy vehicles they believe belong to the Libyan army , a rebel rocket team wipes off desert grit from their weapon , oils it up and fires -- their aim , at best , approximate . 
The group 's commander , Fahti , knows the opposition forces are in many ways overmatched . 
`` They have tanks . 
Rockets , '' Fahti said . 
`` They have mortars , all the heavy weapons . '' 
Dressed in everything from military fatigues to polo shirts to T-shirts , the rebels are not the stereotypical picture of a modern fighting force . 
But despite their challenges , the rebels here have had success . 
That includes , they say , driving Libyan forces several days ago out of the village 45 kilometers -LRB- 90 miles -RRB- south of Tripoli , a key north-south route in the North African nation . 
One fighter said Gadhafi 's men are `` very afraid '' that rebels will soon take another big step forward by taking his home city of Gharyan , which is 45 kilometers to the north and just 100 kilometers south of the Libyan capital . 
While strongest in the east near Benghazi , the opposition remains active around much of Libya . 
A fighter named Mahmoud told CNN on Saturday that his comrades had conducted night raids and ambushes , for instance , around his native Zamiya , a coastal city still in the government 's hands about 50 kilometers from Tripoli . 
`` But on the coast Gadhafi is strong , he has his people everywhere , '' Mahmoud said . 
The opposition continues to get help in the form of NATO strikes . 
The alliance announced in a statement Saturday that it had struck a missile-firing position near Tawhurgha , south of Misrata , that it claims was tucked within a set of farm buildings . 
Libyan forces used this area to attack civilians in nearby Misrata through missile strikes and as a staging area for attacks , NATO said . 
In Qawalish , the rebels had some good fortune after coming upon an abandoned army base , and its boxes stacked almost to the ceiling with mortar and artillery rounds . 
The find was a welcome one for a force that , until recently , was struggling to muster the weaponry to keep up the fight . 
Those rolling through checkpoints around the village are almost exclusively rebel fighters , drawn to the battlefront by their commitment to a common cause . 
Their enthusiasm appears strong as they drive by , crammed into the back of pickup trucks , smiling broadly and flashing victory signs . 
And even with the sounds of war in the distance , some rebels pose for pictures -- victory photos , they hope , in their quest to end Gadhafi 's 42 years in power . 
