In report on gulf oil spill , BP spreads the blame A day after the blowout on BP 's Macondo oil well in the Gulf of Mexico , crews battled the blaze on the damaged rig . 
BP 's internal report on the disaster emphasizes `` shared responsibility . '' 
-LRB- U.s. Coast Guard Via Associated Press -RRB- BP rolled out the results Wednesday of a four-month internal investigation into the causes of the April 20 blowout of its Macondo oil well in the Gulf of Mexico , spreading blame among its contractors and giving a glimpse of the defenses it might deploy in public and in court . 
The much-anticipated report asserted that a `` complex and interlinked series '' of failures - of equipment , engineering and judgment - led to the surge of oil and gas that exploded on the deck of the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig , killing 11 people , sinking the rig and triggering the worst oil spill in U.S. history . 
The report was written by a team of 50 internal and external experts led by the company 's head of safety and operations , Mark Bly , and the rollout Wednesday morning at a hotel in downtown Washington was labeled a `` technical briefing . '' 
But the document inevitably carries a heavy public relations element as well as legal and financial implications for BP . 
It arrives as the Justice Department is weighing whether to bring charges of criminal negligence against BP that could sharply increase the cost of the spill for the London-based oil giant and provide fodder for private lawsuits . 
In addition , there is legislation in Congress that would effectively strip BP of the right to drill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
The company is haggling with the Obama administration over what pieces of collateral to offer while it is financing the $ 20 billion escrow fund that will be used to pay claims . 
And BP 's main partner in the well , Anadarko Petroleum , has declared that it wo n't pay its share of the cleanup costs and claims because it views BP 's well design and actions as reckless . 
The BP report makes the case for `` shared responsibility , '' saying that `` no single factor '' caused the blowout . 
It points to multiple failures by its contractors in maintenance , equipment and planning . 
The investigation found fault with the recipe Halliburton used in its cement , with the flaps on a Weatherford International barrier device known as a float collar , and with the condition of hydraulic lines and batteries that might have sapped power from the blowout preventer made by Cameron International and operated by Transocean , making it impossible to clamp and cut through steel piping . 
`` Transocean was solely responsible for operation of the drilling rig and for operations safety , '' the report says in an appendix . 
`` It was required to maintain well control equipment and use all reasonable means to control and prevent fire and blowouts . '' 
The report also said Transocean and BP rig leaders jointly `` reached the incorrect view '' on well tests in the crucial hours before the explosion . 
And Bly said BP needs to reexamine the way it oversees work by its contractors . 
Yet the report absolves BP 's widely criticized well design . 
It says the path that oil and gas followed as they escaped from the well meant that the well 's casing and design - matters that could otherwise implicate BP - were not factors in the disaster . 
Instead , it says that if any one of eight failures of equipment or decision-making had not taken place , the blowout would not have happened . 
The report not only offers new details and analysis of what went wrong , it also represents a bold declaration that BP is not going to assume more than what it considers its share of the blame for the accident . 
The report did not say how far up the BP corporate ladder the well problems went , and no employee was named or punished . 
In a news release , BP chief executive Tony Hayward , who has barely spoken publicly since his disastrous congressional testimony in June , did not offer anything resembling a mea culpa . 
