WASHINGTON | Fri Dec 3 , 2010 2:50 pm EST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - BP Plc believes the actual flow rate of its massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico may have been significantly less than the government 's final estimate , according to comments released by the White House oil spill commission on Friday . 
The government has said BP 's ruptured undersea well released between 53,400 and 60,000 barrels per day , but commission staff said BP orally told them those estimates were 20 percent to 50 percent too high . 
`` They rely on incomplete or inaccurate information , rest in large part on assumptions that have not been validated , and are subject to far greater uncertainties than have been acknowledged , '' BP said in written comments submitted to the commission in October . 
The disagreement over the amount of oil that flowed from BP 's ruptured undersea well sets up a legal battle over the billions in dollars in government fines the oil giant faces relating to the accident . 
A lower flow rate would call into question the government 's estimates that BP 's Macondo well spewed a total of 4.9 million barrels of oil this summer and would impact the amount of fines BP would have to pay for the drilling disaster . 
Under the Clean Water Act , the government could fine BP up to $ 4,300 for each barrel of oil spilled into the Gulf , which would mean a maximum fine of $ 21.1 billion for the oil giant , based on the government 's spill estimates . 
`` The relevance of how much oil was released obviously plays into the calculation of fines , '' said Commissioner Terry Garcia . 
`` It 's not surprising they think it was lower . '' 
In its comments , BP said the government 's estimates seemed to be biased toward the maximum amount of oil that could have been discharged instead of the amount most likely to have been released . 
BP said more information , such as an analysis of the rig 's blowout preventer , was needed before it can develop its own estimate of the well flow rates . 
But , ultimately , the company said , a full review will show `` possibly far less oil '' was spilled than the government estimated . 
The issue of flow rates is `` very complicated because it involves the flow path during different times in the spill ... it 's going to be litigated , '' Priya Aiyar , deputy chief counsel of the commission , said at a meeting on Friday . 
The comments came as the commission weighed proposals that would call for requirements for more accurate flow rate estimates from the start of a major oil spill . 
Some commissioners said they believed the government should be responsible for independently measuring flow rates , and not be reliant on the companies responsible for spills . 
Lack of accurate flow rate estimates at the start of the BP spill in April eroded public confidence in the government 's ability to handle the accident response , the panel said . 
Charged with guiding the future of offshore drilling , the commission is working to develop policy recommendations to prevent or better respond to spills . 
The seven-member panel 's official report is set to be released on January 11 , but it will be up to the Obama administration , lawmakers and the oil industry to decide whether to implement whatever framework the panel lays out . 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
It still is n't good and will have consequences , however are media sensationalized it for viewers as they do everything else . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
