Protests have continued across Syria , despite President Assad 's crackdown Syrian security forces have attacked protesters at a mosque in the capital , Damascus , activists say . 
Security officials stormed the al-Rifai mosque in the Kafar Susseh district , the activists said , reportedly wounding the mosque 's imam . 
Unconfirmed reports say at least one person was killed in clashes with troops on Saturday . 
The UN says more than 2,000 people have been killed since protests against Syria 's president began in March . 
A video shot at the mosque shows protesters chanting `` the people demand an end to the regime '' , and calling for the execution of President Bashar al-Assad . 
As security forces stormed the mosque , protesters tried to barricade themselves in with bookcases and shoe racks , reports say . 
The imam , Osama al-Rifai , who is in his 80s , is said to have been beaten up . 
`` Some of the ` amn ' -LRB- security -RRB- went on the roof and began firing from their AK-47s to scare the crowd . 
Around 10 people were wounded , with two hit by bullets in the neck and chest , '' a local cleric told Reuters news agency . 
AFP news agency quoted the London-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights as saying one person was killed in the mosque attack . 
Other deaths in clashes were reported in Kafar Nabel , Qusair and Latakia , although these have not been confirmed . 
The BBC 's Jim Muir in neighbouring Beirut says after the mosque incident , other Damascus suburbs are reported to have staged protests in solidarity with the injured imam . 
Most foreign journalists have been barred from Syria , making it difficult to verify reports from local activists and officials . 
The latest reported violence comes a day after a UN investigative team which visited Syria said there was `` an urgent need to protect civilians '' from excessive force . 
There is an urgent need to protect civilians from the excessive use of force '' End Quote Farhan Haq UN spokesman The team , the first Syria has allowed in since the deadly crackdown on protests began , said there was no countrywide humanitarian crisis . 
Syria had refused for months to allow a UN mission into the country to investigate the violence . 
The government allowed the team in last week , promising full and unfettered access . 
`` The mission concluded that although there 's no countrywide humanitarian crisis , there is an urgent need to protect civilians from the excessive use of force , '' said UN spokesman Farhan Haq . 
At the UN Security Council , the battle over what to do about Syria has heated up , says the BBC 's UN correspondent Barbara Plett . 
Russia and a group consisting of the US , France , Britain , Germany and Portugal submitted rival draft resolutions on Syria . 
The Russian draft calls for the Syrian government to speed up reforms and for the opposition to take part in political dialogue . 
The US-European draft calls for a freeze of President Assad 's assets and an arms embargo against Syria . 
Russia 's UN ambassador Vitaly Churkin said the Western group was `` stirring up the opposition '' in Syria . 
Our UN correspondent says there is no immediate plan for a vote on the rival drafts . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
