` Deadly blasts ' shake Syrian capital Damascus The BBC 's Lina Sinjab said Syrian TV says the attacks are the work of '' terrorists '' State TV described the blasts as `` terrorist '' attacks . 
Preliminary reports suggested vehicles packed with explosives had been detonated , it said . 
It said intelligence and police buildings were hit and the cause was not known . 
Details of the reports can not be independently verified . 
Foreign journalists only have very restricted access to Syria . 
Dozens of people have been killed in bomb attacks in Damascus and the second city Aleppo in recent months , which the government also blamed on terrorists . 
The opposition has accused the authorities of staging some of those incidents . 
Lina Sinjab BBC News , Damascus The two explosions aimed at security buildings are another breach of the tight security apparatus control here in Damascus . 
Although all security buildings are sealed off with barricades , the government claims these were car bomb explosions . 
They happened in the early hours of the morning on a weekend so there was hardly any movement in the street . 
But the timing of the blasts will raise eyebrows . 
They occurred a day before UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan is to launch his mission by sending a technical team to Damascus . 
Mr Annan wants to find a political solution to the crisis but President Assad said this would not succeed while terrorist groups were operating in Syria . 
Similar explosions took place in Damascus just as an Arab League mission arrived in the country . 
Opposition groups blame the government for such attacks and say they are aimed at discrediting them . 
The latest blasts came two days after the first anniversary of the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad , which UN estimates say has left more than 8,000 people dead . 
State TV showed pictures of charred bodies , burned-out vehicles and bloodstains on the streets , as well as injured people being treated in hospital . 
It described one body as being that of a terrorist . 
It said buildings housing the criminal police and aviation intelligence had been targeted . 
Opposition sources also said security buildings had been hit . 
One activist told AFP news agency the first blast occurred at 07:30 local time -LRB- 05:30 GMT -RRB- , and was followed by a second more powerful explosion . 
`` All our windows and doors are blown out , '' local resident Majed Seibiyah , 29 , told the Associated Press news agency . 
`` I was sleeping when I heard a sound like an earthquake . 
I did n't grasp what was happening until I heard screaming in the street . '' 
Fresh anti-government protests were held on Friday in cities across Syria . 
23 Dec : Two bombs hit security buildings in Damascus 6 Jan : Car bomb in Damascus kills 26 10 Feb : Twin attacks on security compounds in Aleppo leave 28 dead And there was a return of violence to the Damascus suburbs - the first significant fighting there since government forces imposed military control some weeks ago . 
Clashes between rebel fighters and the army were reported in several other parts of the country . 
President Assad insists his troops are fighting `` armed gangs '' seeking to destabilise Syria . 
On Friday , UN and Arab League special envoy Kofi Annan renewed calls for an end to fighting and for unimpeded humanitarian aid for Syria . 
Speaking to UN Security Council members , he said he was sending a team to Damascus to discuss setting up a new international monitoring mission . 
The international community remains divided on Syria , with Russia and China both blocking UN Security Council resolutions on Syria and aid groups from 27 countries urging them to condemn the government 's use of violence . 
But the two permanent members have backed Mr Annan 's peace mission . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
