Wednesday 23 February 2005 12.14 GMT A US tank moves into position near Iraq 's western border . 
Photograph : Adam Butler\/AP The attorney general , Lord Goldsmith , warned less than two weeks before the invasion of Iraq that military action could be ruled illegal . 
The government was so concerned that it might be prosecuted it set up a team of lawyers to prepare for legal action in an international court . 
And a parliamentary answer issued days before the war in the name of Lord Goldsmith - but presented by ministers as his official opinion before the crucial Commons vote - was drawn up in Downing Street , not in the attorney general 's chambers . 
The full picture of how the government manipulated the legal justification for war , and political pressure placed on its most senior law officer , is revealed in the Guardian today . 
It appears that Lord Goldsmith never wrote an unequivocal formal legal opinion that the invasion was lawful , as demanded by Lord Boyce , chief of defense staff at the time . 
The Guardian can also disclose that in her letter of resignation in protest against the war , Elizabeth Wilmshurst , deputy legal adviser at the Foreign Office , described the planned invasion of Iraq as a `` crime of aggression '' . 
She said she could not agree to military action in circumstances she described as `` so detrimental to the international order and the rule of law '' . 
Her uncompromising comments , and disclosures about Lord Goldsmith 's relations with ministers in the run-up to war , appear in a book by Philippe Sands , a QC in Cherie Booth 's Matrix chambers and professor of international law at University College London . 
Exclusive extracts of his book Lawless World are published in today 's Guardian . 
Lord Goldsmith warned Tony Blair in a document on March 7 2003 that the use of force against Iraq could be illegal . 
It would be safer to have a second UN resolution explicitly sanctioning military action . 
`` So concerned was the government about the possibility of such a case that it took steps to put together a legal team to prepare for possible international litigation , '' writes Mr Sands . 
The government has refused to publish the March 7 document . 
It was circulated to only a very few senior ministers . 
All Lord Goldsmith gave the cab inet was a later oral presentation of a parliamentary answer issued under his name on March 17 . 
This appears contrary to the official ministerial code , which states that the complete text of opinions by the government 's law officers should be seen by the full cabinet . 
On March 13 2003 , Lord Goldsmith told Lord Falconer , then a Home Office minister , and Baroness Morgan , Mr Blair 's director of political and government relations , that he believed an invasion would , after all , be legal without a new UN security council resolution , according to Mr Sands . 
On March 17 , in response to a question from Baroness Ramsay , a Labor peer , Lord Goldsmith stated that it was `` plain '' Iraq continued to be in material breach of UN resolution 1441 . 
`` Plain to whom ? ' 
It is clear , he says , that Lord Goldsmith 's answer was `` neither a summary nor a precis of any of the earlier advices which the attorney general had provided '' . 
He adds : `` The March 17 statement does not seem to have been accompanied by a formal and complete legal opinion or advice in the usual sense , whether written by the attorney general , or independently by a barrister retained by him '' . 
Separately , the Guardian has learned that Lord Goldsmith told the inquiry into the use of intelligence in the run-up to war that his meeting with Lord Falconer and Baroness Morgan was an informal one . 
He did not know whether it was officially minuted . 
Lord Goldsmith also made clear he did not draw up the March 17 written parliamentary answer . 
They `` set out my view '' , he told the Butler inquiry , referring to Lord Falconer and Baroness Morgan . 
Yet the following day , March 18 , that answer was described in the Commons order paper as the attorney general 's `` opinion '' . 
During the debate , influential Labor backbenchers and the Conservative frontbench said it was an important factor behind their decision to vote for war . 
Robin Cook , the former foreign secretary and leader of the Commons , yesterday described the Guardian 's disclosure as alarming . 
`` It dramatically reveals the extent to which the legal opinion on the war was the product of a political process . '' 
The case for seeing the attorney general 's original advice was now overwhelming , Mr Cook added . 
`` What was served up to parliament as the view of the attorney general turned out to be the view of two of the closest aides of the prime minister , '' he said . 
Sir Menzies Campbell , the Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokesman , said the government 's position had been seriously undermined . 
`` The substance of the attorney general 's advice , and the process by which it was partially published , simply do not stand up to scrutiny , '' he said . 
Sir Menzies added : `` The issue is all the more serious since the government motion passed by the House of Commons on March 18 2003 , endorsing military action against Iraq , was expressly based on that advice . '' 
He continued : `` The public interest , which the government claims justifies non-publication of the whole of the advice , can only be served now by the fullest disclosure . '' 
Lord Goldsmith twice changed his view in the weeks up to the invasion . 
He wrote to Mr Blair on March 14 2003 , saying it was `` essential '' that `` strong evidence '' existed that Iraq was still producing weapons of mass destruction . 
The next day , the prime minister replied , saying : `` This is to confirm it is indeed the prime minister 's unequivocal view that Iraq is in further material breach of its obligations . '' 
The same day , Lord Boyce got the unequivocal advice he says he was after in a two-line note from the attorney gen eral 's office . 
The extent of concern among military chiefs is reflected by Gen Sir Mike Jackson , head of the army , quoted by Peter Hennessy , professor of contemporary history at Queen Mary College , London . 
`` I spent a good deal of time recently in the Balkans making sure Milosevic was put behind bars , '' said Sir Mike . 
`` I have no intention of ending up in the next cell to him in the Hague . '' 
Mr Sands records that Lord Goldsmith visited Washington in February 2003 when he met John Bellinger , legal adviser to the White House National Security Council . 
An official later told Mr Sands : `` We had trouble with your attorney , we got him there eventually . '' 
A spokeswoman for Lord Goldsmith said yesterday : `` The attorney has said on many occasions he is not going to discuss process issues '' . 
The March 17 parliamentary answer was the `` attorney 's own answer '' , she said adding that he would not discuss the processes of how the document was drawn up . 
The Department for Constitutional Affairs said it could not say if Lord Falconer had a role in drawing up the answer . 
