UK attacks presence at conference on hunger PM and Bush likened to Axis leaders over Iraq war Britain expressed outrage yesterday after Robert Mugabe took advantage of a United Nations ceremony in Rome to compare Tony Blair to Italy 's wartime dictator , Benito Mussolini . 
Departing from his prepared text at the 60th anniversary celebrations of the UN 's biggest agency , the Food and Agriculture Organisation , the Zimbabwean leader described the prime minister and the US president , George Bush , as `` international terrorists '' . 
He also denounced their invasion of Iraq , saying they were `` the two unholy men of our millennium who , in the same way as Hitler and Mussolini formed -LRB- an -RRB- unholy alliance , formed an alliance to attack an innocent country '' . 
Matthew Wyatt , Britain 's representative at the FAO , said Mr Mugabe 's presence at a conference on food and hunger was a `` sick irony '' . 
He told the Guardian : `` It is extremely unfortunate that Mugabe was at this occasion . 
He has created hunger and poverty in his own country . '' 
Aid groups have estimated that five million of Zimbabwe 's 12 million people may need food aid this year . 
Mr Mugabe 's policies , including the forcible redistribution of white-owned farms , have been widely criticised for plunging the country into its deepest economic crisis since independence . 
Mr Mugabe said that his land reforms had been needed to redress `` gross imbalances '' left by colonialism . 
Mr Wyatt said that he and other delegates had gone to the anniversary celebrations `` to remind ourselves that there are , by the FAO 's estimate , 852 million hungry people , and that we face a huge challenge meeting the millennium development goals . 
Having somebody like Mugabe present was entirely inappropriate . 
It would have been better for all of us - the FAO included - if he had not come . '' 
His outrage was echoed by that of his US counterpart , Tony Hall , who described the Zimbabwean president as someone who `` chews up his own people and spits them out '' . 
That was clearly not the view of some of the other delegates who repeatedly applauded Mr Mugabe 's fiery anti-western diatribe . 
Flanked by bodyguards , the Zimbabwean leader declared : `` The voice of Mr Bush and the voice of Mr Blair ca n't decide who shall rule in Zimbabwe , who shall rule in Africa , who shall rule in Asia , who shall rule in Venezuela , who shall rule in Iran , who shall rule in Iraq . '' 
His reference to Venezuela was well received by Hugo Chvez , who told Italy 's Ansa news agency : `` I pay tribute to Mugabe . '' 
The Venezuelan president added : `` The president of Zimbabwe is made out to be a villain - because he takes land from those who do n't need it to give it to those who need it to live . '' 
British and US officials acknowledged that customarily the FAO invites the heads of state of all its member nations to such events . 
But yesterday 's rumpus is bound to fuel growing disquiet in London and Washington over the course being taken by the agency under the leadership of its Senegalese director general , Jacques Diouf , who has been in place since 1994 ; next month he will stand unopposed for a third term of office . 
President Mugabe yesterday thanked the director general for having invited him despite objections made by the US . 
American officials said last month that they were preparing to place travel restrictions on Mr Mugabe , his government and family . 
The ban is expected to be similar to one imposed by the EU following claims that the Zimbabwean government was involved in vote-rigging in the 2000 and 2002 elections . 
Under an agreement with the FAO , Italy does not impose any restrictions on delegates visiting the agency . 
However , the head of the Italian parliament 's agriculture committee , Sergio Agoni , said it was `` scandalous that Robert Mugabe should be coming to speak about food at a time when his compatriots are dying in the streets for lack of foodstuffs and human rights '' . 
Mr Mugabe also enjoys immunity for visits to the Vatican ; earlier this year , he exploited to the full his attendance at the funeral of Pope John Paul II . 
Placed close to the Prince of Wales , he leaned over and shook the prince 's hand during the service . 
The prince 's household said afterwards that he had been taken by surprise . 
