Credit : Reuters\/Nathanael Miller\/U . 
S. Navy photo\/Handout By Maria Golovnina and Michael Georgy TRIPOLI | Sat Mar 19 , 2011 7:34 pm EDT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Western forces hit targets along the Libyan coast on Saturday , using strikes from air and sea to force Muammar Gaddafi 's troops to cease fire and end attacks on civilians . 
French planes fired the first shots in what is the biggest international military intervention in the Arab world since the 2003 invasion of Iraq , destroying tanks and armored vehicles in the region of the rebels ' eastern stronghold , Benghazi . 
Hours later , U.S. and British warships and submarines launched 110 Tomahawk missiles against air defenses around the capital Tripoli and the western city of Misrata , which has been besieged by Gaddafi 's forces , U.S. military officials said . 
They said U.S. forces and planes were working with Britain , France , Canada and Italy in operation `` Odyssey Dawn '' . 
Gaddafi called it `` colonial , crusader '' aggression . 
`` It is now necessary to open the stores and arm all the masses with all types of weapons to defend the independence , unity and honor of Libya , '' he said in an audio message broadcast on state television hours after the strikes began . 
State television said the `` crusader enemy '' hit civilian areas of Tripoli and fuel storage tanks that supplied Misrata . 
Residents in Misrata said air strikes had targeted a military airbase where Gaddafi loyalists were based . 
Several Tripoli residents said they heard an explosion near the eastern Tajoura district . 
`` I heard an explosion . 
I saw a flash , it was a very strong explosion , '' said one . 
In Benghazi , where earlier on Saturday rebels said they had beaten back an advance by Gaddafi 's troops , residents welcomed the military intervention but were also apprehensive . 
`` We think this will end Gaddafi 's rule . 
Libyans will never forget France 's stand with them . 
If it were n't for them , then Benghazi would have been overrun tonight , '' said Iyad Ali , 37 . 
`` We salute , France , Britain , the United States and the Arab countries for standing with Libya . 
But we think Gaddafi will take out his anger on civilians . 
So the West has to hit him hard , '' said Khalid al-Ghurfaly , a civil servant , 38 . 
Earlier on Saturday , leaders meeting in Paris announced the start of military intervention after Gaddafi 's troops pushed into the outskirts of Benghazi in spite of a U.N. resolution passed on Thursday calling for an end to attacks on civilians . 
`` Those taking part agreed to put in place all necessary means , especially military , to enforce the decisions of the United Nations Security Council , '' French President Nicolas Sarkozy said after the meeting of Western and Arab leaders . 
`` Colonel Gaddafi has made this happen , '' British Prime Minister David Cameron told reporters after the meeting . 
`` We can not allow the slaughter of civilians to continue . '' 
Some analysts have questioned the strategy for the military intervention , fearing western forces might be sucked into a long civil war despite a U.S. insistence -- repeated on Saturday -- that it has no plans to send ground troops into Libya . 
Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper suggested that outside powers hoped their intervention would be enough to turn the tide against Gaddafi and allow Libyans to force him out . 
`` It is our belief that if Mr. Gaddafi loses the capacity to enforce his will through vastly superior armed forces , he simply will not be able to sustain his grip on the country . '' 
A U.S. military slide showed some 25 coalition ships , including three U.S. submarines armed with Tomahawk missiles , are stationed in the Mediterranean . 
The Libyan government has blamed rebels , who it says belong to al Qaeda , for breaking a ceasefire it announced on Friday . 
In Tripoli , several thousand people gathered at the Bab al-Aziziyah palace , Gaddafi 's compound that was bombed by U.S. warplanes in 1986 , to show their support . 
`` There are 5,000 tribesmen that are preparing to come here to fight with our leader . 
They better not try to attack our country , '' said farmer Mahmoud el-Mansouri . 
`` We will open up Libya 's deserts and allow Africans to flood to Europe to blow themselves up as suicide bombers . '' 
U.S. SAYS NOT LEADING INTERVENTION France and Britain have taken a lead role in pushing for international intervention in Libya and the United States -- after embarking on wars in Afghanistan and Iraq -- has been at pains to stress it is supporting , not leading , the operation . 
In announcing the missile strikes , which came eight years to the day after the 2003 U.S.-led invasion of Iraq , Obama said the effort was intended to protect the Libyan people . 
`` Today I authorized the armed forces of the United States to begin a limited action in Libya in support of an international effort to protect Libyan civilians , '' Obama told reporters in Brasilia , where he had begun a five-day tour of Latin America . 
He said U.S. troops were acting in support of allies , who would lead the enforcement of a no-fly zone to stop Gaddafi 's attacks on rebels . 
`` As I said yesterday , we will not , I repeat , we will not deploy any U.S. troops on the ground , '' Obama said . 
But despite Washington 's determination to stress the limits of its role , Vice Admiral Bill Gortney , director of the U.S. military 's Joint Staff , said the missile strikes were only the first phase of a multiphase action . 
Many analysts do not think Western powers would be satisfied with a de facto partition which left the rebels in control in the east and Gaddafi running a rump state in the west . 
One participant at the Paris meeting said that Clinton and others had stressed Libya should not be split in two . 
And Obama on Friday specifically called on Gaddafi 's forces to pull back from the western cities of Zawiyah and Misrata as well from the east . 
But security analysts have questioned what western powers will do if Gaddafi digs in . 
`` It 's going to be far less straightforward if Gaddafi starts to move troops into the cities which is what he has been trying to do for the past 24 hours , '' said Marko Papic at the STRATFOR global intelligence group . 
`` Once he does that it becomes a little bit more of an urban combat environment and at that point it 's going to be difficult to use air power from 15,000 feet to neutralize that . '' 
Earlier on Saturday hundreds of cars full of refugees fled Benghazi toward the Egyptian border after the city came under a bombardment overnight . 
One family of 13 women from a grandmother to small children , rested at a roadside hotel . 
`` I 'm here because when the bombing started last night my children were vomiting from fear , '' said one of them , a doctor . 
`` All I want to do is get my family to a safe place and then get back to Benghazi to help . 
My husband is still there . '' 
Those who remained set up make-shift barricades with furniture , benches , road signs and even a barbecue in one case at intervals along main streets . 
Each barricade was manned by half a dozen rebels , but only about half of those were armed . 
In the besieged western city of Misrata , residents said government forces shelled the rebel town again early on Saturday , while water supplies had been cut off for a third day . 
`` I am telling you , we are scared and we are alone '' , a Misrata resident , called Saadoun , told Reuters by telephone . 
-LRB- Reporting by Mohammed Abbas and Angus MacSwan in Benghazi , Tom Perry in Cairo , Maria Golovnina and Michael Georgy in Tripoli , Hamid Ould Ahmed and Christian Lowe in Algiers ; John Irish and Elizabeth Pineau in Paris , Missy Ryan in Washington , Writing by Myra MacDonald ; Editing by Jon Boyle -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
For once , Obama acted the way we all hoped he would act . 
With reason , sane , and decidedly , but in way to prevent war or destruction with war action as much as possible . 
It will obviously be in Gaddafi 's interest not to contravene the no-fly order because he stands to loose his fleet and anti-aircraft defenses . 
Ironically , that he entire struggle of the tow opposing sides has to be stopped now and that it will need diplomacy to find a way that includes all sides ' necessities , results in the negotiations which Venezuelan president Chavez suggested . 
Lets see if anyone has the stones to enforce it . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
