UN panel draws up Syria crimes against humanity list The Homs neighborhood of Baba Amr has endured weeks of daily shelling A United Nations panel has delivered a list of Syrian officials who could be investigated for crimes against humanity . 
Experts commissioned by the UN say army officers and government officials are responsible for human rights violations . 
Syrian forces have renewed shelling of the opposition stronghold of Homs . 
There is growing pressure on Damascus to give access to civilians trapped by the onslaught . 
The US , Europe and Arab countries plan to challenge President Bashar al-Assad to provide humanitarian access within days to the worst affected areas . 
They plan to present their ultimatum at Friday 's international conference on Syria in Tunisia . 
The UN had asked a panel of experts to report on the situation in Syria , in a follow up to an investigation published in November . 
Imogen Foulkes BBC News , Geneva The UN report documents the last three months in Syria , during which , the investigators say , the violence has reached new and terrible levels . 
They have evidence that Syrian forces have shot dead women and children , subjected civilian areas to merciless shelling , and tortured wounded protestors in hospital . 
These systematic violations were ordered by high ranking figures in the military and government , the report says . 
The investigators have compiled a confidential list of names of those they believe are responsible and sent it to the UN Human Rights Commissioner . 
The implication is that those people - and President Assad is likely to be among them - will one day appear at the International Criminal Court . 
The new report finds that Syria has become increasingly militarised , and accuses security forces of gross and systematic human rights violations . 
The evidence against some senior Syrian army officers and government officials is such that the team has sent a list of their names and their alleged crimes to the UN human rights commissioner . 
The UN secretary general says he wants to send his humanitarian chief to Syria to negotiate access to Homs . 
Dozens of people were killed in Syria on Wednesday , including journalists Marie Colvin and Remi Ochlik . 
Their deaths brought further condemnation of the Syrian government , which has denied responsibility for the killings . 
Aid workers trying to retrieve the journalists ' bodies say they may have to be buried in Syria , as the roads out of Homs are blocked by the Syrian army . 
On Thursday , rockets , artillery and mortar rounds pounded the opposition stronghold of Baba Amr , Inshaat and Khalidiya , activists said . 
Activist Hadi Abdullah told AFP that he could hear `` terrifying explosions '' . 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said a ceasefire was `` imperative '' to enable food and medical supplies to be brought into Homs , which has been under siege since 4 February . 
The city is one of the focal points of the uprising against the government of President Assad . 
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague said the international community would be looking at further ways to apply pressure to Mr Assad . 
`` It is a deeply frustrating situation that people have been dying in their thousands ... that the Assad regime has continued to act seemingly with impunity - but I think we can agree to a wider set of measures across a large group of nations , '' Mr Hague said . 
The European Union sanctions on Syria could be tightened further , Mr Hague added . 
Marie Colvin of the Sunday Times and French photographer Remi Ochlik were killed on Wednesday morning in the house in which they were staying in Baba Amr . 
Three other Western journalists were wounded in the strike on the house , among them a British photographer , Paul Conroy , whose injuries are not thought to be life-threatening , and the French reporter Edith Bouvier . 
Her situation is believed to be more serious . 
France and the UK have demanded that they be given urgent medical assistance . 
The editor of the Sunday Times , John Witherow , said he thought it was possible that the journalists had been deliberately targeted , speculating that government forces may have been able to use technology to identify their precise location . 
`` It seems to me perfectly reasonable to assume that they would have targeted them , '' he told the BBC . 
World and Arab leaders are due to meet in Tunisia on Friday to discuss Syria 's future . 
But Russia , a key ally of President Assad , says it will not attend the `` Friends of Syria '' meeting because the Syrian government would not be represented . 
Russia and China have faced Western and Arab criticism for blocking a UN Security Council resolution that would have backed an Arab League peace plan for Syria . 
Opposition groups claim more than 7,500 people have been killed since the start of the uprising 11 months ago . 
The Syrian government says at least 2,000 of its forces have died fighting `` armed terrorists , '' as it calls the rebels . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
