BOISE , Idaho | Fri Jul 30 , 2010 12:36 am BST BOISE , Idaho -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - More than 2,000 miles -LRB- 3,200 km -RRB- from the Gulf of Mexico shoreline , a panel of U.S. judges heard arguments from lawyers on Thursday on how piles of oil spill-related lawsuits against BP Plc should be merged . 
The panel , meeting in Boise , Idaho , as part of its regularly scheduled rotation among federal courts , did not immediately rule on how it would handle the mounting civil litigation brought against BP and other defendants involved in the worst offshore oil disaster in U.S. history . 
A decision is expected within several weeks . 
At stake is whether civil lawsuits from injured rig workers , fishermen , property owners , investors and others will be combined in Houston , where BP has its U.S. headquarters and wants the cases heard , or New Orleans , the preferred venue for many plaintiffs -- or elsewhere . 
Some lawyers argue the litigation is too massive for any one court to handle . 
The environmental havoc wreaked by the oil rig explosion that killed 11 workers could take years to reverse . 
A temporary cap has halted the gusher a mile below the sea 's surface while crews try to plug the well for good next week , but the massive spill has wrecked the Gulf 's fishing and tourism industries . 
BP could start its `` static kill '' plan to pump mud into the Macondo well -- the first in a two-step process to choke it off with mud and cement -- by this weekend , ahead of the scheduled start time on Monday , the top U.S. official dealing with the spill said on Thursday . 
`` There 's a chance that that schedule can be accelerated , '' retired Coast Guard Admiral Thad Allen told reporters in New Orleans . 
He also said the U.S. government is laying the groundwork to shift its massive oil spill clean-up operation from acute disaster management to long-term recovery , and that the clean-up could take years . 
Millions of gallons of oil leaked into the ocean over nearly three months -- until the well was capped two weeks ago . 
But clean-up boats have found it increasingly hard to find oil on the surface and officials say much has dispersed or evaporated , although hundreds of miles of coastline are polluted with orange or black deposits . 
The disaster has posed a huge challenge for U.S. President Barack Obama , whose administration has tried to halt deep-sea oil drilling until the causes of the BP spill are clear . 
A U.S. court overturned a six-month moratorium imposed after the spill but the government is seeking a new one . 
Potentially adding its name to the line of claimants , Royal Dutch Shell Plc idled seven rigs and took a $ 56 million charge related to the drilling ban on Thursday . 
Saying the ban would reduce its production by almost 3 million barrels this year , the company did not rule out reclaiming the cash from BP . 
Shell , one of the biggest oil producers in the Gulf of Mexico , said it had idled rigs rather than move them elsewhere because the ban 's six-month duration meant it was not profitable to redeploy them to other areas . 
BP , which has created a $ 20 billion fund to compensate companies and individuals affected by the spill , declined comment on compensating Shell . 
Executives at the London-based group believe it is not liable for damages resulting from the ban . 
At the packed Boise federal courthouse , attorneys were given a few minutes each to make their case to the seven-judge panel during the hour-and-a-half-long hearing . 
Plaintiffs ' attorney Russ Herman of Louisiana pressed for lawsuits pending in various federal courts to be moved to New Orleans . 
He said the spill has devastated the city , which is still climbing back after the 2005 Hurricane Katrina . 
`` Our culture rises as a gumbo of Cajuns , Creole , French , German and Spanish , '' he said . 
`` All of that is threatened now . 
This disaster threatens our hope and faith . 
That 's why New Orleans is the best avenue of justice . '' 
The U.S. Justice Department also requested that the lawsuits be handled by a New Orleans federal court . 
`` The U.S. is not a party at present in the cases against corporate defendants , but we think we will be , '' Justice Department representative Steven Flynn told the panel . 
He said New Orleans `` would provide the best access to all litigants . '' 
Whichever court , or courts , end up overseeing the cases could grapple with them for years . 
The panel , formally known as the U.S. Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation , will decide whether the cases belong under the umbrella of one court , or potentially several . 
BP asked that the cases be combined in Houston , the U.S. oil capital , as did an attorney for Cameron International Corp , manufacturer of the blowout preventer on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig that exploded on April 20 . 
BP pushed ahead with plans to sell assets in Vietnam , Colombia and Venezuela , as it scrambles to hive off $ 30 billion of assets to pay for the cleanup . 
Bankers said many of the most likely bidders are already part owners of the assets BP wants to sell , and this could help speed up the sales . 
Incoming Chief Executive Bob Dudley said on Wednesday BP would stay involved with the cleanup long after the well was finally plugged , which he said could happen next week . 
Although the flow of oil has been stopped , experts say the clean-up operation will take months . 
The major oil slicks appear to have dispersed and experts are analyzing the extent of pollution in the sea . 
An area of nearly 60,000 square miles -LRB- 150,000 sq km -RRB- of Gulf of Mexico waters is closed to fishing and more than 600 miles -LRB- 950 km -RRB- of coastline in four U.S. states is affected by oil , according to the latest U.S. government reports . 
Environmentalists have said it could be years before some Gulf beaches are declared free of toxic pollutants . 
Shares of BP -- which has lost about 40 percent of its market value since the blast -- closed 2 percent higher in New York on Thursday . 
Its London shares closed up 2.7 percent . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
They would need to prove that the way they conduct their business differed significantly from the way BP does theirs and that their sub contractors operated in a different manner from how they worked with BP . 
Leading one to ask of the sub contractor , how a valid risk assessment for doing a job could have two acceptable methods of enforcement . 
and to ask the same question of the regulators in the employment of the US government . 
The drilling ban was enforced by the US government and as such opens no line of action by Shell against BP . 
The investigation into this incident has a significant purpose to find out how the different companies operate their drilling rigs and who authorised the different regimes as acceptable practice . 
This goes outside of a ` Get BP ` mentality . 
The US government had a responsibility to set down the standards by which drilling was to be conducted and the procedures to be followed . 
To date it has shown itself to be woefully incompetent . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
