cents Beaches clean and open for business , says president cents Coastal states could lose $ 23bn in tourism revenue Sunday 15 August 2010 23.03 BST Barack Obama and his daughter Sasha swim at Alligator Point in Florida . 
Photograph : Pete Souza\/Reuters Barack Obama plunged up to his neck into the debate about the safety of Gulf waters after the BP oil spill yesterday when the White House released a photo of the president taking a dip at a Florida resort town . 
The White House had cast the trip to Panama City by the president , Michelle Obama and daughter Sasha as a solidarity mission that would help restore public confidence in the resort towns , which have suffered heavy cancellations during the peak school holiday season . 
Obama has faced a growing chorus of criticism for not heeding his own advice that Americans vacation in the Gulf . 
The president and his family were pictured playing mini golf and taking a boat trip around St Andrews Bay looking for dolphins . 
The White House also released a single image of Obama swimming with his daughter by the official photographer Pete Souza . 
Other photographers were kept away from the beach . 
The resort towns of the Florida panhandle are on the eastern edge of the oil spill but the beaches were still hit by tar balls and an oily sheen . 
A study by Oxford Economics for the US Travel Association estimated the spill could cost coastal towns in the four Gulf states nearly $ 23 billion dollars in lost tourism arrivals over the next three years . 
On Friday , Alabama became the first state to sue BP for damage from the oil spill . 
Louisiana sustained the most damage to its coastline following the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig three months ago . 
The state 's attorney general said it was suing BP , Transocean and Halliburton for `` catastrophic harm '' caused by the spill . 
On Saturday , Obama sought to shore up businesses along the entire Gulf coast . 
`` As a result of the clean-up effort beaches all along the Gulf Coast are clean , they are safe and they are open for business , '' Obama told reporters . 
`` That 's one of the reasons Michelle , Sasha and I are here . '' 
He promised that his administration would continue to monitor the oil as it hit the shore and to make sure the clean up was completed . 
But the first family 's own holiday in the Gulf was over within just 27 hours with the Obamas returning to Washington by lunchtime today . 
They leave on their real holiday a 10-day stay in Martha 's Vineyard midweek . 
No new oil has entered the Gulf since July 15 when a BP crew fitted a new cap over the well . 
The administration 's lead official on the crisis , Coast Guard commander Thad Allen , on Saturday directed BP to conduct a new set of pressure tests on the well before launching the operation to kill it for good with a relief well . 
It could be later tomorrow or early on Tuesday before officials know the results of those tests . 
A version appeared on p15 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 10.46 BST on Monday 16 August 2010 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off stuartmillar159 : I stand corrected RT @flashboy : @stuartmillar159 NO STUART THAT IS WHAT RAIN ACTUALLY IS 
