The Transocean Development Driller III , left , and the Transocean Development Driller II , right , the rigs drilling relief wells , are seen on the Gulf of Mexico near the coast of Louisiana Aug. 14 . 
-LRB- AP Photo -RRB- NEW ORLEANS -- Crews started pumping cement Friday deep under the seafloor to permanently plug BP 's blown-out well in the Gulf of Mexico . 
A BP spokesman said there no longer was a need to use mud in tandem with the cement because pressure from the well was n't an issue . 
BP expects the well to be completely sealed on Saturday . 
The government had previously said it expected the well to be declared dead by Sunday , but on Friday the Coast Guard indicated the culmination was likely to be Saturday . 
Cement began flowing at 1:30 p.m. CDT . 
It was expected to flow for several hours and then take up to 24 hours to set , according to BP . 
The pumping of cement followed the successful intersection late Thursday between a relief well drilled nearly 2.5 miles beneath the floor of the Gulf and the blown-out well . 
An April 20 explosion killed 11 workers , sank a drilling rig and led to the worst offshore oil spill in U.S. history . 
`` I am ready for that cigar now , '' John Wright , who led the team drilling the relief well , said in an e-mail Friday to The Associated Press from aboard the Development Driller III vessel . 
Wright , who is not a BP employee but is working on a contract basis , had told the AP in August that he was looking forward to finishing his mission and celebrating with a cigar , a dinner party with his crew and a trip somewhere quiet to unwind with his wife . 
He has never missed his target over the years , with this relief well being the 41st he 's successfully drilled . 
The gusher was contained in mid-July after a temporary cap was successfully fitted atop the well . 
Mud and cement were later pushed down through the top of the well , allowing the cap to be removed . 
But the blown-out well can not be declared dead until it is sealed from the bottom . 
The blast sank the Deepwater Horizon rig and triggered the spill that eventually spewed 206 million gallons of oil from the well . 
BP PLC is a majority owner of the well and was leasing the rig from owner Transocean Ltd. . 
The disaster caused an environmental and economic nightmare for people who live , work and play along hundreds of miles of Gulf shoreline from Florida to Texas . 
It also spurred civil and criminal investigations , cost gaffe-prone BP chief Tony Hayward his job and brought increased governmental scrutiny of the oil and gas industry , including a costly moratorium on deepwater offshore drilling that is still in place . 
Gulf residents will be feeling the pain for years to come . 
There is still plenty of oil in the water , and some continues to wash up on shore . 
Many people are still struggling to make ends meet with some waters still closed to fishing . 
Shrimpers who are allowed to fish are finding it difficult to sell their catch because of the perception -- largely from people outside the region -- that the seafood is not safe to eat . 
Tourism along the Gulf has taken a hit . 
BP took some of the blame for the Gulf oil disaster in an internal report issued earlier this month , acknowledging among other things that it misinterpreted a key pressure test of the well . 
But in a possible preview of its legal strategy , it also pointed the finger at its partners on the doomed rig . 
