Commission identifies ` incredible failures ' at BP , Halliburton and Transocean ahead of fatal Gulf of Mexico disaster The Deepwater Horizon explosion killed 11 men and sent nearly 5m barrels of oil spewing into the Gulf . 
Photograph : Gerald Herbert\/AP BP and the other companies involved in the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster were operating under a `` culture of complacency '' and need top-to-bottom reform , the head of the presidential investigation into the oil spill said today . 
A day after releasing preliminary findings on the causes of the fatal explosion on the Deepwater Horizon the first of multiple inquiries William Reilly , co-chair of the commission , was scathing about the safety regime on board the Deepwater Horizon . 
Reilly said there was `` emphatically not a culture of safety on that rig '' . 
He added : `` I referred to a culture of complacency and speaking for myself , all these companies we heard from displayed it . '' 
Bob Graham , the commission 's other co-chair and a former senator , said : `` There were a series of almost incredible failures in the days and hours leading up to the disaster . '' 
On Monday , the commission 's chief investigator , Fred Bartlit , uncovered a string of bad judgments by all three companies , BP , Transocean and Halliburton , during the last days of the rig . 
Eleven men were killed in the 20 April explosion , which sent nearly 5m barrels of oil spewing into the Gulf . 
The bad calls on the rig included : going ahead despite a faulty cement seal at the bottom of the well ; overlooking a failed pressure test ; replacing heavy drilling mud -LRB- compounds used to lubricate and cool wells during drilling -RRB- with seawater ; and failing to notice monitors , on board and onshore , showing a strong kick of gas . 
These were warning signs that the well was about to blow . 
Much of the scrutiny focused on the company 's plan to temporarily plug the well , which investigators with the presidential commission say added to the risk of a blowout . 
Plugging the well is a procedure used to seal it off until the company comes back to produce oil and gas . 
Experts questioned BP 's use of a single plug in the process . 
Charlie Williams , a chief scientist with Shell Energy Resources , said his company used a minimum of three plugs in its deepwater wells . 
Reilly described the narrative , developed by Bartlit in a courtroom style that drew on sophisticated graphics and questioning of executives from the three companies , as `` ghastly '' . 
Bartlit said he found no concrete evidence that any of those mistakes were motivated by cost a conclusion that drew angry criticism from Democrats in Congress . 
But he also noted that time and money were always factors because of the huge costs associated with offshore drilling . 
`` Any time you are talking about $ 1.5 m -LRB- # 935,000 -RRB- a day , money enters into it . '' 
Panel members also said that BP was hurried and made confusing , last-minute changes to plans that were unusual in the complex environment of deep-water drilling . 
They said BP could have operated more safely if it had taken the time to get the necessary equipment and materials . 
`` We are aware of what appeared to be a rush to completion , '' Reilly said . 
What is unclear , he added , was what drove people to determine that they could not wait for equipment and materials to perform operations more safely . 
Today 's proceedings are devoted to developing a safety culture of offshore drilling , with two other oil companies , Exxon and Shell , talking about their safety protocols . 
But Reilly put BP in a category of its own . 
`` BP has been notoriously challenged on matters of process safety , '' Reilly said . 
`` Other companies may not be so challenged . '' 
The panel is due to release its final report on 11 January , but it has been pressing hard for the Senate to grant Bartlit powers to issue subpoenas for more rigorous questioning of the oil companies . 
A number of those who were on the rig have refused to talk to the investigators . 
A version appeared on p22 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 20.47 GMT on Tuesday 9 November 2010 The latest news and comment from our team of reporters , writers and editors in the US Auto update every minute On | Off moorehn : Huh ! 
RT @BrianSozzi : Within food , white bread had one of the strongest price increases in December . 
