Former BP chief executive Tony Hayward tells a BBC2 documentary on tonight that it 's easier to hate an individual than a company . 
Photograph : Toby Melville\/Reuters Tony Hayward , the former chief executive of BP , has said that if he had a degree in acting from `` Rada rather than a degree in geology I may have done better '' in handling the fallout from the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster . 
Giving his first in-depth interview about his handling of the crisis , he also told the BBC , in a documentary to be broadcast tonight : `` You know it 's very difficult to hate a company , it 's much easier to hate an individual . '' 
Hayward was vilified particularly in the US after he made a series of public relations gaffes . 
During one tour of the stricken Gulf , he famously said : `` I want my life back . '' 
He also told the Guardian , in comments which were reported around the world , that the amount of oil which had leaked into the Gulf was `` relatively tiny '' compared with the `` very big ocean '' . 
The disaster , which killed 11 workers , resulted in the world 's biggest accidental marine oil spill . 
Hayward expressed his anger at the hostility of some of the media coverage , such as when he was seen on a yacht at Cowes in July during a rare trip home . 
`` I have to confess , at the time I was pretty angry actually . 
I had n't seen my son for three months . 
I was on the boat for six hours , between the hours of midnight and six o'clock in the morning US time and I 'm not certain I 'd do anything different . 
I wanted to see my son . 
The only way I could see my son was to be with him on a boat race he was on . '' 
While acknowledging his public relations mistakes , he indicated that he still would have had to resign . 
`` I 'm not certain it would have changed the outcome , but certainly the perception of myself may have been different . '' 
The hour-long BBC2 documentary at 9pm tonight called `` BP : the $ 30bn Blow-Out '' also delves into the history of BP , which last year produced more oil than any other non-state controlled company . 
Hayward also becomes the first senior company figure to publicly acknowledge the severity of the financial crisis faced by BP in June , when the size of the spill had increased by 10 times in the space of a few weeks and BP was under pressure from the White House to suspend dividend payments . 
`` Prior to the meeting with the White House the capital markets were effectively closed to BP , we were not able to borrow in the capital markets , either short or medium term debt at all , '' he said . '' 
It was a classic financial crisis issue . 
It was n't about the cash flow of the company it was about the liquidity . '' 
Bob Dudley , who took over from Hayward as chief executive on 1 October , also agreed to be interviewed for the program . 
It is understood that Lord Browne , who preceded Hayward , declined a request by the program makers to be interviewed . 
Browne 's reputation was tarnished by a string of accidents in the US which hastened his retirement . 
