Swine flu : ` watch , prepare , reassure ' A 23-month-old child has become the first victim of the outbreak outside Mexico , as three more cases were confirmed in the UK . 
Follow the latest updates and reactions to the spread of the virus Before we start on another day of swine flu blogging , a word or two on why we have been doing this . 
The Guardian columnist Simon Jenkins complained today of `` demented '' coverage of the swine flu outbreak and the need to put this in perspective . 
Many of those commenting on this blog yesterday felt that minute-by-minute treatment of the outbreak was an example of yet more media hysteria . 
We 've been trying to avoid panicky reporting - please keep letting us know when you think we are getting too excited . 
What we are trying to do here is stick to the important developments in what is a fast-moving story , and also report on how the outbreak is being covered and talked about . 
The head of the US Centres for Disease Control , Richard Besser , said the virus is almost certain to claim lives in America . 
`` I fully expect we will see deaths from this infection , '' he said . 
Germany 's national disease control center says it has confirmed three swine flu cases , making it the third country in Europe where the disease has surfaced . 
Several colleagues say they saw people wearing masks in London today . 
Twitter users have also spotted masks in the capital . 
`` First sighting of a commuter wearing a face mask on the Northern Line . 
Looks very out of place , '' tweets Gary Gale . 
It has n't been easy to find those who know people who have died from the new strain of flu or who have relatives suffering from them , which is n't helped by the fact the the Mexican authorities are refusing to publish a list of the dead . 
I did find people affected by the illness of course -LRB- hey - come on - I 'm a snoop -RRB- but , well , given that the swine flu has been labeled a pandemic , there 's no panic in the streets , no riots in the hospitals , and no over-supply of sufferers of their families to speak to . 
Another Mexico-based blogger , Burro Hall , has some wry words on the subject of panic . 
We heartily endorse panic - not because we think there 's more to fear than fear itself , but because panic , particularly on the part of the state 's public officials , tends to get results . 
It added that new tests on samples from the area are expected by the end of the week . 
Facebook has been tracking the rise of swine flu discussions on wall posts . 
It has also recorded the percentage of Facebook users discussing swine flu by US state . 
Facebook : The percentage of Facebook users in each US state discussing swine flu on wall posts . 
A new Guardian video shows how swine flu fears have spread across the world . 
Richard Besser , acting director of the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention , has confirmed that 23-month-old child has died of swine flu in Texas . 
Gordon Brown has confirmed that the government has ordered several million facemasks for NHS staff . 
Speaking at prime minister 's questions , he added that Tamiflu would only be given out when symptoms are discovered . 
For more follow Andrew Sparrow 's live coverage of PMQs . 
`` Mexico City is a ghost town , it 's weird '' , Rory Carroll reports from the Mexican capital . 
Three more cases of swine flu have been confirmed in the UK , Gordon Brown said today , bringing the total number to five . 
The prime minister told the Commons that a 12-year-old girl from Torbay was among the victims , and her school , Paignton Community College , had been temporally closed and all other pupils offered anti-viral medicines . 
Brown said the other two new cases were adults , one from Birmingham and one from London . 
All three had recently traveled to Mexico and had shown mild symptoms and were responding well to treatment . 
Egypt is considering a cull of pigs as `` precautionary measure '' , according to Reuters . 
The agency suggests that the move is motivated more by desire to quell panic rather than a serious attempt to stop the spread of the disease - which is not spread by pigs . 
Ben Goldacre , GP and author of the Guardian 's Bad Science column , is looking for examples of swine flu scaremongering and misrepresentation -LRB- do n't all send him this blog -RRB- . 
Health secretary Alan Johnson said the infected pupil in Torbay has been in close contact with 50 fellow pupils . 
They and 150 others have been given antiviral drugs . 
Facemasks ca n't stop the disease spreading , Johnson said , but it can be a help for NHS staff he says . 
He also sets out steps that people can take to stop the spread of the disease . 
`` Catch it , bin it , kill it '' is the theme . 
There will also be TV and newspaper adverts , Johnson said at a Department of Health press conference . 
Chief medical officer Liam Donaldson pointed out that all those affected had traveled to Mexico . 
The 12-year-old girl in Torbay was on the same flight from Mexico as the newlywed couple from Scotland who have also tested positive for the virus , Johnson said . 
Antivirals can help prevent people catching the virus , Donaldson said . 
But he said it was not sensible to issue everyone with antivirals . 
Ed Balls , the children 's secretary , said that the school in Devon Paignton Community and Sports College , will be closed for seven days . 
Airlines will be asked to keep the records of passenger on flights from affected areas , Johnson said . 
Facemasks are of very little value and give a false sense of security , Donaldson said . 
Keeping you hands clean is more important , he said . 
We have 33 million dose of antiviral treatment , Johnson said . 
Front line NHS workers will get priority . 
The government aims to get 50 million doses , he said . 
Donaldson said that a vaccine will be developed when a `` proper profile '' of the virus has been established . 
We are now up to 25 suspected cases in the UK , Johnson said . 
But he added this is a `` fast-moving situation '' . 
An official then tells him that it is up to 78 cases now . 
The BBC is reporting that seven of the nine people who were in contact with Iain and Dawn Askham , the newly weds who were the first Britons known to contract the virus , have tested negative for swine flu . 
This report has not been confirmed . 
-LRB- This is Haroon Siddique , I have taken over from Matthew Weaver while he takes a break -RRB- . 
Donaldson just explained to Sky News why masks are not the answer : `` The pores in the masks let through viruses . 
Viruses go through because the viruses are so small ... they -LRB- the masks -RRB- give a false sense of security . '' 
Worcestershire primary care trust confirmed today that a woman from Redditch has contracted swine flu . 
The department from health confirmed to the Guardian that the man from Birmingham cited by Johnson and Brown is in fact a 41-year-old woman from Redditch . 
The other two cases are the 12-year-old girl from Devon and a 22-year-old man from south London . 
Wendy Orent , author of Plague : The Mysterious Past and Terrifying Future of the World 's Most Dangerous Disease , has written an article for the LA Times in which she says categorically we are not facing a pandemic : `` Only packed conditions allowing deathly sick hosts to pass disease repeatedly to the well can produce highly virulent strains of flu -- for animals or for people . 
The usual sort of human crowding will not do it . 
Even massive , densely populated Mexico City , with more than 20 million inhabitants , wo n't produce the kind of lethal strains that the Western Front did in World War I. People died in Mexico because they were close to the epicenter of the disease , to the probable emergence of lethal strains from crowded pig breeding . 
But natural selection 's corrective action is swift and predictable : The strains spreading across the world are milder . '' 
The child died on Monday night , according to AP . 
Mexico City 's mayor Marcelo Ebrard says the swine flu outbreak seems to be stabilising . 
He said there was one more death to report . 
Ebrard said if the death toll keeps tapering off , he says he will consider easing the restrictions on public gatherings in the city . 
Scottish health secretary Nicolas Sturgeon has given the Scottish parliament an update on the health of Iain and Dawn Askham . 
A second couple who became ill after returning from a Mexico honeymoon remained in quarantine in their home , according to PA. . 
Pete and Jenny Marshall said they had been told to stay in their house in Edinburgh , along with friend Gemma O'Brien , as they wait to find out if they have contracted the virus . 
The WHO is also holding a news conference on the outbreak . 
Sebelius said antivirals are effective against the virus . 
`` We expect to see more cases and unfortunately more deaths , '' she said . 
Richard Besser , the acting director of the US CDC , said the situation is uncertain and changing quickly . 
We know from seasonal flu that 36,000 people die each year from flu . 
He said there are now 91 confirmed cases of swine flu in 10 US states . 
Five of these cases have resulted in people going to hospital . 
But he warned that the information is probably already out of date because the situation is changing so fast . 
`` We call this a pre-pandemic situation , '' Besser said . 
`` Unfortunately we will see more deaths . '' 
The WHO said it is moving closer to increasing its pandemic alert level . 
An official from the US Food and Drug Administration -LRB- whose name I did n't catch on the teleconference -RRB- said vaccine trials could start within two months . 
He explained why the disease is a concern : `` We have not seen this virus before . 
There is no background immunity in the population and spreading from human to human . '' 
Spain has detected its first case of swine flu in a person who has not recently visited Mexico , health minister Trinidad Jimenez said , Reuters reports . 
The CDC has confirmed the locations of the 91 US cases . 
The sun never sets on the Guardian 's swine flu coverage . 
Daniel Nasaw here , from the Washington bureau . 
Thanks Matthew and Haroon . 
From Mexico , Tara Huntington Hyde wonders on Comment is free : As multiple sources and medical experts have pointed out in the media , common strains of flu are responsible for far more deaths each year . 
So why all the frenzy ? 
A spokeswoman for BA says : We 're keeping the situation under review . 
We revised our booking policy -LRB- allowing people to reroute or defer travel -RRB- when the FCO changed its advisory on Monday , and we would review our policy again following any EC directives . 
But people still want to fly to Mexico . 
There were several dozen people on our flight out there this morning . 
There are people who want to fly out to help their families in Mexico and people who want to come home from Mexico . 
And the WHO said that there was no point in stopping travel . 
Our staff are briefed to help people with their questions . 
We have n't had time to consider France 's request to suspend flights , but we are still operating 12 flights a week to Mexico City and people are still flying . 
A high school in San Jose , California , is closed today until May 6 after a student tested positive for swine flu . 
The Santa Clara County , California health department sent parents a note that opens : `` Dear Parents : On April 23 , 2009 your child may have been exposed to swine flu '' . 
The note says officials closed the school on the advice of the Centres for Disease Control . 
Dr Keiji Fukuda of the WHO just told reporters the swine flu virus is clearly spreading and that officials have seen no evidence its spread is slowing . 
Fukuda said the organization is moving closer to declaring phase 5 on its pandemic alert . 
He said there is clear evidence now of human-to-human transmission . 
We 're currently at phase 4 out of 6 , with 6 indicating a pandemic . 
Phase 5 is characterized by human-to-human spread of the virus into at least two countries in one WHO region . 
While most countries will not be affected at this stage , the declaration of Phase 5 is a strong signal that a pandemic is imminent and that the time to finalize the organization , communication , and implementation of the planned mitigation measures is short . 
The Guardian 's Chris McGreal describes a father 's terrifying ordeal . 
A California man says his 16-year old son narrowly escaped death from the swine flu : I could n't even touch my son he was so hot . 
I could n't pick him up . 
His muscles were seizing up on him . 
He could n't move . 
He had a fever of 102 . 
He was throwing up , and diarrhoea . 
He screamed out when I touched him . 
My wife was freaking out . 
I thought I was going to lose my son . 
It 's the hardest thing in the world . 
The Guardian 's Scotland correspondent Severin Carrell reports some good news : 13 suspected cases there tested negative for swine flu . 
He writes that Scottish health secretary Nicola Sturgeon said tests on eight of the nine people who had been in contact with the first Britons to catch swine flu had shown they were not suffering from swine flu . 
Five others were also negative . 
Potential Swine Flu , huh ? 
Best stay at home , batten down the hatches and play some computer games ! 
What should we play first !? Resi Evil 5 !? Severin Carrell reports that the three British swine flu victims were all aboard a Thomson Airways First Choice flight from Canc n to Birmingham on April 21 . 
That was number TOM 578 . 
The airline said it would send a special flight for British holidaymakers who want to leave tomorrow morning , flying to Manchester and London Gatwick . 
The American Libertarian Party advises Obama to close the US border with Mexico , despite a WHO determination that the move would do little to stem the spread of the virus that has now spread to more than 30 countries . 
Communications director Donny Ferguson said in a statement : The proper response is simple . 
The government should use its rightful authority over the border to control entry into our country of foreign nationals who pose a threat to our health by spreading the virus into areas where it does not exist . 
America 's doctors , hospitals and health care professionals the best in the world should then take the lead on eradicating the virus where it already exists . 
Ferguson notes the only US death from swine flu was a Mexican toddler who traveled to Houston on holiday with his family . 
The Obama administration has ruled out the move . 
On Comment is free , Ben Goldacre defends the coverage : `` For so many people , their very first assumption on the story is that the media are lying '' . 
In La Glorida , Mexico , The Guardian 's Jo Tuckman writes about the search for swine flu ground zero . 
Meanwhile , in Paignton , Devon , The Guardian 's Steven Morris says parents at a school shuttered by authorities are concerned and angry after learning a 12-year old tested positive for swine flu . 
In Mexico City , The Guardian 's Latin America correspondent Rory Carroll writes that the city 's denizens are furious at an edict shutting its 30,000 restaurants . 
Not even after the 1985 earthquake was it like this , '' said Juan Perez , 44 , scrubbing the front of Julia 's , a shuttered taco joint on Avenida Cuauhtemoc . 
`` This is a disaster . '' 
On the other hand , he notes : Crime rates have fallen , air quality has greatly improved and birds are audible on what once were thronged thouroughfares . 
Reuters just reported that the WHO is likely to increase the flu alert phase to 5 because `` things are moving fast '' . 
The report quotes `` one well-informed source '' . 
The United States Marine Corps has confirmed a marine at a base in Twentynine Palms , California tested positive for swine flu . 
He and his roommate are being kept in isolation . 
The stricken marine showed up at an on-base medical clinic over the weekend complaining of flu-like symptoms , and has since largely recovered , the Marine Corps said . 
The Guardian 's Chris McGreal says South African health officials are investigating the first suspected cases of swine flu in Africa . 
South Africa 's National Institute for Communicable Diseases is testing a woman from the Western Cape who returned from Mexico on April 24 , and a woman from Gauteng who also recently returned from Mexico . 
Both are not seriously ill . 
The Southern hemisphere is just entering the annual flu season . 
US Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano reiterates the Obama administration has no plans to close the border with Mexico . 
Also , she said border agents have stopped 49 people showing suspected signs of swine flu . 
All but eight were subsquently cleared , and those were still under observation , she said . 
WHO Director General Dr Margaret Chan just announced the organization is raising its flu pandemic alert level to phase 5 out of 6 . 
`` All countries should immediately now activate their pandemic preparedness plans , '' she said . 
Phase 5 indicates `` pandemic is imminent '' , according to the WHO . 
WHO 's Chan was asked about countries ' freedom to break Roche 's patent on Tamiflu , an antiviral drug that has proven effective in treating the H1N1 swine flu , in order to manufacture it locally and , presumably , more cheaply . 
Chan left the door open : `` When and what the country is going to decide , it is their decision . '' 
