A panic stoked in order to posture and spend Despite the hysteria , the risk to Britons ' health is tiny - but that news wo n't sell papers or drugs , or justify the WHO 's budget We have gone demented . 
Two Britons are or were -LRB- not very -RRB- ill from flu . 
`` This could really explode , '' intones a reporter for BBC News . 
`` London warned : it 's here , '' cries the Evening Standard . 
Fear is said to be spreading `` like a Mexican wave '' . 
It `` could affect '' three-quarters of a million Britons . 
It `` could cost '' three trillion dollars . 
The `` danger '' , according to the radio , is that workers who are not ill will be `` worried '' -LRB- perhaps by the reporter -RRB- and fail to turn up at power stations and hospitals . 
Appropriately panicked , on Monday ministers plunged into their Cobra bunker beneath Whitehall to prepare for the worst . 
Had Tony Blair been about they would have worn germ warfare suits . 
British government is barking mad . 
What is swine flu ? 
It is flu , a mutation of the H1N1 virus of the sort that often occurs . 
It is not a pandemic , despite the media prefix , not yet . 
The BBC calls it a `` potentially terrible virus '' , but any viral infection is potentially terrible . 
Flu makes you feel ill . 
You should take medicine and rest . 
You will then get well again , unless you are very unlucky or have some complicating condition . 
It is best to avoid close contact with other people , as applies to a common cold . 
In Mexico , 2,000 people have been diagnosed as suffering swine flu . 
Some 150 of them have died , though there is said to be no pathological indication of all these deaths being linked to the new flu strain . 
People die all the time after catching flu , especially if not medicated . 
Nobody anywhere else in the world has died from this infection and only a handful have the new strain confirmed , most in America and almost all after returning from Mexico . 
A couple from Airdrie who caught the flu on holiday in Cancun are getting better . 
That tends to happen to people who get flu , however much it may disappoint editors . 
We appear to have lost all ability to judge risk . 
The cause may lie in the national curriculum , the decline of `` news '' or the rise of blogs and concomitant , unmediated hysteria , but people seem helpless in navigating the gulf that separates public information from their daily round . 
They can not set a statistic in context . 
They can not relate bad news from Mexico to the risk that inevitably surrounds their lives . 
The risk of catching swine flu must be millions to one . 
Health scares are like terrorist ones . 
Someone somewhere has an interest in it . 
We depend on others with specialist knowledge to advise and warn us and assume they offer advice on a dispassionate basis , using their expertise to assess danger and communicating it in measured English . 
Words such as possibly , potentially , could or might should be avoided . 
They are unspecific qualifiers and open to exaggeration . 
The World Health Organisation , always eager to push itself into the spotlight , loves to talk of the world being `` ready '' for a flu pandemic , apparently on the grounds that none has occurred for some time . 
There is no obvious justification for this scaremongering . 
I suppose the world is `` ready '' for another atomic explosion or another 9\/11 . 
Professional expertise is now overwhelmed by professional log-rolling . 
Risk aversion has trounced risk judgment . 
An obligation on public officials not to scare people or lead them to needless expense is overridden by the yearning for a higher budget or more profit . 
Health scares enable media-hungry doctors , public health officials and drugs companies to benefit by manipulating fright . 
On Monday the EU health commissioner , Androulla Vassiliou , advised travellers not to go to north or central America `` unless it 's very urgent '' . 
The British Foreign Office warned against `` all but essential '' travel to Mexico because of the danger of catching flu . 
It would make more sense to proffer such a warning against the American crime rate . 
Yet such health-and-safety hysteria wiped millions from travel company shares . 
During the BSE scare of 1995-7 , grown men with medical degrees predicted doom , terrifying ministers into mad politician disease . 
The scientists ' hysteria , that BSE `` has the potential to infect up to 10 million Britons '' , led to tens of thousands of cattle being fed into power stations and # 5bn spent on farmers ' compensation . 
A year later , the scientists tried to maintain that BSE `` might '' spread to sheep because , according to one government scientist , `` the absence of evidence is not evidence of absence '' . 
The meat industry was wrecked and an absurd ongoing cost was imposed on stock farmers with the closure and concentration of abattoirs . 
This science-based insanity was repeated during the Sars outbreak of 2003 , asserted by Dr Patrick Dixon , formerly of the London Business School , to have `` a 25 % chance of killing tens of millions '' . 
The press duly headlined a plague `` worse than Aids '' . 
Not one Briton died . 
The same lunacy occurred in 2006 with avian flu , erupting after a scientist named John Oxford declared that `` it will be the first pandemic of the 21st century '' . 
The WHO issued a statement that `` one in four Britons could die '' . 
Epidemiologists love the word `` could '' because it can always assure them of a headline . 
During the avian flu mania , Canada geese were treated like Goering 's bombers . 
RSPB workers were issued with protective headgear . 
The media went berserk , with interviewers asking why the government did not close all schools `` to prevent up to 50,000 deaths '' . 
The Today program 's John Humphrys became frantic when a dead goose flopped down on an isolated Scottish beach and a hapless local official refused to confirm the BBC 's hysteria . 
The bird might pose no threat to Scotland , but how dare he deny London journalists a good panic ? 
Meanwhile a real pestilence , MRSA and C difficile , was taking hold in hospitals . 
It was suppressed by the medical profession because it appeared that they themselves might be to blame . 
These diseases have played a role in thousands of deaths in British hospitals - the former a reported 1,652 and the latter 8,324 in 2007 alone . 
Like deaths from alcoholism , we have come to regard hospital-induced infection as an accident of life , a hazard to which we have subconsciously adjusted . 
MRSA and C difficile are not like swine flu , an opportunity for public figures to scare and posture and spend money . 
They are diseases for which the government is to blame . 
They claim no headlines and no Cobra priority . 
Their sufferers must crawl away and die in silence . 
A panic stoked in order to posture and spend This article appeared on p29 of the Main section section of the Guardian on 00.01 BST on Wednesday 29 April 2009 . 
Time for a ban . 
