Oil execs in Senate hearing as gulf oil spill cleanup efforts continue -- photos Oil companies stress one another 's failures in a Senate hearing as cleanup and containment efforts continue in the Gulf of Mexico , after the explosion of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig April 20 . 
View how tourism , commerce and the coastline are all at risk . 
Even as BP finished construction on one massive containment dome Monday and started drilling a relief well to cope with the oil leaking from crumpled pipes at the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico , lawmakers and Gulf Coast residents began questioning whether the company will take full responsibility for the economic losses stemming from the spill . 
The incremental steps forward -- the company finished one four-story , 74-ton dome and hopes to complete two others on Tuesday -- came as company and Obama administration officials predicted it might take up to three months to seal off the spill threatening the Gulf Coast 's sensitive ecosystem . 
The prospect of an extended leak has intensified concerns over what compensation BP is willing to pay , since a law passed after the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill requires companies to pay for cleanup costs but no more than $ 75 million for other damage . 
BP posted a fact sheet on its Web site saying it will take responsibility for the spill cleanup as well as provide compensation for `` legitimate and objectively verifiable '' claims for property damage , personal injury and commercial losses . 
On a day when the stock market rose sharply , the company 's shares fell $ 1.96 , or 3.8 percent , to close at $ 50.19 . 
It was the third worst performing stock in the S&P 500 . 
In his daily briefing Monday , White House press secretary Robert Gibbs underscored the administration 's `` commitment '' to affected residents that BP will pay them for their economic suffering . 
`` That 's part of the law . 
Absolutely , '' Gibbs said . 
`` The economic damages that are incurred are part of the cost of this incident . 
Also on Monday , four members of Obama 's Cabinet -- Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano , Interior Secretary Ken Salazar , Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Lisa P. Jackson and Energy Secretary Steven Chu -- met with BP chief executive Tony Hayward and Lamar McKay , BP America chairman and president , to discuss the ongoing response to the spill . 
Meanwhile , a group of Democratic senators including Robert Menendez -LRB- N.J. -RRB- and Bill Nelson -LRB- Fla. -RRB- introduced legislation Monday to raise oil companies ' liability limit retroactively to $ 10 billion . 
The economic implications of the disaster are potentially mammoth -- but highly uncertain . 
The annual commercial seafood harvest in the gulf is $ 661 million , recreational fishing contributes $ 757 million and nearly 8,000 jobs , and tourism related to wildlife adds $ 517 million , according to the Harte Research Institute for Gulf of Mexico Studies . 
It remained unclear Monday how much damage those industries will incur from the oil spill , and how long that damage will last . 
The research group estimates that $ 1.6 billion in annual economic activity is tied to the wetlands directly exposed to the spill . 
`` The question is if the marshes are impacted and how long they will be impacted , '' said David Yoskowitz , an economist at the institute . 
`` It 's all kind of up in the air right now until we really start to see the oil coming to shore and see what happens . 
There is no doubt that there will be some economic impact . '' 
If economic activity were reduced by only a few billion dollars , it would be damaging for the regional economies of Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama , but would be a drop in the bucket of the $ 14 trillion U.S. economy . 
But some analysts see the potential for even more dire outcomes . 
David R. Kotok , chief investment officer of Cumberland Advisors , laid out scenarios in a note to clients that range from damages in the tens of billions of dollars and years of cleanup to a cost in the hundreds of billions of dollars that leaves the gulf as a `` damaged sea '' for a generation . 
The spill , he said , has made the likelihood of a dip back into recession higher than it had been . 
`` A ` double-dip ' recession probably has been made more likely by this tragedy , '' Kotok wrote . 
Staff writers Neil Irwin , Joel Achenbach and Steven Mufson contributed to this report . '' 
