World Health Organisation reveals figures as health officials announce America 's third death from disease Sunday 10 May 2009 14.27 BST The US has more confirmed cases of swine flu than any other country , the World Health Organisation said as health officials announced the country 's third death from the disease today . 
The Centre for Disease Control and Prevention -LRB- CDC -RRB- reported 2,254 confirmed cases across the US , and the deputy director for science and public health , Anne Schuchat , warned that the total could be an underestimate . 
`` Today there are almost 3,000 probable and confirmed cases here in the United States , '' she said . 
`` The good news is we are not seeing a rise above the epidemic threshold . '' 
The US department of health said a man in Washington state with H1N1 influenza died last week . 
Officials said the man , in his 30s , had underlying heart conditions and viral pneumonia , but that swine flu was considered to have been a factor in his death . 
Mary Selecky , Washington state 's secretary of health , said : `` We urge people to take this outbreak very seriously . '' 
Although most cases appear to be mild , the virus has put 104 people across the US in hospital . 
Forty-eight people have died of the virus in Mexico where there have now been 1,626 confirmed cases and new deaths have also been recorded in Canada and Costa Rica . 
The death of a 53-year-old man in Costa Rica yesterday was the first involving swine flu outside North America . 
The man had from diabetes and chronic lung disease , the country 's health ministry said . 
Canadian officials said a woman who died there also had other health problems , but gave no further details . 
Nine new cases of swine flu have been confirmed in the UK eight in England and one more in Scotland bringing the total to 48 . 
A Department of Health spokeswoman said one of the three new adult cases was linked to travel to Mexico , while six children infected all attended the same school . 
