H1N1 flu vaccine a step closer as firms test seed LONDON | Wed Jun 10 , 2009 2:10 pm EDT LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Drugmakers are on track to have a vaccine against the new H1N1 strain of flu ready for the northern hemisphere autumn after receiving seed virus samples , company officials said on Wednesday . 
Sanofi-Aventis , GlaxoSmithKline , Novartis and Solvay all said their vaccine teams had obtained the new influenza A -LRB- H1N1 -RRB- seed virus within the past fortnight , enabling them to begin the production process . 
What is still unclear , however , is how much vaccine they will be able to manufacture , since this depends on how easily the new virus strain grows within a commercial production environment . 
`` It will probably take a couple of weeks to ascertain the yields before we get into large-scale manufacture , '' a Glaxo spokesman said . 
The World Health Organization -LRB- WHO -RRB- said on Tuesday it was on the verge of declaring the first influenza pandemic in more than 40 years . 
It is concerned at the sustained spread of the H1N1 strain -- including more than 1,000 cases in Australia -- following major outbreaks in North America , where it emerged in April . 
Confirmed community spread in a second region beyond North America would trigger moving to phase 6 on the U.N. agency 's six-step disease scale , signifying a full-blown pandemic . 
Recent investment in flu vaccine capacity means companies are in far better shape to meet the challenge of a pandemic than in the past . 
They are also well advanced in manufacturing supplies of the normal seasonal flu shot , allowing them to switch some capacity to making a pandemic H1N1 vaccine over the coming months . 
As a result , there could be windfall sales and profits this year for leading suppliers , some of which have already won orders for H1N1 vaccine from governments in Europe and North America . 
Although the H1N1 flu strain seems mild at present , health officials are worried it might return in a more virulent form in the northern hemisphere winter . 
The WHO estimates vaccine makers could produce 4.9 billion pandemic flu shots a year in the best-case scenario , though this will still not be enough for the entire world population of more than 6.5 billion , particularly if it turns out that people need more than one injection to gain immunity . 
The 4.9 billion estimate would be significantly lower if there was no wholesale switch from seasonal to pandemic flu vaccine-making . 
The H1N1 vaccine now being developed by companies must be tested first on ferrets and then on humans in clinical trials before regulatory authorities can approve it . 
