The battle over the constitution is regarded by most Iraqi women , confined to their homes by the occupation , as an irrelevance Wednesday 17 August 2005 01.15 BST A prominent group of Iraqi women who backed the US-British invasion recently met the American ambassador in an effort to pressure the politicians drawing up Iraq 's constitution not to limit women 's rights . 
Western feminist groups and some Iraqi women activists fear that Islamic law , if enshrined as a main source of legislation , will be used to restrict their rights , particularly in relation to marriage , divorce and inheritance . 
The US claims to share this concern . 
Iraqi women generally do not . 
To understand why , perhaps we need to remember that this constitution is being written in a war zone , in a country on the verge of a civil war . 
This process is designed not to represent the Iraqi people 's need for a constitution but to comply with an imposed timetable aimed at legitimising the occupation . 
The drafting process has increasingly proved a dividing , rather than a unifying , process . 
Under Saddam Hussein , we had a constitution described as `` progressive and secular '' . 
It did not stop him violating human rights , women 's included . 
The same is happening now . 
The militias of the parties heading the interim government are involved in daily violations of Iraqis ' human rights , women 's in particular , with the US-led occupation 's blessing . 
Will the new constitution put an end to this violence ? 
Most Iraqi women try to cope sensitively with the predicament of dealing with the occupation and the rise of reactionary practices affecting their rights and way of life . 
This applies across the political and class spectrum , to the secular left as much as to moderate Islamists and nationalists . 
Most also feel that the constitution is not their priority , and that those writing such a crucial document should be able to think clearly , to think of tomorrow . 
To do that one must be free of today 's fears and able to enjoy basic human rights , such as walking safely in the streets . 
Iraqi women can not . 
Despite all the rhetoric of `` building a new democracy '' , Iraqis are buckling under the burdens and abuse of the US-led occupation and its local Iraqi sub-contractors . 
Daily life for most Iraqis is still a struggle for survival . 
Human rights under occupation have proved , like weapons of mass destruction , to be a mirage . 
Torture and ill-treatment - even the torture of children in adult facilities - is widespread . 
Depleted uranium and other banned weapons have been used against Iraqi cities by occupying troops . 
Iraqi women were long the most liberated in the Middle East . 
Occupation has largely confined them to their homes . 
A typical Iraqi woman 's day begins with the struggle to get the basics : electricity , petrol or a cylinder of gas , water , food and medication . 
It ends with a sigh of relief at surviving death threats and violent attacks . 
For most women , simply to venture on to the street is to risk being attacked or kidnapped for profit or revenge . 
Young girls are sold to neighbouring countries for prostitution . 
In a land awash with oil , 16 million Iraqis rely on monthly food rations for survival . 
None has been received since May . 
Privatisation threatens free public services . 
Acute malnutrition among children has doubled . 
Unemployment , at 70 % , has fuelled poverty , prostitution , backstreet abortions and honor killings . 
Corruption and nepotism are rampant in the interim government . 
Gender is no obstacle : Layla Abdul-Latif , the minister of transport in Ayad Allawi 's administration , is under investigation for corruption . 
A quota system imposed by Paul Bremer , the former head of the Coalition Provisional Authority , ensures women 's participation in the interim government , the national assembly and the committee appointed to write the constitution . 
Iraqi women 's historical struggle against colonial domination , and for national unity , social justice and legal equality , has been reduced to bickering among a handful of `` women leaders '' over nominal political posts . 
Powerless , holed up in guarded areas , venturing out in daylight only with armed escorts , and lacking any credibility among Iraqi women , the failure of these `` leaders '' is catastrophic . 
Like their male colleagues , they have adopted a selective , largely US-oriented approach to human rights . 
The suffering of their sisters in cities showered with napalm , phosphorus and cluster bombs by US jets , the death of an estimated 100,000 Iraqis -LRB- half of them women and children -RRB- , is met with rhetoric about training women for leadership and democracy . 
Documents released in March by the American Civil Liberties Union highlight more than a dozen cases of rape and abuse of female detainees , and reveal that no action was taken against any soldier or civilian official as a result - and that US troops have destroyed evidence , to avoid a repetition of last year 's Abu Ghraib scandal . 
The silence of female National Assembly members and interim-government and US-financed women 's NGOs is deafening . 
In Iraq , `` women 's rights '' is an absurd discourse chewing on meaningless words . 
No wonder that the US-funded NGOs , which preach western-style women 's rights and democracy , are regarded as vehicles for foreign manipulation and are despised and boycotted , even when they recruit liberal or left personalities . 
Iraqi women know that the enemy is not Islam . 
There is a strong antipathy to anyone trying to conscript women 's issues to the racist `` war on terror '' targeted against the Muslim world . 
Most Iraqi women do not regard traditional society , exemplified by the neighborhood and extended family , however restrictive at times , as the enemy . 
In fact , it has in practice been the protector of women and children , of their physical safety and welfare , despite lowest-common-denominator demands on dress and personal conduct . 
The enemy is the collapse of the state and civil society . 
And the culprit is the foreign military invasion and occupation . 
Haifa Zangana is an Iraqi-born novelist and former prisoner of Saddam 's regime ; a version of this article appeared in the Cairo weekly Al-Ahram Letters for publication should be sent to : letters@guardian.co.uk If you need help using the site : userhelp@guardian.co.uk Call the main Guardian and Observer switchboard : This article was published on guardian . 
