Thad W. Allen can finally retire now . 
Allen , 61 , was a U.S. Coast Guard admiral when he was appointed `` national incident commander '' for the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
He retired from the Coast Guard , as scheduled , on June 30 - but continued to oversee the spill response as a civilian . 
On Friday , 11 weeks after the runaway well was capped July 15 , Allen announced that the `` national incident command '' was being dismantled . 
The response to the oil spill will continue , under the command of a lower-ranking Coast Guard admiral based in New Orleans . 
As of last week , about 22,600 people and 1,381 vessels were still involved in cleaning up oil along the coast . 
But Allen , whose military buzz cut and continuing love for nautical metaphors made an odd contrast with his new business-casual clothes , will be off the job . 
`` As I transition to a new phase of my professional life , '' he said in a statement Friday morning , `` I want to thank the thousands of individuals ... who worked tirelessly to contain the discharge , shut in the well , clean up the oil and mitigate the impacts of the spill . '' 
Allen , who served nearly 40 years in the Coast Guard , said Friday that he will join the Rand Corp. as a senior fellow , starting Monday . 
Allen had planned to join Rand in May , but his transition was delayed by the oil spill , according to a company news release . 
Rand does research and analysis on homeland security , environmental and national security issues . 
Friday afternoon , President Obama said that he was `` profoundly grateful '' to Allen for his `` years of dedicated service '' to the nation and for his leadership in the spill response effort . 
`` At a time when he could have enjoyed a well-deserved retirement from the United States Coast Guard , Admiral Allen stepped up to the plate and served his country when his skills and experience were urgently needed , '' Obama said in a statement . 
Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano issued a statement praising Allen 's handling of the crisis . 
`` The BP oil spill presented unique challenges and required an aggressive , all-of-government approach , '' Napolitano said . 
Also Friday , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced the reopening of 5,628 square miles of the gulf for fishing . 
The newly reopened area , off the coast of Louisiana just west of the Mississippi Delta , means that just 11 percent of federal waters in the gulf are closed to fishing . 
At the height of the spill , 37 percent were closed . 
News , features , and opinions on environmental policy , the science of climate change , and tools to live a green life . 
