U.S. Northeast digs out from blizzard , tornado strikes in South . 
Full Article SCENARIOS - Ivory Coast heading back towards civil war ? 
ABIDJAN\/DAKAR | Tue Mar 1 , 2011 5:29 pm IST ABIDJAN\/DAKAR -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Ivory Coast 's post-poll crisis is degenerating into armed conflict , with gun battles between forces loyal to presidential rivals erupting in the commercial capital Abidjan and the volatile west of the country . 
Incumbent leader Laurent Gbagbo has defied international pressure to step down after U.N. certified poll results showed he lost an election that was meant to end years of stalemate following a 2002-3 civil war . 
His rival Alassane Ouattara is internationally recognized as president-elect of Ivory Coast but remains trapped in a lagoon-side hotel under siege by the pro-Gbagbo military , but forces siding with him have succeeded in seizing a town in the west and large swathes of an Abidjan neighborhood . 
Here are some possible scenarios in the weeks ahead : THE RETURN TO ALL-OUT WAR With daily AK-47 assault rifles and heavy weapons fire booming through Abidjan , and clashes erupting in various places across the country this week , a return to all out civil war is looking increasingly likely . 
Gbagbo still retains the public loyalty of the armed forces but , fearing a coup , is believed to have ensured that only his core elite forces have adequate access to the army 's weapons . 
U.N. accusations that Gbagbo has been seeking attack helicopters from Belarus further support fears of war . 
Both Belarus and Gbagbo 's government have denied the accusations . 
It is not clear whether Ouattara is ready to sanction a full-blown rebel advance , as it would taint his credibility if he came to power . 
Nor is it clear the rebels would succeed if they mounted any such offensive . 
But analysts say Gbagbo 's forces may be spread thin if clashes are opened up on enough fronts and he risks defections if losses within his ranks start building up -- as they seemed to do this week , with a number of deadly ambushes in Abidjan . 
A military source says increasing numbers of soldiers in the Ivorian military are deserting , by switching their phones off and going into hiding . 
A few are defecting to the other side . 
An unknown factor remains foreign mercenaries and Ivorian militia fighters that analysts say Gbagbo has on his payroll , although he needs money to pay them at a time when the financial noose is closing around him from sanctions and bank closures . 
A STALEMATE OF SPORADIC CLASHES Ivory Coast 's crises have a habit of fizzling into a slow burn neither war nor peace stalemate -- as has been the case since 2002-3 . 
In this scenario , no side makes much progress and the frontline does n't move much from the existing north-south one , with armed men on each side looting what they can from a rapidly shrinking economy . 
But previous such stalemates were possible because negotiations held out the hope of a resolution eventually . 
That now seems impossible since Gbagbo effectively tore up the peace process by refusing to accept the poll results . 
In this scenario , there would be a high likelihood of civilian unrest . 
This week saw pro-Gbagbo mobs attack Ouattara supporters and U.N. peacekeepers , after a call by Gbagbo 's youth leader to set up roadblocks and block their movements . 
AU PROPOSES A WAY OUT African presidents tasked with resolving the Ivorian crisis by proposing a `` binding solution '' have been given another month to complete what appears to be a Herculean task . 
Divisions emerged within the panel during their working visit to Abidjan , with Burkina Faso 's president and the head of ECOWAS objecting to the AU continuing with its trip despite threats against them by pro-Gbagbo supporters . 
Both sides have dug in so deep it is unclear what the AU might propose that would be palatable to both . 
An outside chance is talk that the AU could propose scrapping the Nov. 28 poll and holding a new one , potentially even with both Gbagbo and Ouattara ruled out and an outside force like Nigeria filling the security vacuum . 
This is unlikely to be popular in either camp but could be seen as the only way to break the deadlock . 
GBAGBO BOWS TO DEMANDS AND LEAVES Analysts see this as extremely unlikely unless his own life is in danger . 
Gbagbo has shown that he is more than willing to watch his country implode economically and head back to all out civil war if it will keep him in power . 
He has brushed off Western economic sanctions , bank closures and threats of force by West African regional bloc ECOWAS . 
He has also snubbed offers of a potentially lucrative soft landing in exile in the United States or South Africa . 
The killings of dozens of Ouattara supporters by pro-Gbagbo forces or allied militias in past weeks also create a strong disincentive for him to leave voluntarily , fearing reprisals or being tried for war crimes in the International Criminal Court . 
However , if the insurgency that is raging in Abidjan could attract enough army defectors to reach the gates of Gbagbo 's house , that might be more persuasive . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
