VALLETTA | Tue Mar 1 , 2011 9:39 am EST VALLETTA -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Malta has refused to return two warplanes to Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi that were flown to the Mediterranean island by defecting pilots last week , Maltese Prime Minister Lawrence Gonzi said . 
Gonzi told reporters late on Monday that Libya 's prime minister had personally requested the return of the two Mirage jet fighters . 
Malta rejected the request and the fighters are still under armed guard at the airport . 
Their pilots have sought political asylum . 
Gonzi said a Libyan Arab Airlines flight which was denied landing permission at Malta on Tuesday last week had been carrying pilots sent to take the Mirages back . 
The prime minister told a news conference he had approved humanitarian missions to Libya from the island , which according to its constitution is neutral and non-aligned . 
Some 12,000 oil workers have been evacuated in a week by air and ferries to Malta , which has a population of just 410,000 . 
A rapid succession of flights is taking them on to their home countries . 
More evacuated workers arrived from Libya on Tuesday with a German-chartered ship bringing some 500 workers of many nationalities . 
The island had also been the departure point for rescue flights by the British Royal Air Force to pick up workers from the desert . 
The flights have been carried out without Libyan authorization . 
Gonzi said Malta was offering its service as a coordinating center for international humanitarian aid to Libya . 
A number of Maltese NGOs have already started public collections of food and medicines . 
Anti-Gaddafi protesters scrambled up the facade of the two-storey Libyan embassy in Valletta on Tuesday and raised the pre-Gaddafi Libyan flag . 
Libyan Ambassador Saadun Suayeh , who had earlier met the protesters , said he would accept any flag which represented the Libyan people . 
He said he intended to stay in his post but would meet Foreign Minister Tonio Borg . 
In media comments over the past two days , the ambassador has made a distinction between the Libyan people and the Libyan government and said the embassy represented all of Libya . 
However he also gave the Libyan official version of what was going on in his country . 
-LRB- Reporting by Chris Scicluna , editing by Paul Taylor -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
