U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton gestures during a news conference after her speech at the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva February 28 , 2011 . 
WASHINGTON | Tue Mar 1 , 2011 12:46 pm EST WASHINGTON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya may become a peaceful democracy or face a drawn-out civil war , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on Tuesday as she urged Congress not to cut funds she said were vital to deal with crises abroad . 
U.S. global leadership needs resolve and resources , Clinton told the House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee in the first of four congressional hearings this week where she will defend her budget against proposed Republican reductions . 
`` In the years ahead , Libya could become a peaceful democracy or it could face protracted civil war , or it could descend into chaos . 
The stakes are high , '' she said . 
`` The entire -LRB- Middle East -RRB- region is changing , and a strong and strategic American response will be essential . '' 
Libya , where Muammar Gaddafi is trying to crush a revolt , was an example of how Washington must use its resources to `` protect our interests and advance our values , '' she told the lawmakers , some of whom want to cut overseas spending . 
Clinton spoke a day after the United States began moving warships and aircraft closer to Libya , and froze $ 30 billion in assets , stepping up pressure on Gaddafi to give up power . 
`` We are taking no options off the table so long as the Libyan government continues to turn its guns on its own people , '' she said . 
Clinton has just returned from Geneva , where she discussed Libya with other governments outraged over Gaddafi 's violent attempt to put down the rebellion against his 41-year rule . 
No one expects any direct foreign military intervention in Libya for now , although there has been talk of a no-fly zone to prevent Libya 's air force from attacking protesters . 
U.S. officials say privately that there is little appetite for a no-fly zone . 
Separately , Clinton played down the idea of foreign forces helping opposition fighters to topple Gaddafi , saying `` they want this to have been their accomplishment . 
We respect that . '' 
Clinton testified to defend U.S. President Barack Obama 's $ 47 billion budget request -- up 1 percent from 2010 levels -- for the State Department and U.S. Agency for International Development , calling it a `` lean budget for lean times . '' 
Republicans , who took control of the House in November elections , have called for a tough new look at non-military overseas spending amid widespread calls to control the ballooning U.S. federal deficit . 
Clinton said Americans were justifiably concerned about the national debt but insisted they also wanted investments in the future , including diplomacy and aid to other countries . 
Retreating from international responsibilities often imposed long-term costs , she said , as happened in Afghanistan when the United States `` walked away '' after the Cold War ended and Soviet troops had gone home . 
`` We saved money in the short term . 
But those savings came at an unspeakable cost -- one we are still paying , 10 years later , in money and lives , '' she said , alluding to the rise of al Qaeda in Afghanistan and the September 11 , 2001 , attacks . 
Representative Howard Berman , the committee 's top Democrat , called the Republican approach to cutting spending on diplomacy and development aid a `` slash and burn process . '' 
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen , the Florida Republican who chairs the committee , largely rejected that argument . 
`` Those who complain about diminished levels of international affairs funding need to ask themselves : How much less would an insolvent United States of America be able to do ? '' 
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
`` Invest in the future '' ? 
, translation = spend more money . 
Typical Republican politicians , $ 3.075 billion for Israel . 
All freshman Republicans sign a letter to Republican leadership to keep those bucks going to the right wing government of Israel . 
Typical politicians thinking our money is their money to do with however they please . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
