U.S. warns of civil war in Libya unless Gaddafi goes TRIPOLI | Tue Mar 1 , 2011 6:36 pm EST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya could descend into civil war unless Muammar Gaddafi quits , the United States said on Tuesday , its demand for his departure intensifying pressure on the longtime leader after news of Western military preparations . 
Gaddafi remained defiant , dispatching forces to a western border area amid fears that the most violent Arab revolt may grow bloodier and cause a humanitarian crisis . 
Tunisian border guards fired into the air on Tuesday to try to control a crowd of people clamoring to cross the frontier and escape the violence . 
About 70,000 people have passed through the Ras Jdir border post in the past two weeks , and many more of the hundreds of thousands of foreign workers in Libya are expected to follow . 
Gaddafi 's son Saif al-Islam warned the West against launching any military action to topple Gaddafi , and said the veteran ruler would not step down or go into exile . 
`` Using force against Libya is not acceptable . 
There 's no reason , but if they want ... we are ready , we are not afraid , '' he told Sky television , adding : `` We live here , we die here . '' 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told U.S. lawmakers : `` Libya could become a peaceful democracy or it could face protracted civil war . '' 
She said the Obama administration would look into allegations that Gaddafi personally ordered the 1988 Lockerbie bombing , because of new statements by defecting Libyan officials `` making it clear that the order came from the very top . '' 
The United States said it was moving ships and planes closer to the oil-producing North African state . 
The destroyer USS Barry moved through the Suez Canal on Monday and into the Mediterranean . 
Two amphibious assault ships , the USS Kearsarge , which can carry 2,000 Marines , and the USS Ponce , are in the Red Sea and are expected to go through the canal early on Wednesday . 
The White House said the ships were being redeployed in preparation for possible humanitarian efforts but stressed it `` was not taking any options off the table . '' 
`` We are looking at a lot of options and contingencies . 
No decisions have been made on any other actions , '' Defense Secretary Robert Gates said . 
French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe sounded a note of caution , saying military intervention would not happen without a clear United Nations mandate . 
British Prime Minister David Cameron said it was unacceptable that `` Colonel Gaddafi can be murdering his own people using airplanes and helicopter gunships . '' 
General James Mattis , commander of U.S. Central Command , told a Senate hearing that imposing a no-fly zone would be a `` challenging '' operation that would mean actual attack . 
`` You would have to remove air defense capability in order to establish a no-fly zone , so no illusions here , '' he said . 
`` It would be a military operation -- it would n't be just telling people not to fly airplanes . '' 
Analysts said Western leaders were in no mood to rush into conflict after the troubled , drawn-out involvements in Afghanistan and Iraq . 
`` They will be desperate not to place themselves in that situation , unless not doing so would result in even worse massacres , '' said Shashank Joshi of London 's Royal United Services Institute . 
Suspicions grew that Gaddafi , a survivor of past coup attempts , did not grasp the scale of the forces against him . 
`` All my people love me , '' he told the ABC network and the BBC on Monday , dismissing the significance of a rebellion that has ended his control over much of oil-rich eastern Libya . 
Rebel fighters claimed the balance of the conflict was swinging their way . 
`` Our strength is growing and we are getting more weapons . 
We are attacking checkpoints , '' said Yousef Shagan , a spokesman in Zawiyah , only 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- from Tripoli . 
A rebel army officer in the eastern city of Ajdabiyah said rebel units were becoming more organised . 
`` All the military councils of Free Libya are meeting to form a unified military council to plan an attack on Gaddafi security units , militias and mercenaries , '' Captain Faris Zwei said . 
He said there were more than 10,000 volunteers in the city , plus defecting soldiers . 
Rebels guarding a munitions store said they feared a direct hit by Gaddafi 's warplanes could cause destruction for miles around . 
But Zwei said pilots appeared to be aiming to miss . 
`` We have complete confidence in the Libyan air force not to hit anything that affects their relatives in the east , '' he said . 
Despite the widespread collapse of Gaddafi 's writ , his forces were fighting back in some regions . 
A reporter on the Tunisian border saw Libyan troops reassert control at a crossing abandoned on Monday , and residents of Nalut , about 60 km -LRB- 35 miles -RRB- from the border , said they feared pro-Gaddafi forces were planning to recapture the town . 
Mohamed , a resident of rebel-held Misrata , told Reuters by phone : `` Symbols of Gaddafi 's regime have been swept away from the city . 
Only a -LRB- pro-Gaddafi -RRB- battalion remains at the city 's air base but they appear to be willing to negotiate safe exit out of the air base . 
We are not sure if this is genuine or just a trick to attack the city again . '' 
Across the country , tribal leaders , officials , military officers and army units have defected to the rebels . 
Sanctions will squeeze his access to funds . 
Tripoli is a clear Gaddafi stronghold , but even in the capital , loyalties are divided . 
Many on the streets on Tuesday expressed loyalty but a man who described himself as a military pilot said : `` One hundred percent of Libyans do n't like him . '' 
There were queues outside bread shops on Tuesday morning . 
Some residents said many shops were limiting the number of loaves customers could buy . 
The U.N. General Assembly on Tuesday unanimously suspended Libya 's membership of the U.N. Human Rights Council because of violence by Libyan forces against protesters . 
A U.N. Security Council resolution on Saturday called for a freeze on Gaddafi 's assets and a travel ban and refers his crackdown to the International Criminal Court . 
Libya 's National Oil Corporation said output had halved because of the departure of foreign workers . 
Brent crude prices surged above $ 116 a barrel as supply disruptions and the potential for more unrest in the Middle East and North Africa kept investors on edge . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
By not demanding immediate military assistance from outside forces to combat Gadhafi s helicopter gunships , tanks and other heavy weaponry is it the will of the Islamic hardliners in the Libyan opposition to sacrifice 100,000 Libyan citizens to Gadhafi s military machine so that these Islamic hardliners can impose their diabolical Religious Democracy upon the backs of Libyan citizens and thereby crush the Libyan revolution ? 
Local Libyan militias had better read the text of those demanding their weapons for they will be turned on them if they choose unwisely . 
Run with wolves be prepared to be devoured or worse to become a wolf . 
We should go public with a bona fide no-fly-zone offer ! 
Make that , Very Public , offer directly to the Libyan opposition leaders in Benghazi and elsewhere and , in addition , make it through a formal demand for a no fly zone in the UN Security Council and General Assembly . 
Immediate unilateral US action may or may not be necessary at the most current moment , but if thousands of Libyans citizens are killed by Qaddhfi , let it NOT be said that it was for lack of a genuine effort by the US . 
A flight of F-15s coming in fast and low over his troops will put an end to this . 
All they want is a paycheck , and they are n't willing to fight hard to get one . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
