ZAWIYAH , Libya | Tue Mar 1 , 2011 1:33 pm EST ZAWIYAH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebels holding a port city near the Libyan capital are launching counter-attacks against government forces massing in the area , but food in the encircled town is running short . 
Armed with tanks , anti-aircraft guns mounted on pick-up trucks and automatic rifles , the rebels in the strategic city of Zawiyah said they had repelled several attacks in past days by forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi trying to retake the city . 
The road between Tripoli and Zawiyah , which is about 50 km -LRB- 30 miles -RRB- long , was blocked by at least 12 checkpoints , most of them reinforced with tanks , when Reuters reporters drove through the area on Tuesday . 
At least eight Russian-designed truck-mounted Grad rocket launchers were deployed about 20 km east of Zawiyah . 
The rebels , who appear to control only the central part of the city , said their forces had started launching attacks on army checkpoints encroaching on the town . 
`` Our strength is growing and we are getting more weapons . 
We are attacking checkpoints , '' said Yousef Shagan , a resistance spokesman . 
Asked if more attacks were planned , he added : `` We plan to attack checkpoints to send them away . '' 
In one incident late on Monday , he said three government soldiers were killed in skirmishes with rebel forces . 
A Libyan government spokesman said 10 soldiers were killed . 
The government says it is not using military force to retake rebel-held cities . 
However , one official did not rule out using force on Monday if all other options were exhausted . 
In central Zawiyah , where the red , green and black flags of the anti-Gaddafi revolt flew from government buildings , protesters said roadblocks around the city were disrupting food and medicine supplies . 
`` The situation is really bad . 
We are isolated , we can not get food supplies , '' said Ibrahim Klami , a human rights lawyer who has joined the rebellion in Zawiyah . 
`` We need human rights organizations to help us . 
There is little food and milk for babies . 
... Gaddafi is trying to hide this . 
The city is no longer controlled by Gaddafi . '' 
On the outskirts of the city , life appeared to be more tranquil . 
Shops were open and herds of sheep were grazing in lush fields dotted with yellow daffodils . 
But in the central square , barricaded against the rest of the city with blocks of concrete and palm tree trunks , a tank and several operational anti-aircraft guns were a testament to the rebels ' determination to fight on . 
A crowd chanted `` Gaddafi you madman '' and `` Down with the dictator '' and fired shots into the air . 
The entire front of a building facing the square was painted in opposition colors . 
Some , clutching their Kalashnikovs , were reclining inside military-style tents pitched over heaps of colorful carpets . 
`` This is how we win . 
Our victory is near , '' said one young man , Haitham . 
`` We have weapons and people 's support . '' 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
