LONDON | Tue Mar 1 , 2011 7:40 am EST LONDON -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - On paper , Libya 's military has some 100,000 troops , more than 2,000 tanks , 374 aircraft and a navy and includes two patrol submarines . 
What Colonel Muammar Gaddafi actually has left to call on is a different matter . 
Here are some details of Libya 's armed forces , officially totaling around 76,000 active personnel , plus a reserve or people 's militia of some 40,000 . 
GROUND FORCES - STRENGTH ON PAPER : Numbers : 50,000 including 25,000 conscripts . 
Main Battle Tanks - 2,205 , including 180 T-90S and 200 T-62 . 
The rest are in store . 
Armored personnel carriers - 945 . 
Even before the uprising , Libya 's military strength was seen as having been seriously undermined by sanctions and neglect although Western powers had just began to sell it weapons again . 
Much of the equipment is seen as poorly maintained or unusable , leaving it hard to estimate genuine numbers . 
Analysts say Gaddafi tried to emasculate the regular army to avoid the emergence of commanders who might rival his immediate family , relying instead particularly on three loyal `` regime protection '' units often of his own tribe . 
That leaves him with what most estimate to be some 10-12 ,000 loyal Libyan troops . 
The most reliable formation is seen to be the 32nd Brigade commanded by Gaddafi 's son Khamis . 
Repeated reports from witnesses , rights groups and others talk of African mercenaries flown in by Gaddafi to help strengthen his government . 
Exact numbers are impossible to obtain . 
In Libya 's east around the city of Benghazi , regular military forces appear to have either defected to the opposition or melted away . 
Citizens groups also appear to have taken arms . 
But analysts say the opposition lacks much in the way of command and control or even any form of centralized leadership . 
So far , opposition units have focused primarily on defending territory and have shown little appetite to advance . 
That leaves loyalist forces trying to stem protest and perhaps regain lost territory in Libya 's west around Tripoli . 
The key coastal city of Sirte between Tripoli and Benghazi is still under government control and the east effectively lost . 
But experts warn the situation remains fluid . 
`` We underestimate the degree of loyalty in the security forces , '' warns Shashank Joshi , Associate Fellow at the Royal United Services Institute . 
`` The defections appear to be patchwork and possibly along tribal lines . 
The units that matter , such as Khamis 's 32nd Brigade , are holding together . 
NAVY - STRENGTH ON PAPER Submarines - 2 patrol submarines . 
Libya 's two surviving Foxtrot class diesel submarines were delivered by the Soviet Union in the late 1980s , but outside experts have long questioned their reliability . 
According to IHS Jane 's , in 2003 one was reported to be in dry dock and one was sea going -- although unlikely to be fully operational . 
It suggested both might already have been abandoned . 
AIR FORCE - STRENGTH ON PAPER Combat capable aircraft - 374 . 
227 fighter aircraft -- 13-Mirage F1-ED , 94 MiG-25 , 75 MiG-23 and 45 MiG-21 . 
Helicopters - 85 Support helicopters Analysts estimate many of Libya 's fast jets are in fact no longer airworthy . 
Gaddafi has so far also lost at least three aircraft in the course of this uprising with two jets defecting to Malta and the crew of a third ejecting over the desert rather than bomb opposition targets as ordered . 
Occasional reports have also spoken of the use of helicopter gunships , fuelling calls for foreign powers to impose a no-fly zone . 
There are also Air Defense Command forces which possess at least 216 surface-to-air missiles and 144 towed and 72 self propelled missiles . 
Again , maintenance may be an issue . 
Most analysts believe Libya 's armed forces would not be able to seriously threaten outside air forces attempting to enforce a no-fly zone , saying Gaddafi 's defense capabilities probably lag behind those of Iraq 's Saddam Hussein before the US-led 2003 invasion . 
The BBC reported a British RAF Hercules transport aircraft evacuating foreign nationals came under small arms fire this week but was not seriously damaged . 
Some suggested the attack might have come from opposition forces who mistook the plane for one of Gaddafi 's aircraft on a bombing raid . 
According to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons -LRB- OPCW -RRB- , Libya destroyed its entire stockpile of chemical weapons munitions in early 2004 as part of a rapprochement with the West that also saw it abandon a nuclear program . 
The OPCW told Reuters Libya did retain some 9.5 tons of deadly mustard gas at a secret desert location but no longer had the capability to deliver it . 
Sources : Reuters\/IISS Military Balance 2010 . 
-LRB- additional reporting by David Cutler -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
I pray for those who take a stand and put their lives on the line to free Libya of the despicable despot . 
Libya 's rebels need to find a political leader to crystallize their efforts and be able to form a temporary government . 
Then if invited by the people 's representative the West should support the people of Libya by sending in troops and ending this bloodshed quickly ! 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
