\* Clinton : `` strategic American response will be essential '' \* Defends `` lean budget for lean times '' and urges no cuts \* Short-term savings can lead to big costs later - Clinton WASHINGTON , March 1 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libya could become a peaceful democracy or face a drawn-out civil war , Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on Tuesday , urging U.S. lawmakers not to cut funds needed to deal with crises abroad . 
American global leadership needs both resolve and resources , Clinton told the House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee . 
`` In the years ahead , Libya could become a peaceful democracy or it could face protracted civil war , or it could descend into chaos . 
The stakes are high , '' she said . 
`` The entire -LRB- Middle East -RRB- region is changing , and a strong and strategic American response will be essential . '' 
The turmoil in Libya , where Muammar Gaddafi is trying to crush a revolt , was an example of how Washington had to use its diplomatic and defense assets as well as development aid to `` protect our interests and advance our values , '' she told the lawmakers , some of whom want to cut overseas spending . 
Clinton spoke a day after the United States began moving warships and aircraft closer to Libya , and froze $ 30 billion in assets , steeping up pressure on Gaddafi to give up power . 
The U.S. Agency for International Development is sending two humanitarian teams to the region to help provide food and medicine to Libyans fleeing into Tunisia and Egypt . 
`` We are taking no options off the table so long as the Libyan government continues to turn its guns on its own people , '' she said . 
Clinton has just returned from Geneva , where she discussed Libya with other governments outraged over Gadaffi 's violent attempt to put down the rebellion against his 41-year rule . 
Clinton was invited to testify to the House panel in defense of President Barack Obama 's $ 47 billion budget request for the State Department and the USAID . 
That is up 1 percent from 2010 levels . 
Clinton called it a `` lean budget for lean times . '' 
Republicans , who took control of the House in November elections , have called for a tough new look at non-military overseas spending amid widespread calls to control the ballooning U.S. federal deficit . 
Clinton said Americans were justifiably concerned about the national debt but insisted they also wanted investments in the future , including diplomacy and aid to other countries . 
Retreating from international responsibilities often imposed long-term costs , she said , as happened in Afghanistan when the United States `` walked away '' after the Cold War ended and Soviet troops had gone home . 
`` We saved money in the short term . 
But those savings came at an unspeakable cost -- one we are still paying , 10 years later , in money and lives , '' she said . 
Obama has proposed spending almost $ 110 billion in 2012 on Afghanistan , where he has pledged to begin withdrawing the first of about 100,000 U.S. troops fighting Taliban insurgents by the middle of this year . 
Of this amount , about $ 107 billion is military spending . 
The State Department , mounting its own civilian `` surge '' aimed at stabilizing Afghanistan , would spend an extra $ 2.2 billion there as it seeks to increase assistance programs . 
`` Retreating from our civilian surge in Afghanistan -- with our troops still in the field -- would be a grave mistake , '' Clinton said . 
She said U.S. aid to Pakistan was `` equally important . '' 
Obama proposes maintaining significant aid to Pakistan to arm , train and equip its military to fight extremists with about $ 1.1 billion earmarked for the Pakistan Counterinsurgency Fund , roughly the same level as last year . 
The Obama administration is launching its requests for the 2012 budget at a time when spending for 2011 is still not approved by Congress . 
Clinton said the 16 percent cut to the State Department and USAID included in a House-passed spending bill for 2011 last month would be `` devastating to our national security . '' 
-LRB- Editing by John O'Callaghan and Eric Beech -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
