AJDABIYAH , Libya | Tue Mar 1 , 2011 10:34 am EST AJDABIYAH , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyans guarding a major munitions store near the rebel-held eastern town of Ajdabiyah fear a direct hit by warplanes sent by Muammar Gaddafi 's military could cause destruction for miles around . 
A warplane bombed just outside the walls of the Haniyeh base on Monday before returning to attack again , striking close to a storage bunker inside the walls , according to an officer at the site who has joined the opposition to the Libyan leader . 
Military officers and other witnesses confirmed on Tuesday that the attack had taken place after the accuracy of the report was questioned . 
The United States said on Monday it was moving ships and planes closer to the country , and British Prime Minister David Cameron has said his government is working work to prepare a `` no-fly '' zone to protect the Libyan people . 
`` There was bombing here last night , but nothing was hit , '' said Jumah Sayed , one of the civilians who had volunteered to guard the base . 
`` If one of these bunkers were hit , everything would be destroyed for miles around . '' 
Mohammed Yusuf , the officer , said anti-aircraft guns were fired at the raiding warplane . 
Then at around 9 p.m. , defenders heard a helicopter . 
`` We attacked with anti-aircraft fire and it left without bombing anything , '' he told Reuters at the site . 
Another aircraft was heard at around 5:30 a.m. on Tuesday , added Saad Mahmoud , another officer who defected from Gaddafi 's military during a revolt that has put much of the Libya under rebel control . 
`` We fired randomly in the air and it left , '' he said . 
The rebels said the bomb which struck inside the walls of the base had landed in a minefield , making it impossible to independently check the blast site . 
The base comprises 35 bunkers . 
This correspondent was given access to one which a military expert said was packed with at least 10,000 tonnes of munitions of every caliber . 
Five tanks were also visible at the base . 
The rebels said they do not have weapons to fire the heavy caliber ammunition . 
