RAS JDIR , Tunisia | Tue Mar 1 , 2011 2:10 pm EST RAS JDIR , Tunisia -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Soldiers fired into the air in an effort to subdue a wave of Egyptian laborers desperate to escape Libya on Tuesday , as the refugee crisis created by the rebellion against Muammar Gaddafi escalated . 
Aid workers threw bottles of water and loaves of bread over the wall to a sea of men surging forward toward the safety of Tunisian soil , in a futile attempt to calm them . 
Young Tunisians with branches torn from the trees kept them from clambering over the wall between border posts . 
Tunisian officials were processing entrants as fast as they could , as medics plucked fainting men from the heaving mass sweeping over the chest-high steel gate . 
Panicking migrants passed their bulging suitcases , rugs , and blankets overhead at the gate where soldiers with sticks tried to hold them back . 
A Tunisian officer with a loud hailer shouted reassurances that they would be let in . 
Order looked close to collapse at one brief point in the overflowing border compound on the Tunisian side , where throngs of men jostled and long lines of exhausted migrants in torn jackets and headcloths queued for water , food , and toilets . 
Troops fired warning shots in the air and white-faced officers unholstered their automatic pistols . 
Many tens of thousands more are expected to flee west from the violence that has consumed Liby as Gaddafi 's regime teeters on the verge of collapse . 
`` We ca n't see beyond that building on the Libyan side but we think there are many more waiting to come through , '' said Ayman Gharaibeh , team leader for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees -LRB- UNHCR -RRB- at Ras Jdir . 
`` The numbers are daunting , '' he said . 
The last couple of days had seen an upsurge and refugees were now crossing at a rate of up to 15,000 a day , he said . 
There was no one to coordinate relief and establish order on the Libyan side and the UNHCR judged it was not safe to go over there . 
Medecins sans Frontieres and the Red Cross-Red Crescent were trying to liaise with the Libyans to slow the flow . 
`` It looks like it 's going to get worse ... They are going to break down the wall in the end , '' said Gharaibeh grimly . 
In the mass of people behind the wall on the Libyan side , Bangladeshis held up a sheet with the words : `` Help Help Help . '' 
In the Tunisian compound , a few hundred Vietnamese squatted stoically , waiting their turn to be bussed out and home . 
About 70,000 refugees had entered Tunisia since the uprising began in Libya and only an estimated 20 percent had been repatriated , the UNHCR team-leader said . 
Tunisia 's capacity to feed , shelter and provide sanitation for the destitute workers is being pushed to breaking point . 
The UN agency built a transit camp of hundreds of white tents overnight about 7 km -LRB- 4 miles -RRB- back from the border , with the capacity to provide temporary relief for up to 20,000 . 
`` When are we going to be taken out of here ? 
We can not accept this , '' said one Egyptian . 
`` Give me a camel . 
I will take a camel . 
I just want to go home . '' 
Evacuation flights were picking up refugees from Djerba airport in the plush beach resort area in the north of Tunisia , a world away from the chaos . 
Ships have taken boatloads away from the port of Zarzis but not nearly fast enough to ease the pressure , said Tunisian army Colonel Mohamed Essoussi . 
`` We need the most rapid possible evacuation , '' he said . 
`` The major weaknesses are in transport , air and maritime transport . '' 
The emergency shelters and transit camp could handle 5,000 a day , he said . 
`` We are now feeding 17,000 people . '' 
International aid agencies at the scene agreed with the assessment . 
Tunisia 's capacity to shelter the flow was at its limit . 
They said faster evacuation was needed and control on the Libyan side would greatly ease the crisis . 
However , there appeared to be almost no one with the power and authority to achieve order there , the UNHCR said . 
Thousands have no money to pay for their passage home , and no employer responsible for their repatriation . 
Many have been sleeping out in the open for days in cold , wet conditions . 
As the sun went down and rain clouds approached , campfires flickered under a grove of trees at the border , where hundreds of refugees huddled in shelters built of their baggage , under blankets and plastic sheeting . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
