BENGHAZI | Mon Jul 25 , 2011 6:39 pm EDT BENGHAZI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The U.N. envoy to Libya and the Benghazi-based rebel council discussed on Monday ideas for ending the civil war , but said a firm initiative had yet to take shape . 
With a diplomatic push to end the conflict gathering steam , Abdul Elah al-Khatib told Reuters after the meeting that he would head to Tripoli on Tuesday to canvass government views . 
`` We did not put a plan in front of them . 
We discussed the views and ideas on how we can trigger a political process ... to achieve a political solution , '' he said . 
Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi is clinging to power despite a four-month-old NATO air campaign and five months of fighting with rebels who have seized large swathes of the oil-rich North African country . 
NATO has continued to hammer Gaddafi 's forces around Libya , striking twice in central Tripoli on Monday , and Britain has said there would be no let-up during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan in August . 
But hopes have grown for a negotiated end to a war that has dragged on longer than many initially expected . 
Speaking to Reuters after meeting Khatib , senior rebel official Mahmoud Jibreel said he had made it clear that the rebels would not accept any initiative that did not involve the removal of Gaddafi from power as a first step to peace . 
That appears to be a tacit rejection of U.N. ideas floated informally by a diplomat last week , which envisaged a ceasefire followed by a power-sharing government without Gaddafi . 
Khatib , a Jordanian politician , has said his ideas involve an agreement on a ceasefire and , simultaneously , on setting up a mechanism to manage the transitional period . 
He gave no details . 
`` So far , there is no initiative . 
He is trying to propose some general ideas , see what is acceptable and what is not acceptable , and on the basis of that he can propose an initiative , '' Jibreel said . 
`` We are not committed to anything unless we have something written . '' 
Khatib 's visit comes a day after Gaddafi 's Foreign Minister , Abdelati Obeidi , ended three days of talks in regional power Egypt to seek a negotiated end to the war . 
Libya 's government has said its representatives are ready to hold more talks with the United States and the rebels , but that Gaddafi himself will not negotiate and will not quit . 
Government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim said on Friday senior Libyan officials had a `` productive dialogue '' with U.S. counterparts earlier this month in a rare meeting that followed U.S. recognition of the rebel government . 
Complicating Gaddafi 's situation is the fact that the world court in The Hague is seeking his arrest for crimes against humanity allegedly committed by his forces . 
This makes it difficult for him to find refuge outside the country . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement have grown , however , since France said for the first time last week that Gaddafi could stay in Libya as long as he gives up power . 
The rebel leaders have given conflicting signals in recent weeks over whether they would allow Gaddafi and his family to stay in Libya as part of a deal , providing he gave up power . 
In the latest comment on the issue , opposition leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil told the Wall Street Journal that it would be acceptable . 
`` Gaddafi can stay in Libya but it will have conditions , '' he said . 
`` We will decide where he stays and who watches him . 
The same conditions will apply to his family . '' 
The poorly armed rebels seem unlikely to quickly unseat Gaddafi . 
Rebels announced they had almost taken the oil town of Brega , but later said that minefields had slowed their advance . 
Libyan state TV showed images of empty streets and oil storage facilities in Brega that it said were filmed on Monday . 
Rebels fighting on a western front near Misrata say they have pushed closer to Zlitan , on the Mediterranean coast 160 km -LRB- 100 miles -RRB- east of Tripoli . 
But the front near Zlitan was relatively quiet on Monday . 
Twenty casualties were taken to hospital in Misrata and to a field hospital , but doctors said most had only light wounds . 
Tripoli-based journalists were taken to Zlitan to see what officials said were some food warehouses and a clinic that were hit by NATO forces . 
The officials said seven bodies had been recovered from what they said was the destroyed clinic , where blankets and oxygen tanks but no beds could be seen . 
Britain said its warplanes near Zlitan hit four buildings on Saturday , which NATO surveillance had identified as command and control centers , staging posts and an ammunition stockpile . 
`` We have no evidence suggesting that these allegations are founded , '' a NATO official told Reuters on Monday when asked about the casualty claim . 
Rebels near Zlitan said in an online posting that the facilities had once served civilian uses -- two medical centers , a food store and a public bath -- but had been turned into military bases by Gaddafi forces . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
UN is so useless and has been manipulated . 
The whole fiasco is to GRAB oil and Exploit libya . 
The original intentions were abandoned and now all the want is a puppet regime in Libya . 
SHAME SHAME on Europe and USA for manipualting the UN and AFRICA slept again and the colonization has returned . 
China and Russia are just deal darling - they could have reversed this madness of imposing the rebels on Libya and on Africa . 
Africa too could have done more to say NO. . 
Those rebels are just a total DISGRACE to Africa and Quater , Turkey betrayed the cause . 
The Arab league is a western club . 
deserves no respect from anyone . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
