BEIRUT | Sat Aug 27 , 2011 8:46 am EDT BEIRUT -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi by Libyan rebels supported by NATO forces focuses international attention on the five months of unrest in Syria , which has shaken one of the most tightly controlled Arab states . 
Opposition figures and activists fear the successful use of force to topple Gaddafi may encourage Syrians to follow Libya 's example . 
Syrian protests have been mainly peaceful but there have been increasing reports of attacks on security forces . 
Upheaval in Syria would affect its allies and enemies in the volatile Middle East , and a softening in rhetoric from Arab countries this week indicated they might still be prepared to support President Bashar al-Assad if he implements reform . 
Following are some possible scenarios in Syria and the risks and opportunities they would present : The United Nations says 2,200 people have been killed in Assad 's crackdown on dissent since protests broke out in March . 
Syria says over 500 soldiers and police have been killed by armed groups which it blames for the violence . 
Despite growing international condemnation , Western sanctions , and escalating economic pressures from the unrest , Assad 's rule shows no sign of imminent collapse . 
Nor is there any indication that the protests across the country are about to stop , although the number of protesters appears to have fallen since Assad sent troops into several major cities earlier in August . 
If Assad can not crush the protests completely , he may be able to contain their impact , staying in power despite the major upheaval and economic disruption caused by the unrest and growing international isolation . 
STRIKING A DEAL WITH OPPOSITION Assad could reshuffle his ministers and bring in some opposition figures in a symbolic move that will not stop street demonstrations but may convince some that he is serious about reforms , including the promise of multi-party elections by February . 
After an apparently coordinated wave of criticism from regional powers including Saudi Arabia , Egypt and Turkey earlier this month , Arab states have moderated their language in recent days , hinting at a possible easing of pressure on Assad . 
Many opposition figures have dismissed Assad 's promise of political reform and said they can not talk to the authorities while the violence continues . 
But if the deadlock continues , some members of the fractured opposition may feel there is no alternative to negotiation , despite the chasm of mistrust between the two sides . 
So far no country has proposed carrying out in Syria the kind of intervention undertaken by NATO forces to help Libyan rebels topple Muammar Gaddafi . 
But the collapse of Gaddafi 's rule has encouraged some Syrian opposition figures and protesters to support international intervention in Syria , including the idea of a Turkish buffer zone in northern Syria . 
NATO help us , '' read one banner , in English , at a protest in the northern province of Idlib on Friday . 
But any military intervention could destabilize a region in which Assad enjoys strong support from Iran and backs militant groups like Hezbollah , Hamas and Islamic Jihad . 
`` Any negative or bad development will affect the whole region , '' Hezbollah Secretary-General Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah said on Friday . 
International intervention could also lead some Syrians to choose Assad over perceived foreign interference . 
Analysts and some opposition activists have warned that the continuous killing may encourage people to take up arms in big numbers , pushing the country toward civil war . 
`` I fear that some in the opposition who are in a hurry to end the regime , who we have always warned against repeating the Libyan example , will say now it has been successful and resort to arms , '' said opposition figure Louay Hussein . 
Assad belongs to the minority Alawite sect which makes up around ten percent of the Syrian population . 
Most of the demonstrations are taking place in Sunni Muslim areas . 
There have been sectarian killings in some cities including Homs , but activists say so far it has been a minor part of the unrest . 
Syria suffered repeated coups in the 1960s before Assad 's father , Hafez al-Assad , seized power in 1970 and purged his opponents from positions of power . 
Despite reports of some low-level defections , and Assad 's replacement of his defense minister at the height of the military crackdown in August , the army has so far stood behind the president , unlike in the Tunisian and Egyptian revolutions . 
But some activists see little prospect of Assad being toppled by street demonstrations and see a military coup as the best chance of removing him . 
They hope Western calls for Assad to step down and targeted sanctions against senior officials might encourage those around the president to break away or carry out a coup to avoid prosecution . 
It is not clear how any new military leaders would deal with protesters ' demands for greater political freedoms . 
Attention has also focused on the wealthy merchant classes of Damascus and Aleppo which have made no public move yet to disassociate themselves from Assad . 
Unless they feel their interests would be protected in a post-Assad Syria , they would be reluctant to push for revolutionary change . 
But their patience may be tested as the economy reels from the collapse of tourism revenues and foreign investment , loss of trade and a fall in manufacturing output . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
