A munitions bunker belonging to Gaddafi 's troops that was destroyed by NATO several days ago is seen approximately 40 kms -LRB- 25 miles -RRB- southeast of Zintan June 29 , 2011 . 
NEAR BIR AL-GHANAM , Libya | Fri Jul 1 , 2011 12:49 am BST NEAR BIR AL-GHANAM , Libya -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Libyan rebels gathered on a ridge overlooking a strategic town only 80 km -LRB- 50 miles -RRB- from Tripoli on Thursday , preparing for a battle that could allow them to march directly to the seat of Muammar Gaddafi 's power . 
About 50 rebel fighters spent Thursday at an observation post 2 km outside the town of Bir al-Ghanam , using binoculars to try to assess the position of Gaddafi 's forces . 
They reached the area on Sunday after fighting in the Western Mountains southwest of Tripoli , an area where France said this week it had air-dropped arms , provoking a diplomatic storm among world powers . 
A French military spokesman confirmed on Thursday a report in Le Figaro that rocket launchers and assault rifles were among arms parachuted in , prompting an angry reaction from Russia , one of many countries who have kept doors open to Gaddafi . 
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said supplying arms was a `` crude violation '' of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1970 , which imposed a comprehensive arms embargo in February . 
Gaddafi 's forces in Bir al-Ghanam know the rebels are watching them from the ridge . 
At one point on Thursday they fired mortars and artillery , sending people running for cover . 
The town is just an hour 's drive from Aziziyah on Tripoli 's southern outskirts , and a similar distance from Zawiyah , which controls the coastal highway that links Tripoli to the Tunisian border and the outside world . 
A trickle of fighters from around the region joined them throughout the day . 
Some came from Zintan , in the mountains behind them , while others said they had made their way clandestinely from Zawiyah , where Gaddafi 's forces have put down two revolts since February . 
The rebels encouraged more arms deliveries . 
`` Giving -LRB- us -RRB- weapons we will be able to decide the battle more quickly , so that we can shed as little blood as possible , '' senior rebel figure Mahmoud Jibril said in Vienna . 
The rebels advance in the west contrasts with little progress east of Tripoli , increasing frustration among NATO allies over a three-month-old air campaign to back the rebels that has exceeded costs and time-frames originally envisaged . 
France , Britain and the United States say the air campaign will not end until Gaddafi falls . 
The war has become the bloodiest of the `` Arab Spring '' uprisings sweeping North Africa and the Middle East . 
Paris says it has not violated the U.N. embargo because the weapons it gave the rebels were needed to protect civilians from an imminent attack , which a later resolution seems to endorse . 
`` We believe that U.N. Security Council resolutions 1970 and 1973 , read together , neither specified nor precluded providing defense materiel to the Libyan opposition , '' State Department spokesman Mark Toner said . 
`` We would respectfully disagree with the Russian assessment , '' he added . 
Nevertheless , the United States had not taken steps to arm the rebels , he said . 
Rebels acknowledged French support , saying it had helped sustain them in the region . 
`` There should be no doubt that Libyans in the Nafusa Mountain -LRB- Western Mountains -RRB- area are alive and safe today thanks to a combination of heroic Libyan bravery and French wisdom and support , '' Vice Chairman Abdul Hafeedh Ghoga of the Transitional National Council said in a statement . 
Libyan television broadcast a statement from tribal leaders condemning French President Nicolas Sarkozy over the arms , calling the rebels in the Berber area `` a product of France . '' 
But the rebel advance towards Tripoli 's southwest outskirts from the Western Mountains has not been matched by progress towards the capital from the east , where they hold Misrata on the coast about 200 km -LRB- 130 miles -RRB- from the capital . 
The city has been bombarded for months by Gaddafi 's forces . 
Six rockets landed early on Thursday near the oil refinery and port . 
A Reuters journalist there reported no casualties . 
Insurgents say Gaddafi 's forces are massing and bringing weapons to quell an uprising in Zlitan , the next big town along the road from Misrata to the capital . 
Rebels inside Zlitan said they mounted a raid on pro-Gaddafi positions on Wednesday night and killed three men in an army patrol on Thursday morning . 
France 's weapons airlift , while possibly increasing the insurgent threat to Gaddafi , highlights a dilemma for NATO . 
More than 90 days into its bombing campaign , Gaddafi is still in power and no breakthrough is in sight , making some NATO members feel they should help the rebels more actively , something the poorly-armed insurgents have encouraged . 
But if they do that , they risk fracturing the international coalition over how far to go . 
Russia is not involved in the air campaign , but its stance could add to reservations among some NATO countries over the air war . 
Moscow could also challenge Paris at the U.N. Security Council , where both are veto-wielding permanent members . 
U.N. spokesman Farhan Haq said it was up to the Security Council to determine what is permitted by its resolutions . 
Even before news of the French arms supply emerged , fissures were emerging in the coalition over the high cost , civilian casualties and the elusiveness of a military victory . 
Gaddafi says the NATO campaign is an act of colonial aggression aimed at stealing the North African state 's oil . 
He says NATO 's U.N.-mandated justification for its campaign -- to protect Libyan civilians from attack -- is spurious . 
The World Bank 's Libya representative said on Thursday Islamist militants could gain ground if the conflict wears on . 
`` If this civil war goes on , it would be a new Somalia , which I do n't say lightly . 
In three months we could be dealing with extremists , '' said Marouane Abassi , World Bank country manager for Libya who has been in Tunisia since February . 
Gaddafi 's daughter Aisha told French 2 television the government was involved in talks with the rebels . 
`` There are direct and indirect negotiations and we should stop letting Libyan blood , '' she said in an interview aired on Thursday . 
`` And for that we are ready to ally with the devil and that is the armed rebels . '' 
