MOUTH OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER -- Oil from a massive spill in the Gulf of Mexico oozed into Louisiana 's ecologically rich wetlands Friday as storms threatened to frustrate desperate protection efforts . 
The White House put a hold on any new offshore oil projects until safeguards are in place to prevent rig explosions like the one that caused the spill . 
Boats patrolled coastal marshes early Friday looking for areas where the oil has flowed in , the Coast Guard said , and the state of Louisiana diverted thousands of gallons of fresh water from the Mississippi River to try to flush out the wetlands , though that effort was being hampered by wind . 
The National Weather Service predicted winds , high tides and waves through Sunday that could push oil deep into the inlets , ponds and lakes that line the boot of southeastern Louisiana . 
Seas of 6 to 7 feet were pushing tides several feet above normal toward the coast , compounded by thunderstorms expected in the area Friday . 
An animal rescue operation at Fort Jackson , about 70 miles southeast of New Orleans , had its first patient Friday , a young northern gannett found offshore . 
The bird is normally white with a yellow head and long , pointed beak but was covered in thick , black oil . 
Workers with Delaware-based Tri-State Bird Rescue and Research used Dawn blue dishwashing soap to scrub it . 
Volunteers started arriving in Venice , La. , though there was n't much for them to do because the weather was so bad . 
About two dozen workers in hard hats and lifejackets were stuck on shore at a marina , lounging on small work boats , some laden with boom , ready to go to work . 
Some smoked cigarettes and spat sunflower seeds as they waited for assignments . 
Volunteer Valerie Gonsoulin , a 51-year-old kayaker from Lafayette who wore an `` America 's Wetlands '' hat , said she hoped to help spread containment booms to hold back the oil . 
`` I go out in the marshes three times a week . 
It 's my peace and serenity , '' she said . 
`` I 'm horrified . 
... I 've been sitting here watching that NASA image grow and it grows . 
I knew it would hit every place I fish and love . '' 
President Barack Obama on Friday directed that no new offshore oil drilling leases be issued unless rigs have new safeguards . 
Obama ordered Interior Secretary Ken Salazar to report within 30 days on what new technologies are needed . 
`` We are making sure any leases going forward have those safeguards , '' said Obama at a White House Rose Garden event . 
He recently lifted a drilling moratorium for many offshore areas , including the Atlantic and Gulf . 
Meanwhile , the Pentagon approved the use of two Air Force planes to dump chemicals on the oil spill , which civilian planes have already been doing . 
The Navy also sent equipment for the cleanup , and Pentagon officials were talking with the Department of Homeland Security to figure out what other help the military could give . 
Obama reassured Gulf Coast communities that the federal government is `` fully prepared '' to meet its responsibilities to them as the spill gets worse . 
The leak from a blown-out well a mile underwater is five times bigger than first believed . 
More than 200,000 gallons of oil a day are spewing from the site of the rig , which was operated by BP and owned by Transocean Ltd. . 
It sank two days after the explosion . 
The Coast Guard is working with BP to deploy floating booms , skimmers and chemical dispersants , and has set controlled fires to burn the oil off the water 's surface . 
Faint fingers of oily sheen began reaching the Mississippi River delta late Thursday , lapping the Louisiana shoreline in long , thin lines . 
Thicker oil was farther offshore . 
Officials have said they would do everything to keep the Mississippi River open to traffic . 
The Coast Guard defended the federal response so far . 
Asked on all three network television morning shows Friday whether the government has done enough to push oil company BP PLC to plug the underwater leak and protect the coast , Coast Guard Rear Adm. Sally Brice-O'Hara said the response led by the Coast Guard has been rapid , sustained and has adapted as the threat grew . 
Brice-O'Hara was also asked on ABC 's '' Good Morning America '' about the possibility of dispersing chemicals about a mile beneath the surface to break up oil . 
She replied : `` That is a technology that is in new stages . 
We are working closely with our scientific support from NOAA , and there will be careful scrutiny . 
But if it has applicability , which we think it does , we want to get that in place very quickly . '' 
The oil slick could become the nation 's worst environmental disaster in decades , threatening to eclipse even the worst oil spill in U.S. history , the Exxon Valdez , the grounded tanker that leaked 11 million gallons in Alaska 's Prince William Sound in 1989 . 
The sheen measured about 70 miles by 130 miles as of Thursday , and officials expected to update that figure Friday . 
It imperils hundreds of species of fish , birds and other wildlife along the Gulf Coast , one of the world 's richest seafood grounds , teeming with shrimp , oysters and other marine life . 
`` This is a very , very big thing , '' David Kennedy , of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , told The Associated Press about the spill . 
`` And the efforts that are going to be required to do anything about it , especially if it continues on , are just mind-boggling . '' 
Volunteers were preparing to help wildlife that might be affected . 
Oil clumps seabirds ' feathers , leaving them without insulation -- and when they preen , they swallow it . 
Prolonged contact with the skin can cause burns , said Nils Warnock , a spill recovery supervisor with the California Oiled Wildlife Care Network at the University of California-Davis . 
Oil swallowed by animals can cause anemia , hemorrhaging and other problems , said Jay Holcomb , executive director of the International Bird Rescue Research Center in California . 
BP shares continued falling early Friday . 
Shares were down 2 percent in early trading on the London Stock Exchange , a day after dropping 7 percent in London . 
In New York on Thursday , BP shares fell $ 4.78 to close at $ 52.56 , taking the fall in the company 's market value to about $ 25 billion since the explosion . 
BP has requested more resources from the Defense Department , especially underwater equipment that might be better than what is commercially available . 
A BP executive said the corporation would `` take help from anyone . '' 
That includes fishermen who could be hired to help deploy containment boom . 
The Coast Guard and BP have at least six remotely operated vehicles working to close an underwater valve meant to keep the oil from reaching the surface . 
Meanwhile , crews are drilling a relief well that will essentially suck the oil away from the original well , decreasing the pressure and slowing the leak , though that could take up to three months . 
Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal declared a state of emergency and asked the federal government if he could call up 6,000 National Guard troops to help . 
Florida Gov. Charlie Crist declared a state of emergency for the state 's Panhandle . 
