April 29 : Oil from the massive spill in the Gulf of Mexico can be seen as a dark blue swirl advancing toward the Louisiana coast . 
ESA As oil from the gigantic spill in the Gulf of Mexico reaches U.S. beaches , scientists warn that the potential long-term effects of the massive disaster are hard to gauge -- but potentially disastrous for some local species . 
The Exxon Valdez disaster is a similar and telling example . 
Among the worst oil spills ever , the tanker dumped more than 10 million gallons of crude oil into Alaska 's Prince William Sound in March 1989 . 
Two decades later , there are still an estimated 21,000 gallons of that oil just below the surface . 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration recently dug 9,000 holes over hundreds of miles of shoreline to ascertain just how much oil was still hanging around . 
NOAA found Valdez oil in about half of those holes . 
`` Despite spending $ 2 billion dollars and using every known clean-up method there was , they recovered 8 percent of the spilled Exxon Valdez oil , '' Jeffrey Short , Pacific science director for Washington , D.C. conservation organization Oceana told LiveScience . 
`` That is typical of these exercises when you have a large marine oil spill . 
You 're doing really great if you -LRB- get -RRB- 20 percent . '' 
Yet despite the lingering oil , many local species recovered : 10 recovered completely , 19 are still recovering , and only two never came back , including the local herring . 
Scientists at the University of California-Davis , which manages California 's Oiled Wildlife Care Network , point out that should the oil hit shore , it could have a serious , long-term impact on marine seabirds , such as brown pelicans . 
The Mississippi Flyway is a critical thoroughfare for migratory birds , and is now experiencing its peak migratory period , said Michael Ziccardi , an associate professor of clinical wildlife health at the UC Davis Wildlife Health Center and director of the Oiled Wildlife Care Network . 
Data is limited on the long term effects of oil on wildlife , but Ziccardi pointed out that after the Valdez disaster , two killer whale pods lost approximately 40 percent of their numbers . 
Since that time , the reproductive capacity of these pods has been reduced by the loss of females , and only about half of newborn calves are surviving . 
George Crozier , executive director of the Dauphin Island Sea Lab , worried about the potential long term effect on coastal marsh lands as well . 
`` If they let it come into the passes , and if they do n't protect the marshes , it will cause long-term economic loss for years , because there 's no way to clean it , '' he said . 
`` They can talk about spraying micro-organisms on the marsh that may help it recover a little faster , but you ca n't spray grass beds and oyster reefs . '' 
`` It 's an accepted fact that the marshes of Louisiana , Mississippi and Alabama -- the Fertile Crescent -- produce 90 percent of the seafood in the Gulf of Mexico , '' Crozier told the Mississippi Press . 
`` If you were to pave that over with an oil spill , you 'd see a dramatic drop in seafood recruitment , possibly for years to come . '' 
As authorities and BP work frantically to clear up the oil and prevent further from leaking , the question of how long it will remain in the environment becomes a factor in determining the oil 's long-term effect . 
Oil that does n't get skimmed up or burned off disperses naturally , according to U.S. Coast Guard Petty Officer 3rd Class Cory Mendenhall . 
He told LiveScience that `` It eventually breaks up and evaporates . 
There are different ways , but we 're told it just kind of goes away . '' 
The rate of dispersal depends on the type of oil . 
Initial reports suggested the oil leaking into the Gulf was standard Louisiana crude , which biodegrades pretty well , according to Edward Overton , a professor emeritus of environmental sciences at Louisiana State University . 
But sample testing revealed that the leaking oil was different , with a very high concentration of components that do n't degrade easily , called asphaltenes . 
One Year Later , Images of Gulf Oil Spill From Space Still Powerful Sign up for free e-mail news alerts from FoxNews.com and FoxBusiness.com . 
