Federal officials say they plan to investigate every possible cause of last week 's massive explosion on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico -- including the possibility of criminal acts or negligence . 
In the aftermath of the blast , an uncapped underwater oil well continues to leak an estimated 200,000 gallons of oil into the Gulf every day -- creating a monstrous oil slick that made landfall in Louisiana 's wetlands Thursday night and could become the nation 's worst environmental disaster in decades . 
President Obama said Friday that his administration is doing `` everything possible '' to respond to the explosion of the BP PLC-operated rig . 
A top adviser to Obama -- who last month lifted a drilling moratorium for many offshore areas , including the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico -- said no new drilling will be authorized until the cause of the explosion , which killed 11 people , is determined . 
Obama also ordered Interior Secretary Ken Salazar to report within 30 days on what new technologies will be needed to prevent future oil spills . 
The Department of Homeland Security and the Department of the Interior are conducting a joint investigation into the explosion . 
`` Investigations are ongoing and everything will be examined , '' a DOI official told FoxNews.com in an e-mail Friday when asked if any evidence points to acts of criminality or negligence . 
`` It 's obviously too early to know . '' 
Salazar has ordered immediate inspections of all 30 deep-water drilling rigs and 47 platforms in the Gulf of Mexico . 
`` This operation is underway and will be targeted inspections ensuring that -LRB- blowout preventer -RRB- tests have been completed and those records are available for inspection , '' the e-mail continued . 
`` We are also verifying that emergency well control exercises are taking place . 
-LRB- U.S. Minerals Management Services -RRB- inspectors should complete these inspections within seven days . 
Once drilling rig inspections are complete , we will start immediately on inspecting all deep-water production platforms . '' 
Along with Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano and Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Lisa Jackson , Salazar was traveling to the Gulf Coast on Friday to inspect ongoing operations and to evaluate the environmental impact of the April 20 explosion . 
The officials will conduct an aerial tour of the affected area and meet with federal , state and local officials leading the response effort . 
DHS officials declined to comment on the cause of the blast and referred to DOI 's statement . 
But Elmer Danenberger , who retired in January as the head of offshore regulatory affairs for the U.S. Minerals Management Service , said the investigation into one of the biggest oil spills in U.S. history will center around what happened just before the blast , as workers finished pumping cement between the well pipe and a hole bored into the ocean floor . 
The process is intended to prevent oil and natural gas from escaping , he said . 
`` That 's what -LRB- investigators -RRB- said the operation was just prior to the blast , '' Danenberger said . 
`` Now , how much prior we do n't know . 
Investigators will be all over those issues . '' 
Danenberger said it appears `` to be the consensus '' among drilling experts that a poor cementing job probably led to the blowout -- when oil and natural gas exit a well with extreme force . 
`` They 're going to be focusing on the root cause , how the oil and gas were able to enter the -LRB- well -RRB- that should 've been secured , '' he said . 
`` That will be the primary focus , how the influx got in to the -LRB- well -RRB- . '' 
Cementing operations could benefit from additional inspection standards , Danenberger said , adding that cementing incidents remain too common . 
According to a 2007 study by three U.S. Minerals Management Service officials , cementing was a factor in 18 of 39 well blowouts in the Gulf during a 14-year period , making it the single largest factor , the Wall Street Journal reported . 
Equipment failure and pipe failure were the next leading factors . 
`` There has been a history of gas influxes during cementing operations , so that is an area of concern , but nothing is confirmed , '' Danenberger said . 
`` But perhaps additional standards are necessary for cementing operations . '' 
Meanwhile , critics of British Petroleum say that cost-cutting measures by the London-based oil giant helped to contribute to the rig explosion . 
Tom Bower , author of the 2009 book `` The Squeeze , Oil , Money and Greed in the 21st Century , '' told Fox News that British Petroleum 's economizing led to a lack of engineers , an overdependence on outsourcing and a lack of supervisors to keep an eye on subcontractors . 
Transocean Ltd. , which operated the rig on lease from BP , has said Halliburton Co. had finished cementing the 18,000-foot well shortly before the explosion . 
BP has said while it assumes responsibility for the incident , the company is still waiting for an investigation to show Transocean 's role in the matter . 
In a statement released late Thursday , BP Group Chief Executive Tony Hayward said the company was increasing cleaning efforts along the shorelines of Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama and Florida . 
In addition to 180,000 feet of boom already in the coastal waters , an additional 300,000 feet is staged or in the process of being deployed . 
`` We are doing absolutely everything in our power to eliminate the source of the leak and contain the environmental impact of the spill , '' Heyward 's statement read . 
`` We are determined to fight this spill on all fronts , in the deep waters of the Gulf , in the shallow waters and , should it be necessary , on the shore . '' 
In a statement released Friday , Halliburton confirmed it performed a variety of services on the rig and had four employees stationed there at the time of the accident . 
`` Halliburton had completed the cementing of the final production casing string in accordance with the well design approximately 20 hours prior to the incident , '' the statement read . 
`` The cement slurry design was consistent with that utilized in other similar applications . '' 
April 28 : A damaged oil well may be leaking five times more oil into the Gulf of Mexico than officials first estimated . 
