Syrians living in Turkey have joined in protests against President Assad Turkey is now one of the harshest critics of President Bashar al-Assad 's government in Syria . 
This is in striking contrast to the warm personal relations established between Mr Assad and Turkey 's leaders up until this year . 
The Turkish prime minister has publicly called on Mr Assad to resign , warning that he was turning into a leader `` who feeds on his people 's blood '' . 
Turkish actions , though , have been more cautious . 
It has been two months since Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan promised to impose sanctions on Syria , but only now have they been announced . 
They include a travel ban and the freezing of assets of those close to President Assad , severing relations with Syrian banks , and enforcing an arms embargo . 
In that , they mirror those imposed by the Arab League last week . 
There are no broader trade sanctions - trade between the two countries rose to $ 2.4 bn -LRB- # 1.5 bn , 1.78 bn euro -RRB- last year - nor any measures that could harm ordinary people , like cutting electricity exports or restricting the flow of water from rivers originating in Turkey . 
None of this is surprising . 
The Turkish government has often expressed its scepticism about the effectiveness of sanctions , and Turkish businesses have lobbied hard against any measures that might hurt them . 
Trade with Syria is in any case drying up quickly . 
The Syrian economy is at a standstill , and Turkish entrepreneurs fear that transporting goods into or through Syria is no longer safe . 
They are also concerned they may not get paid . 
There has been a lot of talk about a possible `` buffer zone '' inside Syria , protected by Turkish troops . 
Turkish officials say it has been discussed , but would only be considered if the flow of Syrian refugees became an unmanageable flood , and if Turkey had international backing for such action , in the form of a UN resolution . 
There has also been talk of `` protected corridors '' running from the Turkish border to troubled areas of Syria , like Idlib and Homs . 
But again , Turkish officials insist this is a hypothetical scenario , and no-one has explained how such corridors would be protected . 
What is clear is how closely Turkey is now co-ordinating its response to the crisis in Syria with other countries . 
The Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan felt personally betrayed by President Assad When the Arab uprisings started in January , Turkey often appeared to be acting alone , calling for President Mubarak to step down in Egypt before any other leaders ; arguing strongly against any intervention in Libya ; but then , in an about-turn , deciding to join the multinational operation supporting the Libya opposition movement . 
On Syria , Turkish officials say , they found themselves in the forefront of President Assad 's critics after August , when months of Turkish effort to persuade the Syrian leader to embrace reform collapsed in acrimony . 
Mr Erdogan felt personally betrayed by what he saw as broken promises by Mr Assad , and outraged by the continued killing of protesters . 
But , say those officials , Turkey is more comfortable letting the Arab League , of which Syria is a proud founder member , take the lead in putting pressure on Mr Assad . 
Turkey is consulting Arab League members very closely about tackling Syria , but is being careful not to move ahead of it . 
There has been surprisingly good co-operation too with France . 
Turkish-French relations had been very poor until this the middle of this year , due to President Nicolas Sarkozy 's very public opposition to Turkey 's EU aspirations , his comments about the slaughter of the Armenian population in 1915 , and his hostility to Turkey 's efforts to mediate in Libya . 
A visit by Mr Sarkozy to Turkey earlier this year - his first as president - was widely judged a diplomatic disaster . 
But a more recent trip by Foreign Minister Alain Juppe has helped to smooth over their differences , and established common ground in their approach to Syria . 
Both France and Turkey are leading sponsors of the main Syrian opposition group , the Syrian National Council , and both are working with SNC members to help prepare them for a transition . 
Turkey also gives sanctuary to military defectors who have formed themselves into the Free Syrian Army , although it insists it does not allow FSA attacks to be launched from Turkish territory . 
The United States too is fully supporting Turkey 's role in Syria . 
It suits the Obama administration 's back-seat approach to the Arab uprisings , to let a strong ally like Turkey do much of the leg-work in building the regional alliances needed to manage the Syrian crisis . 
It must also be a source of some satisfaction in Washington to see the strains in Turkey 's relations with Iran over Syria - Turkey 's attempts to engage Iran over its nuclear program last year independently of the US caused some alarm there . 
For Turkey , the most pressing concern is the impact it will feel from whatever now happens in Syria . 
They share their longest frontiers with each other , and a civil war in Syria could have unpleasant consequences for Turkey , from waves of refugees , to increased attacks by Kurdish insurgents based over the border . 
Turkish officials say they have given up hope that President Assad can be part of a solution , but they are pressing the various opposition groups to take care not to allow the violence to escalate into a sectarian conflict . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
