BP offers one-off payouts to stem Gulf oil spill lawsuits Lump-sum compensation offered in return for waiving the right to sue , but uncertainty remains for those indirectly affected Sunday 1 August 2010 16.53 BST Workers continue to collect leaked oil off the coast of Louisiana . 
Photograph : Patrick Semansky\/AP BP will begin its legal offensive this month to cap its liabilities from the Gulf of Mexico disaster by offering those affected one-off compensation payouts in return for them waiving the right to sue . 
US lawyers say tens of thousands of affected people in the Gulf , particularly those in the fishing and tourism industries , are weeks away from bankruptcy . 
BP , which will try to permanently seal the Macondo well with a `` static kill '' operation on Tuesday , hopes that settling claims in this way will help it to begin to draw a line under the crisis and to quantify the costs . 
But lawyers say it is impossible to calculate future lost earnings . 
There is also no way for claimants to know whether they would receive more compensation if they decided to sue BP in the courts , which would take many months with no guarantee of success . 
Brent Coon , a Houston-based lawyer , said : `` These are mostly uneducated people . '' 
Applicants could rush to apply for a one-off , lump sum payout if they believe that BP will run out of money or will put its US business into bankruptcy . 
Ken Feinberg , who was appointed by the White House in June to administer the claims process on behalf of BP , will take charge within the next three weeks . 
BP has committed to pay $ 20bn into the fund in a series of instalments over the next three and a half years . 
The fund does not cap BP 's liabilities at $ 20bn . 
But privately the company believes that it will not have to pay out anywhere near this sum . 
BP has hired a battery of lawyers to protect itself , and so far it has paid out $ 261m in claims . 
When Feineberg takes over this month , for the first time claimants will be offered a one-off sum based on their future lost earnings , provided they agree not to sue BP . 
`` The fund will offer lump sum payments in return for an agreement not to pursue claims in court , '' a spokeswoman said . 
Claimants will also be able to receive an emergency payout to cover their lost income for up to six months without waiving their right to sue BP . 
BP had been making monthly payouts . 
A spokeswoman for Feinberg did not answer emailed questions from the Guardian about how a one-off payment would be calculated . 
Claims from those directly affected by the spill , such as fishermen , will qualify but uncertainty surrounds those more indirectly affected . 
For example , many owners of beach apartments in Florida even where no oil hit the shore face bankruptcy because holidaymakers stayed away . 
`` BP could argue that it could not foresee that people would react this way , '' said Coon . 
`` At some point the chain of foreseeability becomes so remote that as a matter of law there is a capping of liability . '' 
Feinberg has said such indirect claims may be determined by state tort law . 
It is likely to be many months , and probably years , before BP knows the cost of legal action by other companies involved and any fines payable . 
Today , it emerged that the US Coast Guard routinely approved BP 's requests to override a federal directive to ban the use of toxic dispersant to break up the spill except on rare occasions . 
The coastguard granted 74 exemptions over 48 days , according to documents obtained by Ed Markey , chairman of the House energy and environment subcommittee . 
According to BP , 1.8 m gallons of dispersant have been pumped into the Gulf . 
Scientists say that the resulting high toxicity levels could harm marine life for years to come . 
On Friday night , the House of Representatives passed legislation that would block BP from winning future drilling permits in the US because of its safety record . 
