cents New techniques needed to deal with crises - chief executive cents Paying dividend would be ` unfathomable ' - US senators Oil cleanup workers hired by BP walk along the beach in Dauphin Island . 
Senators have demanded that BP suspends its dividend . 
Photograph : Dave Martin\/AP BP 's under-fire chief executive Tony Hayward has admitted that the company was not adequately prepared to fight the Deepwater Horizon oil leak , as pressure mounted on the company not to pay its annual dividend to shareholders . 
Hayward told the Financial Times it was `` entirely fair '' to criticise BP for not being better equipped to fight a leak 5,000 feet below the surface . 
He said the oil giant needed to develop new techniques for such crises , rather than using decades-old methods . 
`` What is undoubtedly true is that we did not have the tools you would want in your toolkit , '' said Hayward in an interview with the FT. . 
His comments came as US politicians demanded that BP should suspend dividend payments to shareholders while it battles the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico . 
In an open letter to Hayward who recently told the Guardian his job was on the line Democratic senators Charles Schumer and Ron Wyden said it would be wrong for BP to pay investors a dividend until it knows the full cost of the disaster . 
`` We find it unfathomable that BP would pay out a dividend to shareholders before the total cost of BP 's oil spill clean-up is estimated , '' they wrote . 
The letter was written hours after it emerged that Hayward was telling BP 's major shareholders that it planned to maintain dividend payments despite the ongoing environmental catastrophe off the coast of Louisiana . 
`` While we understand the need to reassure shareholders that the disaster in the Gulf will not substantially impact BP 's long term financial health , we are concerned that such action to move money off of the company 's books and into investors pockets will make it much more difficult to repay the US government and American communities that are working around the clock to stem the damage caused by this devastating oil spill , '' explained Schumer and Wyden . 
The two senators had previously lobbied Transocean , owner of the Deepwater Horizon rig that exploded on 20 April , against paying dividends to its own shareholders . 
Shares in BP rose by over 4 % this morning to 448p , indicating that traders remain confident that the the annual dividend will be paid . 
BP is part way through its latest attempt to cut the amount of oil gushing into the Gulf of Mexico , by cutting the pipe that rises from the sea bed and placing a cap on top . 
This procedure hit problems yesterday when a robot-operated saw temporarily stuck , and even if it succeeds it will not capture all the oil . 
The company told the stock market this morning that it will pay the $ 360m -LRB- # 244m -RRB- cost of building six sand barriers to protect Louisiana 's delicate marshes . 
This will push BP 's total bill to date to around $ 1.4 bn , including the cost of trying to stop the leak , mopping up oil that reaches the shoreline and compensating those affected by the disaster . 
The final cost is unclear , though , with President Obama insisting the company was responsible for the Deepwater Horizon leak and will be made to pay for it . 
Although some City analysts believe BP can cover these costs , others calculate that the company may be forced to sell some assets especially if it plans to maintain its dividend . 
Douglas Ober , chief executive officer at Petroleum & Resources , suggested that BP 's 26 % stake in the Prudhoe Bay oil field in Alaska might have to be sold . 
Mining giant BHP Billiton has also named as a potential bidder for BP 's interests in the Gulf of Mexico . 
Other experts believe BP , whose market capitalization has fallen to around # 82bn , could be a takeover target . 
BP has received thousands of suggestions on how it could fight the leak , from industry experts and concerned members of the public . 
One , filmmaker James Cameron , was disappointed that his offer of help was not better received . 
Cameron has significant experience of underwater filming using remote-operated submarines , having directed Titanic . 
Cameron attended a meeting with scientists and government officials yesterday to brainstorm ways of reducing the damage cauuse by the massive oil spill , and also revealed last night that BP had turned down his offer of help . 
`` Over the last few weeks I 've watched , as we all have , with growing horror and heartache , watching what 's happening in the Gulf and thinking those morons do n't know what they 're doing , '' Cameron told the All Things Digital technology conference in California , according to Reuters , who added it was not explicitely clear who `` those morons '' referred to . 
Public anger against BP is growing in America as the crisis enters its seventh week . 
BP garage signs have been smeared with mud , and a Boycott BP campaign appears to be gathering pace . 
