After the oil spill , we need a sea change The BP oil spill is eerily similar to the Exxon Valdez disaster . 
President Obama must act before history repeats itself yet again A beach is closed on Grand Isle , Louisiana , due to the oil spill . 
Photograph : Win McNamee\/Getty BP 's out-of-control geyser in the Gulf is now the biggest oil spill in US history . 
Though the Exxon Valdez was a comparatively finite disaster with the tanker carrying 54m gallons of crude oil the Deepwater Horizon debacle continues to spew oil like a vindictive beast lodged in the bottom of the sea . 
While this catastrophe may seem like a singular event , its unfolding parallels the political path carved by the Exxon Valdez oil spill with uncanny similarity . 
It turns out we 're actors in an eerily familiar play . 
The script was written in 1989 when the Exxon Valdez rammed the rocky reefs , piercing a hole in its hull and disgorging 11m gallons of oil into Alaskan waters . 
A careful examination of the Exxon Valdez aftermath reveals a recognisable pattern . 
Big Oil 's initial response is to downplay the ecological damage until contradicted by firsthand reports of environmental horror . 
The oil company then vows to do whatever it takes to control the spill , with public-relations officials promising to pay for the clean-up costs and all `` legitimate '' claims . 
The firm deploys the environmentally dodgy dispersant Corexit and locals voice concern over its toxicity . 
Groups across the political spectrum express frustration over the lack of a clean-up plan and criticise the president for not asserting leadership . 
The blame game heats up , fuelled by cosy relationships between government and industry . 
A key difference is that in the case of the Exxon Valdez a supposedly sloshed sea captain made for a convenient cookie-cutter villain who we could blame although he was later found not guilty of drunkenly driving the tanker . 
The denouement in Alaska featured `` human error '' as the culprit , with Exxon dragging out litigation for nearly two decades . 
In 2008 , with an assist from the US supreme court , Exxon finally settled with claimants for a fraction of the original jury award . 
With the BP calamity , there 's no handy hoodlum who we can blame for the fiasco . 
Because we have no such go-to target this time , we actually have an opportunity to reconsider the whole Big Oil shebang . 
Clearly it 's the system that 's at fault . 
Not that BP has n't acted reprehensibly . 
BP now means Beyond Pinocchio . 
It 's not so much that BP is lying as it 's consistently not telling us the whole truth . 
For instance , the oil company initially alleged that 1,000 barrels a day were flowing from the ruptured well , before upping the estimate to 5,000 barrels . 
Now we know it 's more like five times that amount , with numerous scientists estimating much higher flow rates after watching video footage of the gusher , footage BP long suppressed using flimsy reasoning . 
Democratic congressman Ed Markey , chairman of a House energy committee investigating the oil spill , said BP were '' either lying or they were incompetent '' . 
But if BP has demonstrated incompetence , it has also shown penny-pinching stinginess . 
Dating back nearly a year , internal BP records documented safety problems involving the very blowout preventer and well casing that were pivotal in the oil rig explosion . 
Partly to save money , BP opted for the `` best economic case '' , choosing an oil well casing that was riskier . 
In other words , plump profit margins trumped public safety . 
Now BP executives are impersonating global-warming sceptics , denying the presence of underwater oil plumes that academic scientists are viewing with their own eyes . 
Forget peak oil this is about peak profit . 
President Obama clearly needs a jumpstart . 
Here 's a five-step plan that will help us learn from history rather than mindlessly replicate it . 
Take over the show . 
Two weeks after the Exxon Valdez spill President Bush Sr put the federal government in charge . 
Obama needs to do the same , sparing no expense and funneling all bills directly to BP . 
A recent poll found a whopping 73 % believes BP is doing a `` poor '' or `` very poor '' job responding to the crisis . 
Critics may say the US government could n't do better than BP , but surely it could n't do any worse . 
Create an independent working group to cap the spill and mitigate its repercussions . 
Obama needs to immediately gather the best and brightest scholars , scientists , and practitioners to engage this national-security emergency . 
People with ties to the oil industry need not apply . 
He should form a new-wave brain trust , like John F Kennedy 's response to the Cuban Missile Crisis , only this working group should toil transparently , offering daily public briefings on its progress . 
Craft an expedited system for processing claims . 
This catastrophe is already causing a landslide of litigation . 
BP says they 'll pay for all `` legitimate '' claims but so did Exxon before its phalanx of lawyers stretched the reparation process into 2008 . 
The administration should also provide legal services for people along the Gulf coast so they do n't get hoodwinked into taking short-term payouts while forfeiting the possibility of heftier compensation down the road . 
Revamp the all-too-cosy relationship between the oil industry and the government 's Mineral Management Service . 
Back in 2009 BP assured the MMS that because of its superior `` proven equipment and technology '' any oil spill would be contained before harming fish habitats and apparently MMS officials believed the implausible claim . 
MMS has never canceled an oil lease sale based on its own environmental risk assessment . 
New oversight systems are needed immediately so other massive oil platforms in the Gulf such as BP 's Atlantis , which some allege was set up without complete engineering documents do n't suffer a similar fate . 
Put forth a real-deal plan for a clean-energy economy . 
President Obama himself said the BP tragedy `` underscores the urgent need to develop clean , renewable sources of energy '' . 
There 's a word for spouting virtuous environmental rhetoric that 's disconnected from on-the-ground follow-through , and that word is greenwashing -LRB- like , say , calling your company `` Beyond Petroleum '' -RRB- . 
If Obama actually wants to create a clean energy economy , then an obvious first step would be to get rid of subsidies for Big Oil and swerve them toward solar and wind projects that could actually use a boost . 
That 's what subsidies are for to help fledgling industries , not line the pockets of companies turning record profits . 
Obama need not fritter away this opportunity to rethink the entire energy system instead of simply tinkering with it . 
We need a sea change , if you will , and it 's hard to imagine a better opportunity than this crisis . 
