His personal assistant described a `` frantic '' call from Dr Conrad Murray . 
Head of security Faheem Muhammad said he saw the medic try to revive the unconscious star , as two of Jackson 's children looked on in tears . 
Prosecutors say Dr Murray caused the death , in June 2009 , with a lethal dose of the sedative , propofol . 
The defense says the star gave himself too much . 
The pop star had been using the drug , which is usually administered intravenously , as a sleeping aid . 
Michael Amir Williams , Jackson 's personal assistant , told the court about a phone call he received from Dr Murray on the day of Jackson 's death . 
Mr Williams told the jury : `` He said , ` Get here right away , Mr Jackson had a bad reaction . 
Get somebody up here immediately ' . '' 
He also gave details about how he dispatched security guards to the star 's bedroom and said Dr Murray was `` frantic '' as Jackson 's body was taken out to the ambulance . 
He wanted to make sure that there was somebody else available to be of assistance '' End Quote Kathy Jorrie AEG Live lawyer Meanwhile , Mr Muhammad confirmed he saw an intravenous -LRB- IV -RRB- stand in Jackson 's bedroom as the doctor tried to revive the star . 
`` Dr Murray was ... on the opposite side of him -LRB- Jackson -RRB- near the far side of the bed on the other side , '' he said . 
`` He appeared to be administering CPR -LRB- cardio-pulmonary resuscitation -RRB- , he appeared very nervous , he was on his side , he was sweating , he just , he appeared to be administering CPR . '' 
Asked about how the star looked , Mr Muhammad said his eyes and mouth were slightly open , but agreed that he seemed already dead . 
The security guard described the reactions of Jackson 's teenage children , who were in the room at the time . 
`` Paris was on the ground balled-up crying . 
Prince was standing there and he just had a real shocked , you know , just slowly crying type of look on his face , '' he said . 
Earlier , the court heard that Jackson was energetic and performing well in the days before he died . 
Promoter Paul Gongaware told the Los Angeles court that Jackson had been `` fully engaged '' in rehearsals for his forthcoming series of comeback concerts in London . 
Fans of Michael Jackson hold signs outside the Los Angeles courthouse Mr Gongaware told the court how Jackson asked him to employ Dr Murray as his doctor , adding that that the doctor initially asked for payment of $ 5m -LRB- # 3.2 m -RRB- for a year . 
`` I told him there 's no way that 's going to happen , '' he said , adding that Dr Murray was eventually offered the equivalent of $ 1.8 m -LRB- # 1.1 m -RRB- per year . 
Mr Gongaware also acknowledged that his firm , AEG , had been sued by Jackson 's mother for negligent supervision of Dr Murray while he worked with the star . 
AEG 's lawyer Kathy Jorrie told the court that Dr Murray had asked for a CPR machine and an additional physician to help him care for Jackson in London . 
`` He wanted to make sure that there was somebody else available to be of assistance , '' Ms Jorrie told the court . 
On Tuesday , the court heard evidence from Jackson choreographer Kenny Ortega , who told of an email he had written expressing `` deep concern '' over the singer 's health about a week before he died , aged 50 . 
The trial is expected to last about five weeks . 
Trial timeline 30 NOVEMBER 2011 , ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
