TRIPOLI | Tue May 24 , 2011 10:29 pm BST TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - NATO warplanes hammered Muammar Gaddafi 's compound with their heaviest air strikes yet on Tuesday after the United States said the Libyan leader would `` inevitably '' be forced from power . 
The shockwave from the strikes was so powerful that plaster fell from the ceilings in a hotel where foreign reporters were staying , about 2 km from Gaddafi 's compound . 
A NATO official said the strikes hit a military facility that had been used to launch attacks on civilians . 
Government spokesman Mussa Ibrahim said late on Tuesday that the death toll from the attacks was 19 , against an early estimate of three . 
Earlier the Libyan government said that 150 had been wounded , and that the casualties were local residents . 
`` It is definitely , in terms of one target , the largest and most concentrated attack we have done to date , '' said the NATO official in Brussels . 
Ibrahim said the strikes had targeted a compound of the Popular Guards , an armed unit . 
But he said the compound had been emptied of people and `` useful material '' in anticipation of an attack . 
`` This is another night of bombing and killing by NATO , '' Ibrahim told reporters . 
Libyan news agency Jana said targets hit by NATO included a Tripoli mosque called Nuri Bani , though this could not be independently verified . 
A Libyan military source said NATO forces also struck civilian and military targets in the Tajoura area , east of the Libyan capital Tripoli , and another nearby location on Tuesday . 
State television al-Jamahiriya said the attack resulted in `` material losses and human casualties '' but gave no specific details . 
It was not immediately possible to verify the report . 
Libyan television also reported a NATO strike on the town of Zlitan , west of Misrata , but gave no details on casualties . 
Led by France , Britain and the United States , NATO warplanes have been bombing Libya since the United Nations authorised `` all necessary measures '' to protect civilians from Gaddafi forces in the country 's civil war . 
Critics argue that NATO has overstepped its mandate and is trying directly to engineer Gaddafi 's fall . 
Rebels , however , have complained Western forces are not doing enough to break Gaddafi 's army . 
`` We have degraded his war machine and prevented a humanitarian catastrophe , '' U.S. President Barack Obama and Prime Minister David Cameron wrote in the Times newspaper . 
`` And we will continue to enforce the U.N. resolutions with our allies until they are completely complied with . '' 
Gaddafi denies his forces target civilians and describes the rebels as criminals and religious extremists . 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told a London news conference on Monday : `` We do believe that time is working against Gaddafi , that he can not re-establish control over the country . '' 
She said the opposition had organised a legitimate and credible interim council that was committed to democracy . 
`` Their military forces are improving and when Gaddafi inevitably leaves , a new Libya stands ready to move forward , '' she said . 
`` We have a lot of confidence in what our joint efforts are producing . '' 
The United States bolstered the credentials of the rebel National Transitional Council as a potential government-in-waiting on Tuesday when a senior U.S. envoy invited it to set up a representative office in Washington . 
Unlike France , Italy and Qatar , the United States has not established formal diplomatic ties with the rebels . 
Rebels trying to end Gaddafi 's 41-year rule control the east of the oil-producing country , but the conflict has been deadlocked for weeks . 
French officials said on Monday that France and Britain would deploy attack helicopters , a step aimed at targeting Gaddafi 's forces more precisely . 
Seeking to counter fears in Western capitals that NATO could be sucked into a long-drawn-out conflict , French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe told the French parliament the mission in Libya `` would not last longer than a few months . '' 
But the use of helicopters carries risks for NATO , as they would fly lower than warplanes and be more exposed to ground fire . 
The downing of helicopters , and any attempts to rescue the crews , could suck Western governments into the ground war which they had promised to avoid . 
British Armed Forces Minister Nick Harvey said Britain had not taking a decision on deploying helicopters . 
`` It is an option which we are considering and at some point in the future we may get to the point of deciding to go down this route , '' he said . 
Reporters , whose movements are tightly controlled by the Libyan authorities , were taken to visit Tripoli 's central hospital after the heavy night raids . 
They were shown the corpses of three men with head injuries , their bodies laid out on gurneys . 
A man who identified himself only as Hatim , who had deep gashes and abrasions on his arms and legs , said the blasts had caved in part of his residence near the military compound . 
`` We were in the house and then , wham , the ceiling came down , right on me , '' he said . 
A Reuters reporter in the city of Misrata , 200 km east of the Libyan capital , said the western district of Defniyah had come under light shelling from pro-Gaddafi forces , but this had stopped later in the day . 
Rebel fighters in the city , the biggest rebel stronghold in western Libya , have pushed back government forces to the outskirts after weeks of street-by-street fighting . 
Gaddafi 's grip on power appeared to have suffered a blow last week when Libyan rebels and officials in neighbouring Tunisia said that Shokri Ghanem , Libya 's most senior oil official , had fled the country and defected . 
However , sources at Western oil firms said Ghanem was still working for the Libyan government , and was in fact on a secret mission to maintain ties with foreign energy firms so they could later return if international sanctions are lifted . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
Do USA , UK , France can not do political and diplomatic way . 
If in such can be affected , the question of their reputation in world . 
Why highly developed democratic state conflicts solved only war . 
whether it contrary to the fundamental principles demokratije . 
Mislim the problem is not democracy in ec in people who have led these countries . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
