It is believed the doctor was at 50-year-old Jackson 's house when he died last month The Houston clinic of Michael Jackson 's doctor has been searched by drug police looking for evidence of manslaughter , his lawyer says . 
Officers from the Drug Enforcement Agency -LRB- DEA -RRB- entered Dr Conrad Murray 's office and removed several items . 
Dr Murray 's spokeswoman told the BBC the raid was `` a surprise to us and it was a surprise to the attorneys '' . 
The doctor , who police say is not a suspect , was at Jackson 's mansion and tried to revive him before he died . 
DEA spokeswoman Violet Szeleczky confirmed a search was carried out but said it was not technically a raid . 
Speaking to the AFP news agency , she said : `` What this is , is the Los Angeles police department have an investigation and they came to the Drug Enforcement Agency , and they asked us to help them effect a state search warrant here . '' 
Dr Murray 's lawyer said he had been helping police with inquiries Dr Murray 's lawyer , Edward Chernoff , confirmed that a search had been carried out . 
`` The search warrant authorised law enforcement to search for and seize items , including documents , they believed constituted evidence of the offence of manslaughter , '' he said in a statement posted on his firm 's website . 
Earlier , Mr Chernoff said his client had been helping police with their inquiries . 
He has already been interviewed twice by police probing Michael Jackson 's death . 
Investigators had asked for medical records in addition to those already provided by Murray . 
`` The coroner wants to clear up the cause of death ; we share that goal , '' said Mr Chernoff in a statement on his law firm 's website on Tuesday . 
Speaking a few days after Jackson 's death , Mr Chernoff denied Dr Murray administered painkilling drugs that could have contributed to the singer 's death . 
Dr Murray is frustrated by negative and often erroneous media reports - he has to walk around 24\/7 with a bodyguard Dr Conrad Murray 's lawyer Edward Chernoff Any drugs his client may have given to Jackson were in response to a specific health complaint , the lawyer added . 
He said the star still had a faint pulse and was warm when Dr Murray found him in bed . 
Mr Chernoff said : `` He just happened to find him in his bed , and he was n't breathing . '' 
Paramedics were called to Jackson 's Los Angeles mansion while Dr Murray was performing CPR , according to a recording of the 911 call . 
Mr Chernoff said in Tuesday 's statement that Dr Murray had since received unwelcome attention from those angry over the singer 's untimely death . 
`` Dr Murray was the last doctor standing when Michael Jackson died and it seems all the fury is directed toward him , '' Mr Chernoff said . 
He added : `` Dr Murray is frustrated by negative and often erroneous media reports - he has to walk around 24\/7 with a bodyguard . 
`` He ca n't operate his practice . 
He ca n't go to work because he is harassed no matter where he goes . '' 
CNN Drugs , documents seized in Jackson doctor raid - 9 hrs ago Miami Herald Manslaughter investigation targets Jackson doctor - 19 hrs ago Philadelphia Inquirer Officials probe Jackson 's doctors in star 's death - 23 hrs ago Citizen . 
