TRIPOLI | Mon Oct 31 , 2011 4:24 pm GMT TRIPOLI -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - NATO ruled out the possibility of military intervention in Syria on Monday but said Damascus should draw lessons from Libya , where NATO-backed rebels won a civil war that resulted in the killing of long-serving leader Muammar Gaddafi . 
Western powers have been tightening sanctions on Syria but have shown no appetite to repeat their Libyan operation in the Middle Eastern nation where protesters have demanded outside protection from a crackdown that has killed 3,000 people . 
Speaking during a visit to the Libyan capital Tripoli , NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said military action in Syria was out of the question . 
`` My answer is very short . 
NATO has no intention -LRB- to intervene -RRB- whatsoever . 
I can completely rule that out , '' he told reporters . 
`` Having said that , I strongly condemn the crackdown on the civilian population in Syria . 
What has happened in Libya sends a clear signal . 
You can not neglect the will of the people . 
`` You should accommodate the legitimate aspirations of your people and work towards democracy . '' 
Months of protests have failed to dislodge Syrian President Bashar al-Assad , creating an unstable stalemate in a country sitting in the heart of the Middle East . 
Assad warned the West over the weekend that meddling in its affairs would cause an `` earthquake '' in the Middle East where his country borders Israel , Lebanon , Turkey , Iraq and Jordan . 
In Libya , NATO military intervention played a decisive role in toppling Gaddafi , the third Arab leader to be overthrown after the revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt . 
Gaddafi was captured and killed near his home town of Sirte on October 20 . 
-LRB- Reporting by Oliver Holmes ; Writing by Maria Golovnina ; Editing by Alistair Lyon -RRB- We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion , anecdotes , links and data . 
Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters . 
As if these warmongers have the right to intervene in other countries . 
Rasmussen and his clique should stand trial for crimes against humanity . 
This discussion is now closed . 
We welcome comments on our articles for a limited period after their publication . 
An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
