JERUSALEM | Mon Oct 31 , 2011 8:02 pm GMT JERUSALEM -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Israel is forcing Palestinians out of East Jerusalem as part of a deliberate policy that might constitute a war crime , a prominent Israeli non-governmental organization said on Monday , a charge rejected by Jerusalem 's mayor . 
The Israeli Committee Against House Demolitions -LRB- ICAHD -RRB- has presented the United Nations with its findings and demanded an inquiry , saying Israel targeted Palestinians by demolishing homes , revoking residency and eroding quality of life . 
`` We are witnessing a process of ethnic displacement , '' said Michael Sfard , a lawyer who helped draw up a 73-page report into the issue . 
`` Israel is manifestly and seriously violating international law ... and the motivation is demographic . '' 
Stephan Miller , a spokesman for Israel 's mayor of Jerusalem , Nir Barkat , dismissed the report . 
He said in a statement it was based on `` misleading facts , blatant lies and political spin about Jerusalem , so I 'm sure the UN will enjoy it . '' 
Israel seized East Jerusalem , including the Old City , in the 1967 Middle East war . 
It later annexed the area and surrounding West Bank villages into a Jerusalem municipality that it declared the united and eternal capital of Israel . 
Palestinians want East Jerusalem as the capital of a future state and world powers have not recognized the annexation . 
There are some 300,000 Palestinians residents in East Jerusalem , representing about 35 percent of the city 's total population , but ICAHD said that since Israel took control of largely Arab areas it had systematically prevented their development . 
One third of land in East Jerusalem was taken for the construction of Jewish neighborhoods , while only nine percent of the remaining land is legally available for housing . 
This has all been built on , making expansion impossible . 
ICAHD said it was virtually impossible for Palestinians to obtain building permits to house their growing families . 
`` They have no other option than to leave East Jerusalem , build illegally or live in appalling , cramped conditions , '' said Emily Schaeffer , who authored the report . 
Those who leave lose residency rights if they are gone for seven or more years and can not return . 
Some 14,000 Palestinians lost their residency between 1967 and 2010 , with half of those revocations taking place after 2006 , ICAHD said . 
Residency entitles you to Israeli health care and national insurance benefits . 
Those who built houses illegally , lived in fear of having their property demolished and also faced hefty fines . 
Israel demolished more than 2,000 homes in East Jerusalem since 1967 , with 771 being pulled down between 2000-2011 . 
A further 1,500 demolition orders are pending execution . 
`` Palestinians will de facto be deported from East Jerusalem , not by using guns or trucks , but by not allowing them to live a decent , normal life , '' Sfard said . 
Because the annexation of East Jerusalem was not recognized , Palestinians living there should be considered as a people under occupation , ICAHD said . 
As such , Israel had no right to strip them of residency or demolish their homes . 
`` There is a suspicion that a war crime is taking place and that is why an investigation should take place , '' said Sfard . 
A statement from the Israeli mayor 's office which said that while East Jerusalem had suffered from a lack of investment in the past that had now changed . 
It said Barkat had `` invested an unprecedented amount of resources and efforts to improve the quality of life of Muslim residents of Jerusalem after decades of neglect by previous administrations . '' 
Miller , the mayor 's spokesman , added that Barkat was `` committed to improving the quality of life of Jerusalem 's Muslim residents and he will continue to do so . '' 
Supporters of the mayor pointed to a poll released this year by the Palestinian Centre for Public Opinion . 
Asked if they would prefer to be citizens of a future Palestinian state or of Israel , 35 percent of those questioned plumped for Israeli citizenship , 30 percent said they would choose Palestinian citizenship and 35 percent gave no answer . 
The vast majority of Palestinian East Jerusalemites rejected offers of Israeli citizenship following the 1967 war , fearing it would undermine Palestinian claims to the area , but most have Israeli residency status . 
-LRB- Created by Crispian Balmer ; Editing by Matthew Jones -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
