Flu Outbreak Threatens Global Economic Recovery The outbreak is affecting trade . 
Russia , China and the Philippines , citing swine flu , suspended pork imports from Mexico and some U.S. states where the virus has been detected , despite the fact that health officials say there is no link between pork consumption and the virus . 
-LRB- By Aaron Favila -- Associated Press -RRB- The swine flu outbreak is compounding the ailments of the global economy just as it is starting to stabilize , darkening the outlook for everything from tourism to world trade , particularly in the United States and Mexico . 
In recent weeks , economic data suggested a bottoming-out of the global financial crisis . 
But economists yesterday were forced to digest worst-case scenarios in which a recession that is already the deepest since World War II could become two or three times as painful . 
That would be the consequence of a full-blown flu pandemic . 
But even if the outbreak were to remain relatively contained , economists warned of a new round of woes . 
Underscoring those concerns , airline stocks plunged yesterday amid fears of a replay of what happened earlier this decade in Asia , when outbreaks of bird flu and severe acute respiratory syndrome , known as SARS , emptied hotels and led to flight cancellations . 
The value of the Mexican peso took its steepest drop since November . 
And investors drove down the price of oil by 2.7 percent on fears that swine flu would slow global economic recovery . 
But the real focus of concern centered on a new dose of the last thing the world economy needs right now -- more uncertainty . 
`` The impact is to threaten the stabilization of the global downturn we 've been seeing over the last few weeks , '' said Brian Dolan , chief currency strategist for Forex.com . 
`` The timing could not be worse . '' 
The damage could hit the already ailing tourism and airline industries the hardest . 
The European Union and a number of nations began warning their citizens yesterday to avoid unnecessary travel to parts of North America . 
During the SARS outbreak in 2003 -- the last major epidemic of a respiratory disease with human-to-human transmission -- airline traffic to Asian destinations such as Hong Kong fell by as much as 60 percent . 
Overall , Asia-Pacific airlines lost 50 percent of traffic in the first five months of 2003 , causing them $ 6 billion in losses . 
North American carriers saw passenger traffic fall by 3.7 percent that year . 
This time , however , the global airline industry is already in deep crisis , raising the specter that deep losses could lead to forced consolidations or even requests for government bailouts . 
Though carriers have reported only limited cancellations so far , Continental Airlines saw its shares dive 16 percent yesterday , while United Airlines , Delta Air Lines and American Airlines saw declines of around 14 percent . 
With a number of nations from Spain to New Zealand reporting confirmed cases of swine flu , and countries including Russia and Taiwan moving to quarantine travelers showing flu-like symptoms , even Asian and European airline shares saw sharp sell-offs . 
The outbreak is also affecting trade . 
Russia , China and the Philippines , citing swine flu , suspended pork imports from Mexico and some U.S. states where the virus has been detected , despite the fact that health officials say there is no link between pork consumption and the virus . 
With trade barriers already on the rise because of the global downturn , other nations could pile on . 
Though Mexico 's pork industry could suffer from any new bans , the impact of such restrictions in the United States is less clear . 
Russia , for instance , is the fifth largest importer of U.S. pork , but since most U.S. production comes from states that have so far not confirmed cases of swine flu , industry leaders said there would be little immediate disruption . 
That said , they warned that Russia could extend the ban , and that other nations might follow suit . 
`` The concern is that regardless of the scientific evidence , other countries could use this as an excuse to restrict our exports , '' said David Warner , a spokesman for the U.S. National Pork Producers Council . 
`` Everyone is looking to protect their own right now . '' 
The economic impact of the outbreak could be amplified by the financial crisis , especially in Mexico , where restaurants and shopping malls were already closing in the capital , eating further into plunging retail sales . 
When SARS struck , by comparison , the global economy was in a period of broad expansion . 
The outbreak , according to the Asian Development Bank , cost East and Southeast Asian nations overall about 0.6 percent in economic growth in 2003 . 
This time , however , the global economy is anything but robust , magnifying potential new strains . 
The impact in the United States would be far greater in the case of a larger-scale pandemic , with the worst-case scenario akin to what happened during the Spanish flu of 1918 , which killed tens of millions of people worldwide . 
A 2006 report from the Congressional Budget Office estimated a pandemic , depending on its severity , could cost the United States between 1 percent to 4.1 percent of annual economic output . 
Given that the U.S. economy is expected to shrink by 2.8 percent this year , a pandemic could lead to a contraction of 3.9 percent to 6.9 percent as consumer demand and worker productivity suffer further . 
Staff writer Sholnn Freeman contributed to this report . '' 
