The reasons why somebody decides to take his or her life often remain opaque , even when there 's a suicide note . 
But recent highly publicized deaths , such as the apparent murder-suicides of one family in their Middletown home and another in a Towson hotel room , and now the apparent suicide of Freddie Mac 's 41-year-old acting chief financial officer , David Kellermann , have fueled speculation about the special psychological stresses caused by financial crisis . 
I ca n't comment on those cases , but as a psychologist I have seen a correlation between the economy 's downturn in the past year and increased symptoms among my clients of anxiety , stress and depression , as well as marital and parenting conflicts focused on spending . 
Some of my clients are having trouble sleeping ; others complain about increases in stress-induced stomach pain and headaches . 
According to the American Psychological Association 's 2007 survey on stress in America , work and money are the two greatest factors of stress for about 75 percent of Americans . 
Research has also shown increases in drinking , eating , gambling and smoking in response to stress . 
Another survey found a decrease in visits to the doctor during the current recession . 
Suicide rates in the United States are on the rise after more than a decade of dropping , and middle-aged white males are a particularly vulnerable group , with four times as many men as women dying by suicide , according to the National Institute of Mental Health . 
The loss of jobs and health insurance are just two of the variables that have been associated with that increase . 
What I hear from my clients and colleagues suggests that the financial downturn and continued uncertainty have overtaxed us emotionally . 
The country 's economic problems are beyond our control , making it all the more essential to pay attention to what you can do on an individual level . 
Here are a few pointers to keep in mind during these tough times : -- The adage that misery loves company does not apply here . 
Finding friends , family members and co-workers to complain to in hopes of feeling supported will probably lead to more upset . 
Talking about the economy will probably involve some degree of mutual worrying and frustration . 
So avoid the topic . 
People say that politics and religion are topics to be avoided at social gatherings ; I would add the stock market to that list . 
-- Do n't keep looking at your investment portfolio ; it will only upset you further . 
I recommend scheduling a short time -LRB- 30 minutes at most -RRB- on the weekend to review your portfolio and make any needed adjustments . 
This way your work week is freed up to focus your energies on what matters most : your work , your relationships and yourself . 
-- Avoid making statements such as `` It 's gotta turn around soon '' or `` This has to be the bottom , right ? '' 
That sort of thought pattern will lead only to more worries . 
Instead , come up with a mantra that fits you well , such as `` I have what I need today . '' 
-- Reduce the time you spend looking at or listening to the media discussing the financial crisis . 
Checking in briefly at the start of the day and at the end of the day is a better approach than watching CNBC all evening . 
You will be just as informed without running the risk of excessive exposure to the situation . 
-- Living a balanced life is always a good thing , especially so in trying times . 
Avoid drinking to excess , watch your diet and make sure to get enough sleep and exercise . 
-- Focus on areas beyond your financial concerns . 
Start a hobby or organize your home . 
Consider taking an evening class . 
Many companies offer to pay a percentage for schooling , especially if the course work relates to your job . 
Additional activities will serve as a distraction and possibly give you a greater sense of control over the areas you can have some control over . 
-- If you or someone you know exhibits any of the warning signs of suicide , such as sudden , disturbing changes in behavior , get help right away . 
You can reach a suicide hotline such as 1-800-SUICIDE or 1-800-999-9999 or call 911 at any time of the day . 
It 's important to remember that America has faced recessions before -- and we 've gotten through them . 
Michael Oberschneider is a psychologist who treats children , adolescents and adults ; he is director of Ashburn Psychological Services . 
This Week in Health & Science 
