DAMASCUS | Tue Mar 22 , 2011 12:36 pm EDT DAMASCUS -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - The preacher of the Saladin Mosque was reflecting on the joys of Mother 's Day , his sermon straying far from dramatic protests now gripping Syria , when a young man jumped up to the pulpit and grabbed the microphone . 
`` Why are you talking about this in these circumstances ? 
Tell us about the political situation ! '' 
shouted the youth , before secret police arrested him and hurried him away . 
The scene at the mosque in the lower income Damascus district of Ruknaldin , recounted to Reuters by worshippers who witnessed it on Friday , was striking in a country where pliant citizens have endured government-dictated sermons for decades . 
In Damascus , as in the provinces , a barrier of fear which had blocked dissent is breaking down . 
Uprisings across the Arab world have not stopped at the door of one of its most hardline administrations . 
For the first time , placards other than those glorifying Syria 's ruling elite and the `` historic achievements '' of the Baath Party are being raised in the towns of the strategic Hauran plain south of Damascus . 
A single word is etched on them -- `` Freedom . '' 
The region , where four protesters have been killed by security forces since Friday , has seen the first non-sectarian protests against the Baath Party since Assad 's late father Hafez al-Assad crushed leftist and Islamist opponents in the 1980s . 
Among them were the cream of Syrian society -- lawyer and former judge Haitham al-Maleh , leftist leader Riad al-Turk , writer Akram al-Bunni , and poet Mohammad al-Maghout , who wrote that being tortured by a compatriot was more painful and humiliating than repression under French colonialism . 
The violent campaign by the Syrian authorities in the 1980s left up to 70,000 people missing . 
In 2004 , Kurds , many of whom are denied Syrian citizenship , mounted violent demonstrations against the government in which 30 people were killed . 
In a sign of changing times , Montaha al-Atrash , whose father led a revolt against French rule in the 1920s , addressed Assad directly in an interview on BBC Television . 
`` Dr Bashar , listen to us . 
Non-stop pressure and repression will generate an explosion . 
You know , and you see how the region is boiling , '' said Atrash , referring to a wave of Arab uprisings which have toppled two leaders and challenged many more . 
`` The regime is still responding to anyone calling for change by trying to portray it as a scheme for sectarian strife and division , and by unleashing on demonstrators security forces who are already filling the streets , '' she added , speaking in Syria . 
The protesters have not called for the removal of Assad , and Atrash said there was no hatred against the president , an ophthalmologist by training who was thrust into politics when his elder brother Bassel died in car accident in 1994 . 
But the name of one top figure of the ruling elite , Assad 's cousin Rami Makhlouf , is being uttered publicly . 
Owner of Syria 's largest cellphone company and several large businesses , Makhlouf is under U.S. sanctions for what Washington regards as public corruption . 
Until now , no one inside Syria has dared question his activities . 
The tycoon maintains his businesses are legitimate , providing professional employment for thousands of Syrians . 
`` Go away Makhlouf . 
We do n't want thieves ... There is no more fear after today , '' is one of the main chants of demonstrators who burned premises of Makhlouf 's Syriatel company . 
Residents of Deraa city , where the demonstrations started on Friday , say they have shaken off humiliation and decades of repression , and broken a ` fear factor ' that had made people suspicious that even close relatives might be informants . 
`` I can now smell freedom , '' said one youth , describing how mass demonstrations had helped unify a tribal-based society he said authorities had played a part in fracturing . 
Even if protests subside -- the south was calm on Tuesday morning -- Syrians say the grievances which sparked them remain . 
Opposition figure Riad al-Turk , who spent 25 years as a political prisoner including almost 18 years alone in a 2-meter by 2-meter underground cell during Hafez al-Assad 's rule , said Syrian leaders face `` the moment of truth . '' 
`` What is required is serious and clear steps to transform Syria from repression to democracy . 
`` They are steps outlined repeatedly : release political prisoners , abolish the state of emergency , legalize a multi-party system , separation of powers , the independence of the judiciary , and scrap the clause that makes the Baath Party ` leader of state and society ' , '' he said . 
`` All I know today is that Syria will not remain the kingdom of silence , '' 80-year-old Turk said . 
`` Fear will no longer suffocate , and my homeland will not remain a big prison . '' 
