Moammar Gadhafi , third from right , stands Monday with the African Union delegation trying to mediate the Libyan civil war . 
Hopes for a Libyan cease-fire were raised briefly this week when it was announced that longtime leader Moammar Gadhafi had agreed , in principle , to the African Union 's `` road map '' proposal for peace . 
Gadhafi 's opposition later rejected the proposal , but its leaders said they would be open to any other proposals the African Union might make . 
African Union delegates join an international conference on Libya 's future on Wednesday . 
Could the African Union be the key to peace in Libya ? 
What is the African Union , anyway ? 
Here 's what you need to know : 1 . 
The African Union is relatively new . 
The African Union was formed in 2002 , replacing the Organization for African Unity , which had been in place since 1963 . 
Its membership is composed of every African nation except Morocco , which withdrew from the OAU in 1984 because it took exception to the OAU 's inclusion of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic . 
`` The main overriding idea was to give more prominence to Africa , to make it an organization that had real teeth , that could push Africa on the international stage , that gave it a more unified voice to Africans , '' said Richard Downie , deputy director of the Africa Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies . 
The diplomatic boost is just one of the reasons the African Union was created . 
Economic prosperity was another -- the African Union is working toward the formation of a central bank and its own currency similar to the euro -- and there was a desire for Africa to be able to respond to its own security crises with peacekeeping troops and humanitarian aid . 
`` The idea going forward is that the AU will take more of a lead in trying to come up with solutions to Africa 's security problems rather than relying on the international community or the United Nations , '' Downie said . 
The African Union has been more effective than its predecessor . 
The African Union seems to have taken a much more active role than the Organization for African Unity ever did , implementing policies to reduce poverty and corruption . 
And one of if its most visible actions in recent years has been sending peacekeeping troops to Somalia and Darfur . 
The OAU had been criticized for sitting idly while humanitarian crises developed in Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo . 
