GHAZAIA , Libya , July 31 | Sun Jul 31 , 2011 2:27 pm EDT GHAZAIA , Libya , July 31 -LRB- Reuters -RRB- - Rebels who seized the government-held town of Ghazaia in Libya 's Western Mountain in a new offensive describe themselves as `` liberators '' , but there were no cheers when they rolled in . 
Its estimated 5,000 residents , supporters of Muammar Gaddafi , had been transported to his stronghold Tripoli by his militiamen , leaving behind a ghost town . 
`` We would have liked to have been welcomed here . 
These people all liked Gaddafi . 
They benefitted from him , '' said a rebel named Majdi , standing beside rows of houses built by Libyans aided by soft loans from the government . 
Libya 's six-month uprising is often described as a simple struggle to end decades of autocratic rule . 
But as the offensive in the Western Mountains illustrates , it is far more complex . 
Factionalism could fuel a civil war , even if Gaddafi falls , keeping the North African oil producer unstable . 
`` I just hope that we can oust Gaddafi and that his followers will let the past be the past and embrace democracy , '' said rebel Omar Ali Muhammad . 
`` Otherwise the country may face troubles even if he is pushed out . '' 
Gaddafi maintained supporters in Ghazaia and other places in the plains below the Western Mountains , despite international pressure on him to step down and defections of senior government officials . 
That is one reason why it took rebels , themselves disunited , months to make serious gains here . 
The veteran Libyan leader 's support network could also enable him to launch a counteroffensive and reverse rebel gains . 
While his opponents were still gaining military experience , Gaddafi was relying on residents of the rough desert region to give him further advantages over a novice rebel force . 
One provided his militiamen with extensive services . 
`` He gave Gaddafi 's soldiers everything . 
Intelligence on our movements , details on the routes we used , he even gave them sheep and goats , '' said rebel commander Salim al Hamdi , who was discussing strategy with comrades at the man 's house , which has been taken over by rebels . 
Government forces had been dug in at Ghazaia since the conflict began , setting up headquarters at a complex of houses the government helped people build . 
Soldiers also lived in villas , enjoying kitchens , television sets and radio . 
Now rebels are surrounding the town of Tiji , which also supports Gaddafi . 
On Sunday afternoon rebels on the frontline fired tank shells and anti-aircraft guns at government forces . 
`` They like Gaddafi in Tiji , '' said a rebel named Osama as missiles were fired back , pounding the earth . 
`` After Gaddafi loses we will remember that the people of Tiji loved him . 
That 's why it 's tough fighting here . 
It is a reality . '' 
Another fighter who overheard quickly rushed over to correct him . 
No everything will be fine . 
Libya will be stable , '' he said nervously . 
-LRB- Editing by Jon Hemming -RRB- An ultra-low latency infrastructure for electronic trading and data distribution A connected approach to governance , risk and compliance Our next generation legal research platform 
