'' This Story : Read + | Watch + | Icelanders protest outside the parliament in Reykjavik , demanding elections for a new government . 
The currency 's sudden decline is making the country an international destination for shopping as well as for more-traditional tourism activities . 
-LRB- By Brynjar Gunnarsson -- Associated Press -RRB- Iceland gets less than five hours of sunlight a day in winter , but bookings from the United States are up 90 percent . 
-LRB- Visit Reykjavik -RRB- Two months ago , Iceland , a cold and ruggedly beautiful chunk of volcanic rock on the edge of the Arctic Circle , was one of the world 's most expensive nations . 
Then the global financial crisis hit , the country went bust , and almost overnight the Icelandic currency , the krona , lost half its value and prices of everything from boots to beer returned to earth . 
Now , as thousands of angry Icelanders protest in the streets over disappearing wealth and jobs , their nation 's tourism industry is enjoying a boom in bargain-hunters . 
People from Boston to Beijing , many of them younger and less-affluent travelers who said they had always considered Iceland prohibitively expensive , are filling planes heading to Reykjavik , the world 's northernmost capital . 
Many are even coming for weekend shopping trips to a city that , until recently , made the glitzy shopping districts of New York and London seem reasonable . 
`` You do n't do this every day -- it 's cool , '' said Andonis Marden , 19 , a student at Boston 's Northeastern University , who was standing near one of Iceland 's famous hot-water spouts as the geyser blasted steam 50 feet into the frigid air . 
`` I would have come when I was older and had more money , but now it 's cheap , '' said Marden , who heard about Iceland 's sudden affordability in an e-mail alert , paid $ 475 for round-trip airfare and spent the Thanksgiving weekend in a $ 23-a-night Reykjavik youth hostel . 
Officials at Icelandair said bookings from the United States are up 90 percent over last year for the period from December through next March . 
Bookings from Britain for the same period are up 48 percent . 
Those spikes in reservations are especially unusual because winter , when Iceland gets less than five hours of sunlight a day , is generally the slowest season for tourism . 
The Blue Lagoon , a large hot spring powered by the island 's potent geothermal energy , had its busiest November ever , despite Iceland 's worst financial crisis in modern history . 
`` It 's a peculiar situation that the economy has created an opportunity to come , but people are grabbing at it , '' said Blue Lagoon chief executive Grimur Saemundsen . 
