Every day is a lottery at the trial of Conrad Murray , Michael Jackson 's doctor , who stands accused of killing perhaps the world 's most famous singer . 
Jackson fans line up against the courtroom wall at 07:30 every morning in the hope of winning a draw for one of the few seats in the public gallery . 
Like millions of others across America and the world they could watch it on the internet or on TV , but there is obviously something more to be gained from being there in person , sitting just a few feet from the lawyers , the family and the accused . 
I joined the draw two days in a row - second-time lucky - to get a feel for the courtroom and to immerse myself in a trial that has been creating a buzz across America . 
It was an interesting day to sit in on the trial . 
It was a day which began with what the TV pundits called a `` cornerstone of the defense '' being pulled away , and went on to hear some damning accusations of `` gross negligence '' against the man whom Michael Jackson trusted as his doctor . 
Before proceedings even began , before the 16 men and women of the jury had been buzzed into their seats , the defense had conceded Michael Jackson could not have drunk the drug which killed him . 
Propofol is what it the trial all about . 
It is is an extremely strong sedative and Michael Jackson was having his doctor use it to help him get to sleep . 
It was a combination of that and a number of other sedatives which caused his death - and as the man prescribing the pills , injections and intravenous drugs , Conrad Murray stands accused of causing his death by involuntary manslaughter . 
One key line of defense is that Michael Jackson took the drugs himself , when his doctor was not looking . 
A presumption made by the countless commentators , TV experts , ex-prosecutors and journalists was that Michael Jackson drank the drug . 
But research by both the prosecution and the defense proved it was only effective if injected straight into the blood . 
And so a line of questioning defense lawyers may have used , and indeed hinted they would use , was dropped - but not the theory of self-medication altogether . 
Jackson could have injected himself , or taken other pills , but that is for another day of evidence or for when the defense case begins . 
But this day was all about independent medical experts and their professional opinion of Dr Murray . 
They were not impressed . 
For much of the day cardiologist Dr Alon Steinberg was in the stand , describing how he had reviewed Dr Murray 's own account of what happened the night Michael Jackson died , as told to a detective . 
He outlined six separate instances of what he called `` gross negligence . '' 
`` Propofol should never be given as a sleeping drug , '' was his premise , explaining it was a strong sedative used as an anesthetic in surgical operations and its use in this way was negligent and unethical . 
Once given the drug , Michael Jackson should have been monitored properly , all the time , with heart and blood pressure monitors , back-up drugs and equipment in case anything went wrong . 
And perhaps most damning of all , he said the way Conrad Murray reacted when Jackson stopped breathing was `` responsible for the singer 's death '' . 
By not immediately calling the emergency services , taking the wrong action in those vital few minutes and not having prepared for an emergency , he had made `` a direct contribution to Michael Jackson 's death '' , Dr Steinberg told the court . 
The second witness , Professor Nader Kamangar , was equally critical of the use of such a powerful sedative which he said required proper training and was usually given in a hospital or clinical environment , not in someone 's home . 
He also reviewed Conrad Murray 's account of what happened , and as a sleep medicine expert stressed propofol should not be used for insomnia . 
The two independent witnesses helped build up a strong picture of a poor doctor who did not follow basic procedure and was negligent . 
It is a picture the defense will be keen to undermine in the cross-examination of Prof Kamangar , with the prosecution continuing to build its case against Conrad Murray as the trial approaches its half-way mark . 
Meanwhile the Jackson fans will keep on arriving for the daily lottery , to secure one of those precious seats in the courtroom . 
The pun - ancient artform , or the lowest form of wit ? 
