Bouthaina Shaaban , right , attended President Assad 's meeting with Kofi Annan in July The Chinese foreign ministry said Bouthaina Shaaban would meet Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi later . 
The ministry said it was part of its effort to implement the UN 's six-point peace plan . 
China has twice vetoed UN resolutions against the Assad regime . 
Meanwhile , UN humanitarian chief Valerie Amos has arrived in Syria to assess the flow of emergency aid . 
She is expected to ask for more visas for foreign aid workers as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent struggles to distribute food . 
The UN says an estimated two million Syrian civilians have now been affected by the crisis and more than one million have fled their homes . 
Tens of thousands of people have fled across Syria 's borders into Turkey , Jordan , Lebanon and Iraq amid continuing violence across the country . 
In another development , foreign ministers of the Islamic Co-operation Organisation -LRB- OIC -RRB- have called for Syria to be suspended from the 57-nation bloc at an emergency two-day summit in Mecca , Saudi Arabia , which starts on Tuesday . 
Only ministers from Algeria and Iran , which is regarded as Syria 's closest ally , were against the recommendation , reports say . 
`` We certainly do not agree with the suspension of any OIC member , '' Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi said after a preliminary meeting in the city of Jeddah on Monday . 
`` We have to look for other ways , means and mechanisms for resolving conflicts and crises , '' he said . 
Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Qin Gang said in a statement that China had always `` actively balanced its work between the Syrian government and the opposition '' . 
He repeated China 's call for the `` practical implementation '' of former UN envoy Kofi Annan 's peace plan - now widely considered defunct - and for `` an immediate ceasefire '' . 
`` Receiving Shaaban in China is part of the above-mentioned work by the Chinese side , '' Mr Qin said , adding : `` China is also considering inviting Syrian opposition groups in the near term to China . '' 
China , along with fellow UN Security Council permanent member Russia , has vetoed UN resolutions condemning the violent crackdown by Mr Assad 's government . 
Correspondents say it wants to deflect criticism and show it is trying to develop a political solution to the Syrian crisis . 
The BBC 's Frank Gardner says the man who rebels claim they captured `` appears rather old for a fighter pilot '' In Syria , rebels clashed with government forces in the northern city of Aleppo and the capital Damascus on Monday , opposition groups said . 
Activist group the Local Co-ordination Committees said at least 64 people had been killed in Damascus and its suburbs . 
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said government forces had begun a new advance against rebels in Aleppo , which has seen fierce clashes in recent weeks . 
Syrian rebels also produced footage of a man they claim was the captured pilot of a fighter jet shot down in the east of the country . 
The Free Syrian Army -LRB- FSA -RRB- said it had shot the aircraft down near the Iraqi border . 
However , state media say the plane crashed because of `` technical problems '' and a search is under way to find the pilot . 
Hopes for a negotiated settlement in Syria remain alive , despite regional tensions stoked by recent air strikes attributed to Israel , says Jim Muir . 
