Classic pop , reappraised by the Magazine Stars including Kylie Minogue , Take That and Mariah Carey are recording REM 's Everybody Hurts as a charity single for Haiti . 
But what is the original song about , and why is it associated with suicide ? 
It started out as a song to comfort `` younger people '' , and the attempt to make it accessible to someone `` who has n't been to college '' has made it applicable in all kinds of situations . 
From 8th album Automatic For The People UK number seven -LRB- April 1993 -RRB- Number three ` Song to listen to when depressed ' -LRB- 6Music poll , 2004 -RRB- Number two ` Gen X funeral song ' -LRB- Bereavement Register , 1993 -RRB- Number one ` Cry-Pod song ' -LRB- Poll for Irish radio station RTE , 2007 -RRB- Everybody Hurts is not a typical REM song . 
For one thing , you can make out all of singer-songwriter Michael Stipe 's words . 
More importantly , it 's immediately obvious what they mean : do n't give up . 
And so the song has had a much more varied and exposed life than most of REM 's output , even before the imminent celeb-carousel rendition . 
It was , for example , the first song played by Radio 1 after the two minutes ' silence to mark 1996 's Dunblane shootings . 
A version edited to include the sounds of the attacks on the Twin Towers was widely circulated online in late 2001 . 
And the track rubbed shoulders with Candle In The Wind and I 'll Be Missing You on the official Diana Memorial album . 
But the troubles that the song originally speaks to are more personal . 
In the 1993 video , Stipe is portrayed among drivers stuck in an almighty Texas traffic jam , each with troubles on his or her mind , all of these conveyed in subtitles . 
Among them is a teenager staring out of a window , thinking : `` They 're going to miss me . '' 
And suicide - especially among the young - is the personal problem with which Everybody Hurts is most often associated . 
In 2001 , the Nevada Assembly passed a resolution praising REM for `` encouraging the prevention of teen suicides '' , specifically mentioning Everybody Hurts . 
And in 1995 , the Samaritans marked the first anniversary of the suicide of Kurt Cobain with adverts in music magazines which consisted of two verses of the song . 
If you 're consciously writing for someone who has n't been to college , or is pretty young , it might be nice to be very direct . 
In that regard , it 's tended to work for people of a lot of ages `` We 've tended to license the song out for free to charity , '' guitarist Peter Buck told the BBC in 2005 . 
In the same interview -LRB- see link on right -RRB- , Stipe is characteristically evasive , but Buck is more forthcoming . 
`` I remember Michael saying something to the effect that he wanted younger people to not have to worry about metaphors , '' he said . 
`` The only metaphor is in the bridge : ` throw your hand ' , which is a card-game metaphor . '' 
It 's also , to many , a metaphor for taking one 's life . 
Is it incongruous , then , to apply the lyric to Haitians affected by an earthquake ? 
` Things are tough but they get better ' Not necessarily . 
Buck told Mojo magazine that `` trying to reach a 17-year-old and say , ` it 's OK - things are tough but they get better ' '' involved economy and directness - and that universality automatically means the song is picked up on by other people . 
The simplicity of the music helps , too . 
Based on a beat from a drum machine that cost $ 20 , the track revolves around a few familiar arpeggiated chords . 
Even after the arrival of the strings , arranged by former Led Zeppelin bassist John Paul Jones , there 's an intimacy that fits the lyric , and a vocal from Stipe that , in the words of rock critic Garry Mulholland , expresses `` all the personal tragedies and troughs that he has traveled through '' . 
An earlier version included the line : `` Everybody hurts , even the singer of the song . '' 
The charity-single template is , of course , very different to this , and Simon Cowell , the organiser of the new version , is not usually associated with musical restraint . 
However , the point of next week 's release is not faithfulness to the REM original , it 's something more commonly associated with Mr Cowell - that is money , in this case for Haiti . 
As for REM , Stipe says : `` How could we not say yes to this appeal ? 
We 're honored to play even a small role in trying to help . '' 
This echoes what Buck told the BBC in 2005 : `` The song belongs more to the people that it 's aimed at than it does to the band any more . '' 
Smashed Hits is compiled by Alan Connor . 
Add your comments on this story , using the form below . 
I am a vicar . 
At funerals I would normally expect to be able to rein in my emotions , but this song will always cause a tear to flow . 
On one occasion as I took the funeral of a suicide , we played this as part of some reflective prayer and the whole congregation , including me and the funeral director , were in tears . 
In my first term at university , I was wracked with absolute gut-wrenching homesickness . 
I heard this song on the radio late one night , and it was like a light-bulb . 
It made me realize that it was OK to be missing home , but that it was going to work out if I just hung in there and stayed the course . 
I saw REM live later that year , and hearing them play Everybody Hurts , with 100,000 other voices in the crowd remains a very special memory to me . 
I am not surprised Simon Cowell thought a song about suicide was appropriate for Haiti - he thought a song about sexual anguish was suitable for the Xmas number one in 2008 . 
I am a big REM fan and in its original context the song really works . 
I CAN imagine being desperate enough to want to commit suicide - so yes , everybody does hurt . 
But I can in no way imagine what it is like to be in Haiti now . 
Everybody does not hurt as they do . 
To tell them that everybody hurts , as if we can in some way empathise , feels patronising . 
I love this song . 
It 's a reminder that when you think you have it bad , other people have it worse and things will get better . 
A beautiful , simple piece of music and wonderful lyrics from Messers Stipe and Berry . 
An all time classic . 
As an expert on depression I can assure you that if you are depressed then you want to avoid this song completely . 
It 's a neat song if you 're in a reflective mood yes , but depression ... oh no ! 
This is an incredibly uplifting song that is both inspirational and powerful . 
I think that perhaps millions of people have at one time not given up on something because of listening to this song . 
Absolutely fitting to be used here . 
The most comforting things to be told when you 're in a terrible state are that you 're not alone and that things will get better ; you will be alright . 
This song does both of those , and it speaks to you as an individual . 
No , REM do n't know you or your individual pains , but this song says that somebody cares . 
Everyone has been through something , so everyone understands the song . 
Everybody Hurts is a great , great song and is no doubt going to be beaten to within an inch of its artistic credibility by this selection of pop stars . 
Would n't it be better to do a brand new song , or better still for REM to repackage the original and allow all proceeds from now on go to the Haiti fund ? 
All the pop stars could just contribute by buying it a few times . 
REM 's Everybody Hurts is a classic song that is as relevant today as it was in 1992 . 
Whilst I appreciate the new version will be for charity , I fear it will be a travesty of the original , ie bland and cheesy . 
I will probably listen to Automatic For The People tonight and donate a couple of quid to Oxfam instead . 
The BBC may edit your comments and not all emails will be published . 
Your comments may be published on any BBC media worldwide . 
