Haiti 's cathedral was in ruins after the earthquake In our series of viewpoints from African journalists , Ghanaian Elizabeth Ohene considers labels , hoaxes and Obamania . 
This past week , like everybody else on the globe , I have been glued to the television screens watching the agony of the Haitians . 
I have heard over and over again that Haiti is the poorest country in the Western hemisphere and as the rhetoric has expanded , I have even heard Haiti was THE poorest country in the world . 
Now I do n't know what the truth is about these claims ; I have never been to Haiti and I have deep scepticism about terminology like GDP and the like . 
My compatriots decided to demonstrate to the whole world that everybody might have mobile phones in Ghana but we remain a scientifically illiterate country One thing I do know is that there does not seem to be any evidence to contradict any of these claims about the level of poverty in Haiti when you watch the apocalyptic scenes on television . 
An earthquake of that magnitude would cause chaos and devastation if it occurred anywhere in the world . 
But surely it is a bit over the top to have an earthquake in which the archbishop gets killed , the head of the United Nations office gets killed and the presidential palace collapses . 
Pat Robertson the American televangelist is reported to have put it all to the wrath of God who has shown his anger on the `` devil-worshipping '' Haitians . 
Ghana lost to Ivory Coast but their fans are now celebrating again The Haitian consul to Sao Paulo , who happens to be white , was a touch more graphic . 
He told a Brazilian TV crew that people of African origin were cursed . 
`` I think it has to do with messing so much with voodoo , '' he said . 
In the midst of it all , my compatriots decided to demonstrate to the whole world that everybody might have mobile phones in Ghana but we remain a scientifically illiterate country when a nationwide panic was generated through text messages claiming that an earthquake was about to hit Ghana . 
My suspicion is that the hoax was induced by a desperate attempt to get Ghana into the headlines when we had lost a football match to Didier Drogba . 
Or we were probably hoping that President Barack Obama would make a speech praising Ghana 's democracy . 
We could n't allow Haiti to usurp Ghana 's position as the favored African\/black country . 
It is of course the anniversary of Barack Obama 's inauguration as US president and many on this continent are getting anxious that Africa has not featured high on his agenda . 
If we want Mr Obama to be a successful president , Africa should resolve that the images of the continent will not be of wars , hunger , malnourished children and political chaos It is worth pointing out again for the umpteenth time that Barack Obama was elected by Americans as their president and his success or failure as president will be measured by how well Americans fare under his watch . 
And it seems to me that he will have a difficult time for as long as Africa continues to claim him as its own . 
I blame the results of the vote in Massachusetts on the Haitian earthquake . 
Every time another Haitian comes on the TV , some in the US probably see the face of the man in the White House . 
If we want Mr Obama to be a successful president , Africa should resolve that the images of the continent will not be of wars , hunger , malnourished children and political chaos . 
And we should stop claiming him as an African . 
If I were his white mother I would be outraged every time someone referred to him as black . 
Thanks for your comments . 
Please read a selection below : Africans need black -LRB- African or African American -RRB- people to aspire to , I 'm a young African and all you tend to here about black is negative if we get a chance to promote some black positivity we should grab it Obama is black , I do n't think he will solve Africa 's problems but he inspires me to reach the very top ! 
Eric Malebe , Johannesburg , South Africa No African or Ghanaian is saying that Obama is the answer to our problems . 
We just feel honored that someone with an African background has worked had to earn such an enviable position who is also a source of inspiration to all groups of people who think such achievement is not possible . 
Secondly it is very wrong for Elizabeth to attempt to discuss scientific literacy or otherwise . 
How many well resourced science labs do we have in our universities for those who claim to be scientist in Ghana . 
I do not even want to talk about science labs for the high schools . 
Just for the record you do not have to be literate to use a mobile phone . 
When someone is famous , people generally like to claim some kind of connection to them . 
But Obama 's presidency should not be reduced to an issue of race , as he has already outlined the challenges of his mixed heritage in his books . 
He also states his identity , so another person should n't presume to do so for him in a manner that could be offensive to some people with mixed heritage . 
I really find it amusing that Elizabeth , a senior colleague , can say that `` we should stop claiming him as an African . '' 
Yes , Barack Obama is the president of the United States and there is absolutely no doubt that his primary duty is to protect the interests of the American people that elected him to the Oval Office . 
But he is AFRICAN as well , even though it does not appears politically convenient to point this out to the American people . 
He is a Kenyan national , as well as being American . 
The last time I checked he has not renounced his Kenyan citizenship , which came through his father -LRB- the fact that he does not carry a Kenyan passport does not take this nationality away from him -RRB- . 
And he acknowledged the fact that he is Luo , -LRB- please read `` Dreams From My Father '' -RRB- notwithstanding the fact that he has only visited Kenya and never lived there . 
Does Elisabeth or anyone else have concrete proof to contradict this ? 
We need to get our facts right , even though I agree that Africa should not expect miracles or a great deal of attention from a man elected to solve the problems of Americans AND NOT AFRICANS . 
It is obvious that the Middle East and certainly Afghanistan\/Pakistan , are more of a worry for Obama than Africa . 
I would like to think that he would help Africa , if only for the stark fact that he is tied to Africa by blood . 
But perhaps in this case , blood may not be thicker than water ... Osasu Obayiuwana , Associate Editor , NewAfrican magazine , Lagos , Nigeria\/London , England I disagree with your views on the Democratic Party 's failure to obtain the Massachusetts senate seat . 
The failure has much less to do with an unconscious connection between Haiti and our black president than an initiative by the people of Massachusetts to send a message that policies must be accounted for and progress must be obtained . 
Another frustrating comment that you seem too willing to assume is that by having a black heritage , Mr. Obama is African . 
I suggest that President Obama is wholly American . 
Although his ethnicity presents itself inevitably from his African ancestry , it seems somewhat incoherent to suggest that his image as President of the United States is reflective of his ethnic heritage and `` tie '' to the African subcontinent . 
As many Africans well know , their skin color does n't reflect their nationality . 
If I were his mother , I would be proud of my son . 
By suggesting that she should be frustrated if anyone called him black , you seem to eager and perhaps unconsciously call upon several issues unrelated to the presidency , Haiti , and the United States all together . 
Elizabeth is right in her analysis . 
The blackman is not cursed as Moses who liberated the Jews was black . 
Kwame Nkurumah was not cursed . 
Africa , like any other continent produced good son and daughters , and like any other continent produced bad children too . 
I sympathise with Obama I believe that Obama represents hope , aspiration and the future for the human race . 
He is an African-American . 
As an African living in Britain , Obama brings respectability to the black race through what he has done and continues to do . 
I know the Americans whether black or white agree that there is a bright future for everyone . 
May God guide , protect and lead Obama 's path . 
By the way , how is Obama 's US Presidency helping Africa ? 
Former President Clinton was involve and is still involve with the development through his foundation . 
President G.W. Bush is known for education , health , and chasing dictators like Charles Taylor from Africa . 
Former President Carter will be remembered for good governance and health . 
What has Obama done or what can he do ? 
Even his John McCain has worked or is working to help immigrants . 
I am sick and tire of hearing this Obama 's blackness or African thing . 
Africans please try for yourself and leave `` poor '' Obama alone . 
Boima Gbelly , North Providence , RI . 
USA Genetically Obama is of mixed heritage , phenotypically he is black ! 
And also politically he is black ! 
And no this was not a paradigm made up by Africans . 
Check the history books , read , learn and you will grow . 
People have the right to refer to Obama as black ! 
I am amazed why some educated people are puzzled why a mixed race should be referred to as black . 
@Rasheed , my fellow countryman . 
I do n't know anyone who is sitting down waiting for Obama to rescue them . 
And there is nothing wrong with clinching onto the aspirations he represents to better yourself . 
In fact , the messianic view of Obama is shared worldwide not just by Africans . 
The author of this piece manages to mix several complicated issues into one . 
There is no direct correlation between success in Africa and Obama 's presidency . 
And everyone can claim Obama if they so desire ! 
Elizabeth , I understand your argument - to an extent - I for one refuse to call Mr. Obama , black . 
Simply because he is not . 
However , your comments and viewpoints about our beloved country 's earthquake fear , is perhaps too cynical and a little insensitive . 
Any country in the world would have reacted the same way , it was sent by text and could have only been disputed when the authorities came to know about it , which is exactly what happened . 
You of all people should know what Ghana is like on the ground , people dropped out of school to make money for their families , Ghana is not a country overflowing with 25 million scientists . 
Some things can not be helped . 
Frankly , Obama can not do much for Africa because he is fighting for his political survival . 
Instead of focusing attention on what goes on outside US , Obama should first try to solve the problem of black American . 
Africa will take care of itself . 
Enough of foreign aid that is making us more dependent ! 
After all , despite all the doomsday scenario and brutal colonialism , Africa is still standing . 
Contrary to what prophet of doom , Pat Robertson , thinks , neither Africa nor Haiti is cursed . 
It is a scare tactics to make black people irrelevant . 
You wonder while many people are sceptical of organised religion . 
Gbenga I beg to differ ! 
Obama is ours and we will claim him , whether good or bad . 
Even great schools like Harvard and Yale claim our purely African leaders whom they trained . 
As an African living in London , I am 100 % in support of what Elizabeth mentioned in her report . 
It leaves me with a bad taste in my mouth when the whole continent lays so much hope on one man 's journey and then forgets all that has been said and done and still continues to be cast in the most undignified manner . 
Take for example my country of birth Sierra Leone . 
We went through ten years of madness killing each other and after all that the people are still facing the same problems . 
The country is still being managed in the same manner , where we still need the west to answer our calls to maintain our daily living . 
No Mr Obama is coming my people - it 's time we get our self out of this dream and start living . 
President Obama sent his Secretary of State , Hillary Rodham Clinton , on a high profile tour in Africa , so I am not sure how you can say that Africa does n't figure into his agenda . 
As well , although I appreciate your resolution that images of Africa not be negative , your closing comment regarding his mother projects racism and self hate . 
If you know much about identity politics in the US , you might also realize that `` African '' and `` black '' are different . 
Which one is better or worse of an association for Barack Obama ? 
I ca n't say . 
I am one that thinks that change will come through the positive image of a black POTUS being projected everywhere to over the next few years and will positively influence young people . 
I am from Massachusetts and what I think you fail to realize is that when I see my President I do not see him as African because he is an American as I am . 
I also see him by his party affiliation . 
He is a Democrat and that is what fuels the majority of Americans regarding their views of their president . 
President Obama has been fixated on passing `` universal '' health care , which it is not , and the people of Massachusetts voted in a Republican to fill the empty Senate seat of deceased Sen. Kennedy not because of Haiti but because of the impending passage of the health care bill . 
The people of Massachusetts and his white mother take no offense to the fact that President Obama has a rich cultural heritage that includes Africa . 
The color of my skin happens to be white . 
But I know the whole world originated in Africa . 
Or at the least a significant majority of earths present inhabitants . 
So the article was completely refreshing . 
Genuinely appreciated and nestled in my heart , mind and soul . 
Your statement : `` If I were his white mother I would be outraged every time someone referred to him as black '' is moronic , because his mother raised him so he knew about his black culture . 
Obama loves his African heritage and identifies himself as being African American -LRB- not white -RRB- . 
To say that Africans should not support him is asinine and dumb . 
As far as I am concerned Obama is post graduate of Harvard University . 
There is no Africa about his being a US president . 
He is just like and in the same age as Clinton , JFK , to name but a few . 
Moreover , the UK did not change as Ian Smith became president of Rhodesia , nor Holland as Botha became that of Apartheid South Africa . 
The Holabohi , the Wahala and Palava over Obama 's African connection is nothing but `` much ado about nothing '' or `` as you like it '' . 
Africa needs to help herself meet the millennium goals through good governance , accountability , nonviolence etc. . 
Obama is the President of the USA not Africa . 
Though he has some of his roots in Africa Obama is not black but bi-racial . 
I have a fiancee who is bi-racial and it is always insulting to her as well her white mother when people call her a black woman . 
It takes her mother out of the picture . 
