Page last updated at 07:39 GMT , Wednesday , 27 January 2010 Mika , James Morrison and Rod Stewart explain why they wanted to be part of the charity single If the list of names does n't already give this Haiti charity single a touch of Band Aid , then the choice of location certainly does . 
Cheryl Cole , Alexandra Burke , Mika , James Morrison and Susan Boyle have all passed through the doors of Trevor Horn 's Sarm Studios this week , headed for Studio 1 . 
It 's the same studio that hosted Sir Bob Geldof and Midge Ure 's gang in 1984 for the recording of Do They Know It 's Christmas . 
Sadly this time there 's no Bono , Sting and Simon Le Bon huddled together round the mic . 
Instead each artist is coming in solo to sing a section of the REM classic Everybody Hurts . 
This cover version is getting a similar treatment to the 1997 Children in Need take on Lou Reed 's Perfect Day , with each act being asked to record just one or two lines that will then get stitched together digitally to make a complete track . 
Leona Lewis has scored the all important opening , laying down her vocals in a Los Angeles studio at the weekend . 
That 's where Robbie Williams and Take That will record their contributions later this week , while Michael Buble 's voice has already been added from New York . 
Over the weekend JLS and Cheryl Cole passed through Studio 1 while on Monday it was the turn of X Factor winners Joe McElderry and Alexandra Burke , who had flown in overnight from her European tour . 
Tuesday began with Mika arriving fresh from France to sing . 
He also gets to be like Phil Collins on Band Aid and play an instrument on the track , a `` New Orleans-style piano '' to round off the song , as Mika put it . 
She was all pumped and ready to go . 
She was cool , I leaned in to give her a kiss but I do n't think she was too keen on giving me a kiss Even though the studio hire and engineering staff were coming free , each act still only got a 45-minute time slot to nail their vocals . 
Mika overran his allotted time so James Morrison had to wait a while , but he was fine as that meant he had time for a quick sarnie from round the corner . 
James also had the added bonus of knowing the producer Steve Robson , so was ecstatic with his pre-selected lines . 
`` He -LRB- Steve -RRB- said that I 'd have the middle eight and I was like , ` Wicked ! ' 
That 's one of the best bits in the song . '' 
So that means James spent the afternoon trying to better Michael Stipe by belting out ` Do n't throw your hand ... oh , no. . . 
do n't throw your hand . ' 
By mid-afternoon on Tuesday the artists at Sarm were starting to overlap , allowing James Morrison a rare Susan Boyle encounter . 
`` She was all pumped and ready to go , '' James said . 
`` She was cool , I leaned in to give her a kiss but I do n't think she was too keen on giving me a kiss . '' 
Hardly a `` feed the world '' group hug moment , but then again this recording was low key in comparison . 
Each act came in one by one to stand at the single microphone in the voice booth in the middle of the relatively large studio , with that piano for Mika just off to one side . 
James Morrison was joined by the likes of Rod Stewart and Alexandra Burke As for SuBo , she admitted she did n't know this REM song very well so had to learn her part from scratch . 
But she thinks it 's a `` very nice song '' and admits `` it was an honor to be picked '' . 
The day ended with Rod Stewart arriving to add his contribution after Simon Cowell called him personally , although more acts are expected to join in over the coming days . 
The video to accompany Everybody Hurts is being made simultaneously with the recording , so in another nod to Band Aid , expect to see a lot of artists at the mic wearing headphones as they sing along . 
The estimated release date is 7 February , with proceeds going to the Disasters Emergency Committee -LRB- DEC -RRB- and there 's already talk this could become one of the biggest selling singles of all time . 
