Haiti 's biggest foreign investor is still standing . 
The building housing Digicel , the Irish telecommunications firm with Caribbean roots , emerged unscathed from the earthquake from the 12 January earthquake . 
It has been reported that the 11-storey structure was built to withstand huge tremors of the kind that that struck Port - au-Prince . 
`` Where the streets outside the building are now filled with chaos and desperation , inside the buzz of workers tapping away on keyboards fills the floors of Digicel 's offices , '' the AFP news agency said . 
Cell phone operators have been working to get networks going again since the earthquake and to let those displaced by the quake contact loved ones in other countries . 
Digicel is Haiti 's leading wireless operator with 2 million customers . 
Last week it said that about 70 % of its cell sites were working . 
There is however still some congestion when making and receiving international calls . 
Digicel , which began in Jamaica , found a very captive market when it set up in Haiti in 2006 . 
The company says the operation cost $ 260 million and it remains a big employer , with nearly 900 people on its staff . 
Fewer than one percent of Haitians have landlines , according to Digicel figures , so mobile phones are crucial for communications . 
Irish telecoms billionaire Denis O'Brien , who founded Digicel , has said said he is working alongside former US president Bill Clinton on rebuilding Haiti . 
`` Obviously we need foreign direct investment but on a wider front we need a Marshall Plan , '' Mr O'Brien told AFP . 
The company says it has yet to account for all of its employees , at least four of whom were killed in the quake . 
But management is counting on having around 650 workers in the office by the end of the week . 
Digicel also says it is working to provide material and psychological support to staff . 
It has given each of its customers in Haiti the equivalent of $ 5 in free credit and has teamed up with Shaggy and other Caribbean singers to record a new song to raise money for earthquake survivors in Haiti . 
