The man was pulled from the rubble of a shop that had been frequently looted A man has been pulled alive from the rubble in the Haitian capital Port-au-Prince , two weeks after the earthquake which destroyed the city . 
He was rescued from the ruins of a building in the center of the city , and taken to hospital by US troops . 
Officials said it seemed he had become trapped by an aftershock two days after the quake and was severely dehydrated . 
The rescue comes 14 days after the 7.0-magnitude quake , which killed as many as 200,000 people . 
Wismond Exantus , 24 , found after 11 days Emmannuel Buso , 21 - rescued after 10 days Marie Carida , 84 - saved after 10 days Mendji Bahina Sanon , 11 - trapped for eight days Lozama Hotteline , 25 - pulled out after seven days Elisabeth Joassaint , 15 days - buried for seven days , half her life Ena Zizi , 69 - rescued after seven days Haiti has been rattled by at least 50 tremors since the original quake . 
The survivor , a man in his early 30s , was pulled from the ruins covered in dust . 
`` He was buried in the rubble for 12 days . 
The man had a broken leg and severe dehydration , '' a statement from the US military said . 
The Associated Press named the man as Rico Dibrivell and said he was discovered initially by a group of Haitians who pulled him from the rubble of a shop that had been repeatedly looted . 
Although he had apparently been trapped by an aftershock rather than the initial earthquake , the man is the longest survivor so far under the rubble . 
A rescue team has also been digging into the rubble of a university , after a man said he had managed to phone his cousin who said she was trapped in a basement , along with several other people . 
Some bodies have already been pulled out but as yet the woman has not been found . 
On Saturday , Haiti 's government declared the search and rescue phase over . 
It is estimated more than 130 people have been pulled alive by rescue teams in the Haitian capital since the quake . 
However , many more have been rescued by ordinary Haitians , often with their bare hands . 
Earlier , Haitian President Rene Preval made an urgent appeal for more tents to house up to a million people left homeless by the tremor . 
Rico Dibrivell was rescued from the rubble after being trapped for 12 days Mr Preval said 200,000 tents were needed before the expected start of the rainy season in May . 
His call came as donor nations and organizations met in Montreal , Canada , to assess the aid effort . 
In an interview with the BBC , the president 's wife , Elisabeth Preval , appealed for patience as criticism grew about the government 's response to the disaster . 
`` The president is working 24 hours a day , continuing to assess the damage , trying to direct the aid relief where the Haitian people need it '' she said . 
She added that the administration had been overwhelmed by the disaster , but that ministers had managed to get on to the streets on the day of the earthquake to assess the damage . 
The president , who lost his house in the quake , is planning to move into a tent on the lawn of the destroyed National Palace in the center of the capital . 
The Haitian government wants to relocate some 400,000 people , currently in makeshift camps across the capital , to temporary tent villages outside the city . 
But aid workers warned that if the camps were too big they could pose security problems , including robberies , rapes and gang activities . 
Meanwhile , US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she `` resented '' criticism of American assistance to Haiti . 
She pinpointed some media outlets which had `` either misunderstood or deliberately misconstrued what was a civilian and military response '' . 
The BBC is not responsible for the content of external internet sites The Independent Student rescued 15 days after quake - 2 hrs ago AFP via Yahoo ! 
` She 's alive ! ' 
Haitian girl saved after 15 days - 4 hrs ago MSNBC Girl pulled out alive 15 days after Haiti quake - 8 hrs ago The Scotsman Trapped teenager found alive 15 days after earthquake devastated Haiti - 8 hrs ago NEWS.com . 
